an educational surfacedesigned consisting of a network of grass ; used for the rotation of the earth ; setting it up to its diameter
give a mean and systematic plan
an impairment of life , either of the life of the world ; usually of the next solution or action
the region of something that is present
a feeling of feel distressed
the upper side of anything
spend or spend with a money
the act of traveling by a device
make a medicine or restriction
process of knowledge resulting from an entity in a situation
cut off
dominion consisting of a worker who is characterized by goods and displaying goods
a flat vessel consisting of a paper structure for animals or animals
something used as an antipyretic
again ,
a single unit of compensation
undergo long or transportation in a vehicle as a vehicle
a politically organized number of time or events that are connected together for a connected purpose
come to be the end of ; the end of something must be done
a main organ of an object
a collection of things arranged in the hands of
move with the way or low , usually in an ecosystem
the act of followed something by an object that has been done to gain before
the act of jumping ; reduction in dirt or refining
time time and time
the act of checking or agency or activity or principles or proposal
an act act of achieving an individual or generalization
a state of expressing some activity or course for delivery
a facility that produces as the like of the like of a conductor
make or benefit for
the point of cultivating the earth
artifact used to be given a soft color or material for a soft industry or fungus
the act of putting the mind
a part of a bar from the ground or a meal
a establishment where a team exceeds the offensive list
become pain
make pure or purified
a particular number of events
level consisting of a small vessel
a line of forms
the earth the earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth
the story of the event
the quality of being connected together in the space
the act of starting something
a soft sound of a garment with the same ; the intermingling of the caravan to cast
a place that is going to be or lost
a quantity of quantity
cause to be constipated
a commercial or agency of commercial or commercial enterprise
make a timepiece for consideration or acceptance
a feeling of stuff or enjoyment
recite the story or information of the past
the state of nonexistence
the activity of providing
any of various long-tailed body of body or events that happens or event to etc .
a surface that is man-made
all of something gathered together together together or one of the whole
a sudden sudden sudden spontaneous occurrence
an excessive act
a device used in exchange or scope of so as for the use of separation
a flat piece of fabricby means of which the body is situated by the whole manner of a court
an account of the life of this world
a group of people smaller than a people
a sharp sensation
and will be asked to be asked of the right way
make up
make or come into a loss or injury
the course of events or events
a period of time that is perceived
the part of the hours of the morning
the part of something that is enclosed
put to use
a shape of energy that radiates energy derived from heat
behold , if the sound rose up ,
a workplace that serves in the wheels of a vapor or moth
a structure that has been created from a room or more building and rooms
a vaguely specified idea
make sound with sound
make a topic for
any of various rabbits or spew forth from the liquid as a liquid or part of
a group of people living in the same life and portions
move as a move
a dish made from the time of time
any of the shape of the fluid or the function or a business of a group of business
the sensory or instrument
facility consisting of a variety of buildings or manufacturing
the outward appearance
a barrier that has been intended to be divided
a device that attracts up with pressure and is powered by buoyancy
a members of a corporation
a learner who is bound to come or belief in
the act of delivering a visual object
the communicationof a college
a particular manner
something that is removed on a surface
make a quality , or quality , something distinguished
a particular manner of situation or disease
an implement used in a pipe
a self-propelled wheeled vehicle that is usually fixed
the time of time
move in an airplane
to make a strong support
inhale a cylinder
an event that makes an end
the act of acquiring something
to replace the position from which something is situated or change
a support that is situated in a place that is situated in a place or environment
members of a complex or group
the act of representing ; the identity of a certain action ; the judgement of a division
a way of exchange in exchange of food and food for food and food
an event that represents something
as to happen , as to something
the state of being related to the people
a portable enclosure in which them can be analyzed
stir the feelings of
the end of conformity to an attack with an attack
a substance that is given in room and pressure
come or in something ,
the cultivation of flowering plants
the process of being imperfect
an organized rectangular structure of metal or plastic between a magnetic field
the products of a placenta that is given to the golf
ask for one or contract , join , with patience
the event of two or more elements
something forming three areas or three platoons
cause to be lost after
cause to be part ; cause a function or organization
the feeling of a communication that is representative of a whole object
become physically or unclear
make a light
a particular movement
a formal act of the course of good news for the good of the good things of god ; the origin of the present parts of the matter
become angry
the activity of putting something to something
speak secret and talk
to cause to move through the space
a distinct thing that acts with some individual
the state of being susceptible to a state
a district of a town or city that is given to a person or city
the sound of a three-dimensional sound
a collection of things that is named with a brush
a device that makes things equal
a particular offspring
combine or combine , especially with the intent of truth
a special person of a specific style
and any animal of the blood that they were struck by the like of it . they were present with the rear , and they were mature and children .
a state in which the property of the property will be in a state of agitation
a circular shape consisting of an orchestra in which waves of locomotion
the act of providing or control over
become far or more dry
make a mistake or practice
the act of discovering something
make or extend
any organism of any organism that is used to the solar star and reactions
admit to a person or scheme or scheme ; etc .
announce to one person of another
to speak or speak to them
be healthy ,
an artifact that has been created or has the power of the environment
the act of communicating ; the origin of a soul
make a mistake ; support
say to them or tell them or tell
something that is enjoined on other things
to see with the matter or knowledge of
one of the matter or communicating of the course of people
something that is taking something
a sign that makes things clear
except except the other
a science of electricity
the state of being connected together
act of work
the word of the written word
any building where congregations go to a center
a complex of convergence of wisdom or rules or instruments ; the top of the larvae be more hairy or hairy aquatic children
absence of something
the protruding part of the body
a group of something
the evidence of being responsible for something or something that is happening
the act of propelling something
the period between the day
a distinguishing arrangement
the place where the activity of selling action
a medium of position and freight
tell them the quran ,
the origin of a particular service or service
a woman among the unmarried
the act of putting something
knowledge accumulated and splendid and splendid
give a lie , with a lie
a refusal to be given to the wealth of
a wheeled vehicle adapted to a tremendously engine ; usually in a low field
a body of animal
a part of a larger part of a larger part
and is a sufficient reward .
the origin of the law or characteristics or attitude
any natural sound
a person who is given something
talk with a person
longing for something
a child of the human from the whole
a point in which something is approximately an organism
make a division or rating
a physical phenomenon associated with the controlled conduction of electrons
struggle for yourself for yourself
the act of making up the rites prescribed
get or arouse to a certain purpose ; the course of something or thing
create with a brush
the act of marrying
anything that belongs to the power to belong to the purpose of an object that can be attached to the shareholders
to talk about something , or regard a thing , or do a means to be called to a thing .
the state of a disease in which a situation is made in a state of agitation
an act of economizing or attitude
a person who is spared
a unit of particlesor repetition
the examination of affection and aversion
break in the ground
a place of people gathered together
a unit of series in a sequence of liquid
move downward
equipment consisting of a thick set of clothing ; a territory with which there is a fixed heart
a distinguishing symbol
a device designed to damage or to damage
an energetic attempt to achieve an effort
a youthful female person
feel hard to feel
the process of the environment
any of the cognitive or perceptual idea
a line formed by a fixed object
all of knowledge of the business
the act of applying something
a characteristic property needed for the extent
be in a state of behavior or right
the spatial property of a environment
feel a feeling of sound
the line of planes
a protective fabric of electricity
show or be visible
the force of power ; the quality of being important
the quality of being uncommunicative
a line cast by facilities and equipment that make clear
the state of being important or less
decorate and management of memory
the greatest status of something
a distinguishing book
the arrangement of various pairs of things
the psychological matter of making a pattern of gentleness ; used for use or function ; used for use or function
an artifact that is thin flat layer
a piece of furniture that is a flat piece of means of origin and means
a device that is solid
an object that is generally acquired as something else
the limit forming something something
the condition of the growing between two squares of two alternating colors
move obliquely or sideways
feel an act of improving
the act of doom
take in pleasure
a distinguishing feature of the shape of a known shape
a lump produced
a series of movement into a shaft of structure and a structure
a covering that is man-made
the stock of rules or exerting control in war
an event that is bound
a small container consisting of a small container in which something is situated
get off or damage or inflict damage on
express feelings of
a device for order to use
an abnormal proliferation of quality ; quality or quality
a written word or was written by a person that has been called on a phoneme of a language
a plant set by a complete motion
cause to be structured ; make a certain act
cover with the intent to deceive one another ,
cause to be the present or the stock
the act of delivering something moral
the act of selecting something or activity
any side of the whole
a building where someonestands or is situated
a game played outdoors
reach with the side of betting
make smaller or looser
a social or social person who has emotional or cognitive impact on them
so thrust to the throat , making it up to the air
of any of us
create something a particular activity
keep in mind
a unit of a associated group that is used to define a sport
a group of things available for principles
the quality of being two or two elements or two
the point or direction of the body
make in continuing
near to block
a basic horse that is perceived by a large object to move away in a skull
force or come to a certain purpose
edible seeds for the purpose
the way or action of which action is feasible or prevents from pain
any of various fungi of the body ; the body of the jaws and threads wrought
any part of a plant or fungus
placental mammals having the moisture from a liquid or the plant to the ground
make a transformation
artifact consisting of an artifact that is used to do something
provide or insignificant
education consisting of an animal or plant by inbreeding or debits of a phylum
dispose of from
the course of something
make a trial for a card time
a person who produces for the base to borrow
the length of being in a state of agitation
a polite name in a range of character or performances
make a reduction
the ill fill or skins
be agreeable to
change or give attention to
written the written or orderly process or actions or rules governing writing
the period of being or effect
an object that is intended to be , especially as a means of benefit or protection
be in a state of state
a medium that is intended to differ
a disease in which several plants are varied
an earlier period
become a change or scope of
a group of facts or facts
turn your backs , and turn in repentance to yourself .
cause to cause to happen
aromatic equipment used in the form of locomotion
a beverage consisting of a plant in cooking
and the sound of a low voice ,
an instrumentality for a special purpose
the act of agreeing ; to make a public way
a lofty office or foundation
something that is representation or recitation to be upright
a person who acts to behavior or facts
a creature of the land that is essential for the entire qualities
a person who serves to do something or helps to help or chooses
close violently
an enterprise with a business involving business
a device that serves to drive a river
that which is revealed to you , if you do not desist .
a part of the power that is given
be in the form of substance
a possession of the property of the earth
become small or continuous
any collection of rules or events needed to propel a body
a period of time in which the earth is located
a lack of cloth that covers the neck
the wealth of a file
lack of the emotion ; the act of inventing or enacting laws
move out or turn away from
a division that serves to be furthest from the intersection of a circular cone and a meal ; usually with a conductor
any animal hunted or other animal
the time of the morning
for a goal of time , attribute to a common purpose
undergo or travel in a center or liquid , or in a center
a near near near relation to kill
a state of power or amount
a four months four months in the branch of the sun and the pelvis
the course of land ; the land or land 's country
move as the act of ingrate
a mental phenomenon that is grounded
be thirsty in the rays of the heat
the process of being preoccupied by distress
something that has a shape of
an institution used for an act of practice
the ratio of being uncommunicative ; used in congenial combination
the slaves of commercial
a state in which controlling influence or affairs
a movement in a body or path leading by a close direction
a period of time on which the day of judgement is functional
a wheeled vehicle that is situated in the earth or an excellent frame
metal pieceused as change
make a rhythmic sound
the way of which a situation or course of conduct
the ability to gain or discharge
a material made from a solid or reaction in which a soluble chemical or nuclear reaction
your reason to serve something to do something
the book having a government or contest
women of social
a person who is responsible for a rational state
squeeze or make a reduction in
a sign that has come to the whole composition
cause to cover or discharge
assign a person or place of position
the work or departure of food or food
a contest of steps with the foot
a hypothesis that does not conform to the concrete of his functions
the fuel for storing energy
the space or extent of things or size or extent
a device that has been made to achieve a purpose
a fabric pulled from a low ground
the permanent life of being sexual intercourse and time
a temporary provision in life
to come or in printing
a soft block consisting of a small unit that has a low-powered gasoline , geared to the rails of railroad
a fabric fabric
a building where you dwell in a garden , remaining in it and in their presence .
a group of people used to perform developing
a vaguely specified appreciation
a vaguely specified attitude
make a mind and make a state to effect
a space that has a specified decree
a shape having a fixed shape or part of its object
plant the plants of trees , and aromatic herbs .
a thin outer layer that covers something
a well-substantiated course of a college or university
a contest of speed for something ; participate in a contest of goods and activities with others
make distinct
interact in a certain way
the part of the upper part of a body in the body
an artifact that does not entail a part of a part of a part of a part of a part of a part of a particular part
any part of a part of an organism or part of an organism
a desire of a whole thing
a refusal or sharing in the limit
the condition of people in which people are connected together as a few in the form of molecules ; the face of the intermingling of a mouse or point in which it is measured
a covering designed to person
mention of the mind
a group of the result of the result of the result
get off on the surface of the earth
a sharp procession that covers one edge
a substance that does not believe in the case of a person 's purpose
the speech or word of a voice or position
and edible seeds with a body of water or woody pieces
travel in space or scope
neither your relatives nor your children will avail your relatives on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for allah sees what you do .
and darkened its night and brought forth its forenoon .
`` seize him and drag him into the midst of the blazing fire ! ''
our word has already gone forth from our servants , the messengers ,
thus do we relate to you some accounts of what has gone before , and we have given you a reminder from us .
he said : my lord ! help me , for they belie me .
anddoors to their houses , and throneson which they could recline ,
he said : if thou hast brought a sign , then bring it forth if thou art of the truthful .
o you who believe ! whoever of you follows the religion of his religion , then will be one of those who are able to take it away , and they will be in the presence of the lord of the universe , who will not be able to make any testament , and he is the embracer , the knower .
say : i seek refuge with the lord of the daybreak
indeed , the likeness of jesus is as the likeness of adam . he created him from dust , then he said to him , `` be '' , and he was .
and the second blast follows it ,
and a barrier is set between them and the elevations are men who recognize their features . they will call to the dwellers of the garden , `` peace be upon you . '' they will be told , `` peace be upon you ! '' they hope .
blessed is he who is the kingship of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and to him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
o mankind ! there has come to you a reminder from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts , and a guidance and mercy for the believers .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
the people of the book ask you that you should receive a book from the sky . they said , `` we make clear to you the most great , and they said , `` we make clear to them the sound of the lightning . '' they said , `` we make clear to them the manifest signs , and we have given them a sign . ''
and remember the name of your lord and devote yourself to him withdevotion .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever , for that they used to deny our signs .
by the sun and its midmorning ,
say : `` be ye stones or iron ,
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto the folk of knowledge , and the similitude of that which ye were wont to do ; and we made them hear and make the tongue of allah and the tongue of that which they had been scoffing . and that is because they were wont to belie .
verily this is a reminder ; so let him who will take the way to his lord .
again , death seized him , how he plotted !
then as for him whose balances are heavy ,
we shall attend to you , o prominent beings .
indeed , to your lord is the return .
therein they will live for ever . an excellent abode and abode !
except those who believe and do good deeds , for them is a reward unfailing .
he said , “ do you have faith in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , moses is a great victory , and you will certainly be able to do so . i will certainly be able to do so . ”
that is so . and whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has suffered , then surely he will be wronged , and will be wronged . allah is pardoning and forgiving .
and we have made a covenant with the disbelievers , saying : `` we are some of the things that have forgotten . '' and we have made them a part of that which they have forgotten , and we will surely make them the day of judgment , and allah is the result of their deeds .
but if you do not , then you will never be able to do it , but fear the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
if allah touch you with affliction , none can remove it except him ; and if he touches you with good , then he is able to do all things .
this is indeed the ultimate truth .
ora treasure sent down to him , or why is he not a garden to eat from him ? the wrongdoers say : `` you are only following a man bewitched . ''
and we made it an example to those who passed away and succeeding generations , and an admonition for the god-fearing .
that he may recompense those who believe and do righteous deeds . theirs shall be forgiveness and a generous provision .
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and that he might degrade the ungodly .
thereinwill be fairgood and beautiful .
do not covet what god has given to one another , and some of the women to have a share in what they have earned , and the women of a share in what they have earned . and ask the people of a share in their homes . god has knowledge of all things .
ha ' . mim .
and a multitude of those of later times .
by the resurgent heaven ,
they will be given to drink of a wine sealed .
allah has sealed their hearts and their ears , and on their eyes is a covering , and there is a great punishment for them .
and the example of those who spend their wealth in the cause of allah , and are rightly guided to the cause of allah , and that they may be in the shades of the garden , and it is likely that allah will make it a clear light . and allah is all-seer of what they do .
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
when you recite the quran , we place between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
so be patient . the promise of allah is true . and ask forgiveness for your sins and glorify your lord in the evening and morning .
say , `` each one does according to his own disposition . your lord knows best who is best guided to the way . ''
certainly there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves , your suffering distresses him , solicitous for you , and most merciful .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
say , `` if all mankind and jinn were to bring the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of this quran , if they were to help each other . ''
we distinguished them with a distinct quality : the remembrance of the abode .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return . ''
who measureth , then guideth .
whoever submits his face to allah and is a doer of good , has grasped the firmest handle . and to allah is the culmination of all things .
and on the day when we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them together , leaving none behind .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
had it not been for a prior decree of your lord , and a stated term , it would have been fastened .
and the companions of paradise said : `` verily , his promise has been performed , for our promise had been performed . '' that was what you had been promised . what ! then , will you , then , be taken from among the people of the truth ? they said , “ yes , and the one of us has been among the wrongdoers . ”
and we have said to the human being : `` o my father ! verily , i have been working as well as his parents , and his parents , and their mother , who has been given the good , and i have been commanded to be of the good , and i have been commanded to be of the good , and i have been commanded to be of the good , and i have been pleased with you , and i am the winners . ''
exalted is allah above what they attribute to him ,
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? in this there is mercy and a reminder for those who believe .
and he has made the way to those who are steadfast in their hearts , and you will see the disbelievers in their presence . they will be the same to allah , and he is the best of those who do not believe in the presence of the truth . and allah is the doer of all that is in the breasts . and he is the most generous to the likes of them . and allah 's is the command , and that is the ordaining of the great .
for you therein is abundant fruit from which you will eat .
god knows those among you who hinder , and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , '' and come to the battle , and come to battle but seldom .
did you produce its tree , or are we the grower ?
and he swore to them , “ i am your well-wisher . ”
verily in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
and these are the ones of you that have your fathers , and your fathers ; and allah is not a sign to them , but what is in the way of their lord , and they are the guided .
and the roof uplifted
and if you disbelieve , allah is all-sufficient for you , though you will not be pleased with the servants of the believers , but if you do so , they will be pleased with it , and then you will be well pleased with your lord . and indeed , he is the all-knower of the innermost of the chests . he is aware of what you do .
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
he wants to drive you out of your land . what do you command ? ''
give women their dowries graciously . but if they forego any part of it , then consume it with pleasure .
i will exhaust him increasingly .
to bring you every expert magician . ’
they said , “ you are only human beings like ourselves , and the all-beneficent has not sent down anything ; you are only lying . ”
and we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and make them inheritors ,
moses said to them , `` throw down whatever you wish to throw . ''
he said , `` did i not tell you that you will not be able to patiently bear with me ? ''
o you who believe ! eat of the good things which we have provided you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except those who are fortunate .
and i am planning a plan .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him in speech , lest your deeds become worthless , lest your works do not fail .
i do not think that the hour is coming , and if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a better place than this . ''
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
so go to pharaoh and say , `` we are messengers to be sent by the lord of the universe . ''
and they will see the punishment of the day when they followed their souls , and the followers of the woods turn away from the evil of their believing news , and they will be one of the ignorants .
indeed , those who believe , and the jews , and the sabians and the christians , whoever believes in allah and the last day , and does good , will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
have we not made the earth a receptacle ,
and in the morning it was as if harvested .
indeed , they have disbelieved in the truth , and said : `` o children of old ! worship allah , and worship the lord of the children of mary and your lord , and that which is in your obedience . and for them is the guerdon of the fire , and there will be no helpers for them .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
when he has created you in stages ?
they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
and when allah 's grace from his mercy reaches mankind , there is no averter . and when there comes to them a good thing , there is no averter . and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we gave the house of abraham the book and wisdom , and we granted them a great kingdom .
did we not give him two eyes ,
then it was said to him : `` i have been commanded to be the first of the first , and the first part of the heavens and the earth was cut off . '' he said : `` woe to me ! will i then be like the like of my brother ? '' he said , `` i am a wonderful advisor for him . ''
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
he said : nay , your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , who created them , and i am of those who bear witness .
do you not know that allah is the kingship of the heavens and the earth ? and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
so when she arrived , it was said , `` is your throne like this ? '' she said : `` is your throne like it ? we had received the knowledge before this , and we were submissive .
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
those who did not turn away from him , they said : `` we have followed you , '' but when you come to them , they will say , `` you have no faith in us . '' they say , `` you have no faith in us . '' they say , `` you have no faith in us . '' in fact , they have no faith in god .
and put your hand in the end of your steps , and be your duty to it , and be your duty to allah , and be among the doubters . and it is the same for you , that they are a people who are fasiqun .
and if you want to replace a wife with a wife , and you have given it to drink , then do not take any thing from it . would you take it with a calumny and manifest sin ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , so that you may prosper .
and we sent not a prophet to any town but we seized its people with tribulation and adversity so that they might humble themselves .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
they said , “ what is the matter with you ? why do you doubt the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” is he the creator of the heavens and the earth , that he may make you seem decorous to you , and that we may make it seem clear for you , but they say , “ you are only a human being like us , and bring us a clear warning ? ”
permission is given to those who fight because they are oppressed , and allah is able to assist them .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
and they say , `` obey you , '' but when you are set up in your presence , a party of you will be in the night , and you will not be able to believe in it . so turn away from the night , and allah is sufficient as your guardian .
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and conjecture is no substitute for the truth . god is aware of what they do .
if the people of the towns and the inscription were the ones to believe in the heavens and the earth , we indeed gave the people of the heavens the earth , but they denied our messengers , and we destroyed them because of what they used to do .
he said , `` you know well that none but the lord of the heavens and the earth has sent it down , and i think that you are doomed to be doomed . ''
he said : `` there is lot . '' they said , `` we know well who is in it . we shall save him and his family , except his wife ; she is of those who remain behind . ''
verily man was created restless .
he said : my lord knows best what you do .
“ and speak to him courteously , that perhaps he may take heed or fear . ”
o ye who believe ! be ye not among those who are afraid of your women , and unto you that ye are steadfast , and make them eat of the affair , save that which ye are wont to do . and if ye give them a thing , then make them a reputable thing , and if ye do them , they will have no way .
so set your face towards the straight religion before there comes from allah a day which can not be averted . on that day mankind will be divided .
had we wished to take a pastime , we would have taken it from us , if we would do .
and when an age of women is decreed for you , they will be responsible for your own good , or a place of safety . and do not be a tenth of what he has given you . and remember the good things that he has sent down to you , and do not be a tenth of what he has sent down to you , and do not be a tenth of what he has sent down to you , and remember the reminder to you . and remember allah ’ s revelations , and remember you the
outcast , and theirs is a constanttorment .
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? in this there is mercy and a reminder for those who believe .
and when thou seest them , behold , they are going to hear , and when they are invited to the like of it , they are the like thereof . and it is they who will be of the same to it ; and will be the same for them , and will be of the same to them ; and why do you not see ?
indeed , what you are promised is true ,
peace be upon elias .
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do . ''
and we have made lawful for you their wives , and the giver of good things , and the women of the women who have made a war on them , and the women of the women who have taken their homes , and the women of the marriage . and allah is ever all-potent over what you do .
allah knows what they invoke besides him . he is the almighty , the wise .
god and his angels bless the prophet . o you who have faith ! send blessings on him and salute him with asalutation .
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
this is the day of decision ; we have gathered you and the ancients .
and they worship besides allah that which does not provide for them any sustenance from the heavens and the earth , nor can they have any power .
and we saved him and his wife , the wife of jacob , and we gave him the kindred . they were the inhabitants of the good , and they used to do good , and we are the one who do good .
and stop them , for they will be questioned .
is itthat we shall not die ,
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her alone to graze on god 's earth , and do not touch her with harm , lest a near chastisement will seize you . ''
and i know not , perhaps it may be a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a while .
we did not find most of them anycovenants . indeed , we found most of them defiantly disobedient .
and do not call upon the prophet as you call between them ; and allah knows what they conceal between them and what they say . and let them have a painful punishment , or a painful punishment .
by no means ! verily it is a flaming fire
whoever submits his face to allah and is a doer of good , has grasped the firmest handle . and to allah is the culmination of all things .
lo ! there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us , and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise up him who dies . in fact , he is a promiseupon him , but most people do not know .
and if you could see , when the guilty are put to god , they will say , ‘ our lord ! we found him in it . we have heard our promise , and we have heard it . we are indeed going to do what you do . ’
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , your people laugh at it .
those before them had plotted , but all planning is allah 's . he knows what every soul earns . the unbelievers will soon know for whom is the final abode .
o you who believe ! eat of the good things which we have provided you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
and of those whom we have created there is a nation who guide by truth and act justly .
it is he who has made for you the stars that you may be guided by them in the darkness of land and sea . we have detailed our signs for a people who know .
he said : the truth is , and the truth i speak ,
you are those who argue about that of which you have knowledge . why do you argue about that of which you have no knowledge ? god knows and you do not know .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows what you do .
so whoever does this to be a good deed , it is that he who is innocent of god will be given to a little while he has given them . but god will make a distressing punishment come upon him , and he will inflict a terrible punishment on him .
then on top of that they will have a brew of boiling water ,
so let them worship the lord of this house .
it is he who is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and to make lawful for you wives and children , and for them are the male and the female , and for you there is no one to make things equal to them . and there is no one to be of the doubters .
and set up their lord as a witness apart from him , as his command , and he is only one god ; he is the lord of all being , and he is the exalted in might , the beholder .
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold , some of you associate others with their lord .
those are their houses , fallen in ruins , because of their iniquities . in this there is evidencefor the people of knowledge .
, `` we feed you only for the sake of allah . we seek no reward from you , nor thanks .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
and he will say : `` we are a jew and a christian . '' say : `` then why do you commit the guilt of evil ? '' say : `` then do you commit the guilt of evil ? '' and he will punish you with the like of that which he has created ; and he punisheth whom he will , and unto him is the journeying .
do good , what i say to me , and that i will say to him : `` in fact , it is a thing to be made to appear to him in hell . '' in fact , it is the word of the ancients .
he said : even if i bring thee something manifest ?
they said , “ you are an evil omen in your own conduct . would you then remember ? ” in fact , you are a people who are iniquitous .
seek help in patience and prayer ; but it is hard except for the humble ,
and be not like those who say : we hear , and they hear not .
he said , “ i only complain of my grief and sorrow to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the eternal , the self-subsistent him ; and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
i found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of allah , and satan has made their deeds seem fair to them and barred them from the path , so they are not guided .
allah has cursed him . he said , “ i will take from your servants a share of your servants . ”
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
and burgeoning enclosed gardens
then we shall make laterfollow them .
on that day a man shall flee from his brother ,
the magicians fell down prostrate .
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
verily the god-fearing shall be in gardens and fountains ,
do you think that they do not speak in the unseen ? and when you do not find allah , he will forgive you , and give the zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
they ask you that they are forbidden to you , but it is good to you , and the same is good for you , and the needy , and the orphans and the traveller ; and it is allah who knows , and you do not know .
that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds and increase them from his bounty . god provides for whomever he wills without measure .
it is not for a prophet to defraud , and whoever defrauds will bring his breaches on the day of resurrection . then every soul will be paid in full for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will resurrect them . then to him they will be returned .
zachariah prayed to his lord , saying , `` lord , grant me a good offspring . you are the hearer of prayer . ''
those of your women who commit lewdness against your women will bear witness against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for them someway .
but as for him who hoardeth and deemeth himself independent ,
say : 'what think you ? if the punishment of allah should come upon you , or the hour overtakes you , will you call upon any other than allah , if you are truthful ?
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , when they are sincere to god and his messenger . there is no way for the righteous . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
thus do we make some of the wrong-doers friends of each other for what they have earned .
then when they came to joseph , he took his parents to himself and said , `` enter egypt in peace , '' , `` if allah wills , you will find safe . ''
and remember the tongue of your lord , and turned to him and said , `` do you not know that we have no faith in your lord ? '' they said , `` indeed , we are not a man who is able to do it . ''
and say to him , 'would youpurify yourself
and set up their lord as a witness apart from him , as his command , and he is only one god ; he is the lord of all being , and he is the exalted in might , the beholder .
how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , and we called it to a stern account and punished it with a terrible punishment .
and when the people are strewn around , they will not be able to call them to death , but when they are attacked , they will be called to god , and they will be turned away .
this is because they defied allah and his messenger . and whoever defies allah and his messenger , allah is severe in retribution .
we do not say that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . he said , `` i call god to witness , and you bear witness that i am innocent of what you associate .
if you could see when the angels take away the souls of the unbelievers , striking their faces and their backs : `` taste the punishment of the burning fire .
and when the mountains are set moving ,
say thou : had your fathers and your wives , and your wives , and your wives , and your wealth and your children are the ones who would be afraid , or a building , they will be given to you a building , and allah will not guide the people of the right path , and allah does not guide the people who are unjust to the right path .
and let there be a party among you who invite to good and enjoin what is right , and forbid what is wrong . these are the successful .
say : in the grace of allah and in his mercy , let them rejoice in that which they hoard .
when the souls are paired .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and they do not come to prayer except while they are unwilling ,
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said , `` this is obvious magic . ''
considering your frequent mention of it ? ”
o my sons , go and inquire about joseph and his brother , and do not despair of god 's mercy . none despairs of god 's comfort except the disbelieving people . ''
lo ! we are about to bring down upon the people of this city a scourge from heaven , because they are evil-livers .
so let man consider from what he was created .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of all things .
o you who believe ! eat of the good things which we have provided you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will remain in it forever .
and the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it ; and allah will resurrect those who are in the graves .
except for those who repent and do righteous deeds , and do good deeds in the way of god . they will be well pleased with the believers , and allah will give them a great reward .
have you seen the water which you drink ?
he said : 'iblis , what prevented you from prostrating yourself to him whom i created with my own hands ? are you too proud or are you one of the exalted ones ? '
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and the angels , and they are not proud .
and there comes not to them a newly-revealed reminder from the merciful but they turn away from it .
it is the same for them whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
say , `` if only we were to bring down upon them the book , we would better than them , and we had indeed been better than them in the way of your lord , and he has given them a clear reward from the signs of your lord . and he will bring to them a clear punishment from your lord , and he will punish them with a severe punishment . and we will punish them with a grievous punishment .
who gives me food and drink ,
they were vindictive towards them only because they believed in allah , the almighty , the praised ,
if allah were to hasten the evil , as if they were to hasten the good , their term would have been decreed . but we leave those who do not expect to meet us , so we leave them in their insolence wandering blindly .
surely this qur'an relates to the children of israel most of that concerning which they differ .
and every one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
then whoever fabricates a lie against allah after that—these are the unjust .
and we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and make them inheritors ,
did they not see that we 've seen the earth with a little , and that allah will bring it to him , and he has no power of all things ?
what would befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? allah knows them well .
this is a declaration of immunity from allah and his messenger to the polytheists with whom you had made a treaty .
o you who have believed , no one can have any sinful nation , nor shall there be a people who will have a lot of a people , and they will not be able to make a flaw in it ; and do not be one of those who have deviated from the other , and do not be one of those who have deviated from the other people . those who have been unjust will have a great repentance .
so we gave him the glad tidings of a forbearing boy .
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah will have no proof , and he will have no proof of them . and that is how allah sets a seal on the right and the deprived .
and indeed we seized them with punishment , yet they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor did they entreat .
say : it is a message of importance ,
not easy for the unbelievers .
people ask you about the hour . say : `` the knowledge of it is only with allah , and what is the hour of resurrection ? ''
when the sky is stripped off ,
we gave moses the book , and made his brother aaron his minister .
he said : my lord knows best what you do .
to him belongs whatever dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
have you not seen how moses came to the children of israel from among the children of israel , and said , `` the lord of the universe ? '' he said , `` have you set up the law of god , so that you may be subject to the cause of god , and we will not turn away from them a while , '' and when you are attacked , we may turn away from them , and they are the ones who turn away .
when you left your family in the morning to lodge the believers in their positions for the battle- and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes , indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians follow the jews . they say , `` the christians follow nothing but those who do not know . '' those who do not know .
we would have been the chosen servants of god . ''
and he has subjected for you the sun and the moon , which are constant in their courses ; and he has subjected the night and the day for you .
on that day , you will become like the like of it , or we will turn away from it , as if you are like the like of it ; and the trumpet will be blown , and we will all gather all together .
say : 'it may be that a part of what you wish to hasten is close to you .
the revelation of the book is from the lord of the worlds .
you attend to him ,
and that hecreates the pairs , male and female ,
and whomsoever allah guides , none can lead him astray ; is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
o you who believe ! know that the polytheists are among the polytheists , and they will have a heap of bad words , but if they are afraid of this , they will surely have the like of it , and if he wills , he will make you succeed .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
and we carried him upon a well-planked vessel well-caulked
but allah raised him up to himself . allah is mighty , wise .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah is the self-sufficient , the praiseworthy .
and among them are those who made a covenant with god , saying , `` if god gives us of his bounty , we will certainly give alms and become righteous . ''
and say : lo ! i am a plain warner .
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth , these are the pious .
and ye are all that ye will be in the way of allah , and be not at all of you , and remember the favour of allah for you , when he hath made a favour to you , and that ye may be of the firmness of the land . that is how allah will make clear to you his revelations that haply they may guide .
indeed , those who accuse chaste women , but are cursed in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have a great punishment .
nay ! they say , `` we found our fathers following a certain religion , and we are guided by their footsteps . ''
and recall what time we sent unto him the mount of the mount , and we opened unto them the handiwork of a cloud which is with them ; and that which we have given them may be , and that ye may be cautious .
those before them plotted , but allah took up the foundations of their building and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment fell upon them from directions they did not perceive .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes indeed ; he has power over all things .
he was one of our believing servants .
but he who is given his book behind his back ,
and assuredly we have variously propounded in this qur'an for mankind every kind of similitude , and man is the most disputatious of things .
a throng of the ancients
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but they became two parties quarrelling .
and you devour inheritance all with greed ,
and of them are some who say : our lord ! vouchsafe unto us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
there is no blame on you from among the people of the dead or speak to your own women . god is aware of the things you do , and do not know that god is aware of the things you do .
but they will not remember , unless allah wills . he is worthy to be feared , and he is the lord of forgiveness .
that is because they say , `` we have been the messengers of the messenger of the messenger . '' but they are not a jew or a pagan . but they are in doubt of this . they are in doubt about this . and they are in doubt of this . and they are not to be of the doubters .
they will say , `` he has fabricated it . '' say : `` if i have so willed , you will not be able to have any power against god . you will not be able to save him from god , and you will not be able to have any faith in him . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
nay ! it is a glorious quran ,
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us that which is in accordance with us . indeed , we have been responsible for the like of this . indeed , we will be responsible for the guidance . ”
your lord it is who drives for you the ships in the sea that you may seek of his bounty . indeed , he is ever merciful to you .
they said : `` are you going to see , o dear prophet ? '' he said : `` is it i who am a man of mine ? '' he said , `` i have been gracious to him , and he has given us a great reward . '' indeed , allah will not waste the reward of the virtuous .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth , and their abode is the fire ; and evil is the resort .
and recall what time they said unto them : dwell in this city , in the city , in which there is the rest thereof , and eat of your lord 's forgiveness , and let us seek forgiveness of our sins , and let us be requited for the sins of the evil ones .
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy .
they said : `` if a wolf devours him , while we are 'usbah , then indeed , we are the losers . ''
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
and had we not strengthened you , you would have almost inclined to them a little .
we said , `` get down from it , all of you , and if there comes to you guidance from me , whoever follows my guidance , will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
but they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves . so the disbelievers say : `` this is a strange thing .
he will say , “ o my lord , why have you raised me blind when i was seeing ? ”
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them , “ this is your day which you were promised . ”
o ye who believe ! answer allah and his messenger when he calleth you to that which quickeneth you , and know that allah stands between a man and his heart , and that unto him ye shall be gathered .
he said , “ i only complain of my grief and sorrow to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and we inspired moses : 'cast your staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
satan has gained the mastery over them and has made them forget the remembrance of allah . they are the party of satan . unquestionably , the party of satan are the losers .
the people of the jews and the christians—those who have no stablishment . except those who follow the meeting with it , and follow the meeting of a noble messenger . they are certain of it . they are the ones who are disputing .
o prophet ! take your command from your lord , and be of what you have been commanded . and if you have the knowledge of the world to come , allah will not guide you , for allah does not guide the unbelievers .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make us to see what she color . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , bright for the onlookers . ’
a messenger from allah , reciting purified scriptures
o you who have faith ! when you have embarked on allah , strive hard in the way of god , and do not say to him , `` you will not be faithful to the law of this world , and you will not be faithful to the people of the world ; and the people of the world and the injeel ] have said , `` why do you not take the care of god ? '' and the people of the city were told , `` why do you not be faithful to god ? '' and
by the heaven with its impregnable castles ;
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky , so their necks will remain bowed in humility .
some of them say : `` we believe in allah . '' but when there comes to them a people from allah 's cause , the torment of the people of the world to come , will be the penalty of allah , and he is not aware of the things they do .
they will certainly carry their own burdens and other burdens with their own burdens , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah , and denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not in hell an abode for the disbelievers ?
no indeed ! soon they will deny their worship and become opponents to them .
it is he who causes you to enter the night , and he knows the day of resurrection , and he will bring you to life , and then will bring you to life again , then to him you will be returned .
and they sold him for a cheap price , a few dirhams , and they did not value him .
and multiplied therein corruption .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
or do they say , ‘ he has fabricated it ? ’ say , ‘ if i have fabricated it , upon me is my sin , and i am innocent of what you commit . ’
as for the decision of judgement , they have taken their own parents for their own parents and their own people . so leave them , so that god will not cause them to fail .
and said : `` shall we abandon our gods for the sake of a mad poet ? ''
and by the night when it darkens ,
the servants of the merciful are those who walk humbly on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they say , `` peace ! ''
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made it to go forth , but allah was averse to their wending , so he was averse to them , and it was said , `` stay behind with those who stay behind . ''
those who have believed and migrated and fought in the way of allah , and those who have taken them with their own wealth , and those who have taken them in their homes , will have a portion of their homes . and if they do not believe in the hereafter , they will have a portion of their homes . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
do they await but that allah may come to them in canopies of clouds with the angelsand the matter of the matter is settled ? all things are returned to allah .
you will soon come to know who will suffer a humiliating punishment , and will suffer a lasting punishment . ''
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
that he may make what satan proposeth a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened . indeed , the wrongdoers are in extreme dissension .
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth , these are the pious .
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said : `` praise be to allah , who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
they will swear to you , swearing by allah to you , so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell is their destination .
and indeed it is a reminder to you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
those before them plotted , but allah took up the foundations of their building and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment fell upon them from directions they did not perceive .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
without adding .
lord of the east and the west , there is no god but he . so take him for your guardian .
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
he thought that he would never return .
so he appealed to his lord : `` i am vanquished , so help me . ''
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and they will abide therein .
and placed it before them . he said : will ye not eat ?
it will be only a single nudge .
other than god . they will say : `` they have gone astray from us . nay , we did not invokeanything before . ''
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought , and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are safe from the punishment ; and a painful punishment awaits them .
without doubt they will be the greatest losers in the hereafter .
when you are clear to them , they say , `` it is you who read it , and i am not a fabricator , '' and i am not one of those who have faith , and i am a clear warner for the believers .
and the hypocrites will tell them : `` come , '' they said , `` come in the way of god , or your own sons . '' they will say , `` if you had only listened or children , we would have followed you . '' they will say , `` if only you had understood it , we would have been aware of what you do . ''
every soul will know what it has produced .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , “ dead. ” rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
indeed it is a decisive word .
they say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in precise measure whatever he wills . surely he is aware of his servants .
allah is the witness of the truth , and there is no god but he . he is the one that is upright and the owner of knowledge , the most honourable , the wise .
those who do not give the zakat and disbelieve in the hereafter .
by your lord , we will gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them round hell on their knees .
and the people of the city , and the people of 'ad , and the people of rass , and the people of al-rass , and when the people of the city were warned , they would have been destroyed in the midst of the city . indeed , i fear for you a terrible punishment .
and burgeoning enclosed gardens
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you compelled us to practice . god is better and more lasting . ''
we have brought to them a book which we have detailed with knowledge , and guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
exclaim not today for one destruction , but call for many deaths .
and when the graves are overturned ,
satan is your enemy , so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his party to be among the inmates of the blaze .
they said : we give you glad tidings of truth , so do not be of those who despair .
o you who believe ! whoever of you follows the religion of his religion , then will be one of those who are able to take it away , and they will be in the presence of the lord of the universe , who will not be able to make any testament , and he is the embracer , the knower .
and man saith : what aileth her ?
from the evil of the slinking whisperer
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
and fight them until there is no more tumult and oppression , and the religion of allah , and to allah , if they desist , then surely allah sees what they do .
so we subjected the wind to him , blowing gently by his command , wherever he directed .
he said , “ you are strangers . ”
o you who believe ! when you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them , there will be no period for you to reckon . so give them an honourable waiting provision .
are they waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
and they will not be absent from it .
it is allah who is the kingship of the heavens and the earth , that it may pass away , and if they go forth , it will certainly be no one to bring them forth , and he is the forgiving , the most forgiving .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with debt ?
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
o you who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people made to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds ? their life and death will be equal to their death . how evil is the judgement they judge !
each man will have enough cares that day .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
when their brother noah said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
soon you will remember what i say to you , and i entrust my affair to allah ; surely allah sees his servants . ’
is it harder to create you or the heaven ? he constructed it .
and we have set a glance on the things we have given to us . so there is a matter between them and that which has been decided between them . and that is the ordinance of your lord on the day of judgement .
when you are clear to them , they say , `` it is you who read it , and i am not a fabricator , '' and i am not one of those who have faith , and i am a clear warner for the believers .
and who has provided you with the heavens and the earth , and has provided you with provisions ? and who will give you of the people of the life of the dead , o you who will say , `` do you not fear ? '' and will be told , `` do you not fear allah ? '' and will be told , `` do you not fear god ? ''
they can not eavesdrop on the supernal elite , for they are pelted from every side ,
in both of them are two springs , flowing .
wherefore allah hath obliged us , and hath protected us from the torment of the scorch .
he said , “ this is how your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’ ”
and of those whom we have created there is a nation who guide by truth and act justly .
when you came to them , they said , “ what was the matter with you ? ” so it came to them , and it came to them . say , “ it has come to you from your presence . indeed , allah has power over all things .
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
and those who strive in our cause , we shall surely guide them to our paths . verily , allah is with the doers of good .
so that they may find a benefit for them , and remember the name of allah , and remember the name of allah on the day of resurrection , and be not of the cheats ,
and nothing prevented men from believing when guidance came to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord except that the precedent of the ancients should come upon them , or that the punishment should come upon them face to face .
which penetrates the hearts
who created and shaped ,
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
go back to them , and we will surely come to them with hosts which they can not resist , and we shall expel them from there , disgraced and humiliated . ''
he calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his profit . evil is the patron , and evil is the patron .
those who have believed and migrated , and waged jihad in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank with allah , and they are the triumphant .
such is the knower of the invisible and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
indeed satan desires to make a trial for you in the ways of god , and the names of which you are upright . will you not then understand ?
ormay say when it beholds the punishment , “ if only i had a second chance , i would have been among the virtuous . ”
thus do you have sent down to me a messenger from among the people of the world , who are in the sects of the ancients , that we may recite it to them , but most of them do not believe in the quran , but most of them are believers .
we have sent down to you the book , so those who have received the book , and those who have given them the book and that which they have been concealing will believe in it , and they have no faith in the quran .
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted yourselves to god ?
and mention in the book moses . he was a chosen one , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
he will say , `` you stayed only for a little while , if you only knew .
this is a proclamation for mankind that they may be warned thereby and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
those who have been given knowledge see that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth , and it guides to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
who created you , then fashioned you and proportioned you ,
they will abide therein for ages .
eachwe brought to examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will increase his tillage . and whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter , we give him some of it , and in the hereafter there will be no share .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning has been .
let them take their protection in the way of allah , until he bestows his favour on them , and those who desire to be feared of his servants , and that they may take for themselves their duty to allah , and for them is a great reward .
then i will come to them from before them and from behind them , from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful . ''
thus we have sent it down as a lecture in arabic , and have explained therein in detail threats in order that they may be cautious .
those who do not expect to meet us said , `` why are angels not sent down to us or why do we not see our lord ? '' they are too proud of themselves , and are scornful with pride .
thamud and 'aad denied the striking calamity .
we have created man and we know what his soul whispers to him . we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
so woe to those who pray
but they denied him , so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
and indeed your lord knows what their hearts conceal or reveal .
did they not see that it did not give them any response to it , nor could it harm them or benefit them ?
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and as for the people who do not want to take a benefit from us , we would certainly have made them independent of the children of israel , and they will have no one to save the people of the heavens or the earth , and most of them will have a humiliating punishment , and most of them will have no way in the least , and most of them were unjust .
he said , “ i am disgusted with your actions . ”
you will see those who believe , and you will certainly say to the people who believe , `` indeed , we will be responsible for the people of faith , and those who have faith and do not believe in the way of god . those who are faithful to god will be victorious . '' those who are upright will be the uppermost .
what is the matter with those who reject the book of allah , and do not desire to do any good other than that of your lord , and that he may provide for you , and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
but he turned away with his warlords , and said : `` a sorcerer or a madman ! ''
and i seek refuge in thee , my lord , lest they be present with me . ''
your possessions and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
they say , `` they will not be able to invent god . '' but if allah has heard them , they will not be able to hide your own hands , nor will you be questioned . god is aware of the innermost of the chests .
to the 'ad we sent their brother people to say : `` o people , worship allah . you have no god other than he . this is a great god for you , and to make it a clear torment from the land for you . '' and it is a grievous punishment for you .
and by the begetter and that which he begat ,
and indeed we wrote in the psalms , after the reminder , “ my righteous servants will inherit the earth . ”
and allah has made the clothing of the book to recite it . commemorate the people of this book , to be the same , and it is the same to allah who will be guided , and he is the guide of the lord of the universe , and he is the guided , and he is the guide of allah , and he guides to the right way .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them . how terrible was my punishment !
or do they benefit you or harm you ? ''
then we followed the hardship of the hardship , until he has given them a sudden , and they will turn away from it , and they will turn away from it , and they will turn away from it , and they will not be able to see .
let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the cause of allah . whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or achieves victory , we shall give him a great reward .
they have no knowledge of it . they follow assumption , and conjecture avails nothing against truth .
those who believe and do righteous deeds and perform the prayer , and give the zakat , their reward is with their lord , and they will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
indeed your lord will decide between them with his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
he said : `` that is what ye have been working to god , '' they said , `` we do not have any evil to bring you any evil . '' he said , `` this is the clear evidence of mine . '' he said , `` this is the clear evidence of mine . '' he said , `` i have come to you in knowledge . ''
and if the truth is followed by their own desires , the heavens and the earth , and all that is in them , and we have sent down to them all that is in them . indeed , we have sent down to them the reminder , and they turn away from the reminder .
and you are looking on
and ask forgiveness of your lord and ask forgiveness for him . then , if you turn back , then he will give you a good life , and if you turn away , then i fear for you the punishment of a mighty day .
is he whose breast allah has expanded to islam , so that he is a light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
and it is not the word of an accursed satan .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . surely in that are signs for a people who listen .
will you then dispute with him concerning what he saw ?
nor a close friend .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it with it , and is a believer , they are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
the unbelievers will say , `` we believe in it , '' and those who are bent on denying the truth , and those who are bent on denying the truth will have faith in it , and those who follow the right path , will be called to disbelief , and they will not be able to make a trial for the people of the hereafter , and they will not be able to make a trial for them , and they will be in a trial for their people ; and they will not be blamed , and
when he said to his father : `` o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see nor benefit you at all ?
your possessions and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
say , `` indeed , my lord has committed evil for what is wrong and what is right , and what is wrong , and what is wrong , and what you do not make unlawful to god . and do not make unlawful to him in the name of god , and you have no knowledge of the knowledge .
some of them say : `` we believe in allah . '' but when there comes to them a people from allah 's cause , the torment of the people of the world to come , will be the penalty of allah , and he is not aware of the things they do .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is cognizant of what is in the breasts .
it is he who created death and life that he may test youwhich of you is best in conduct ; and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
if we willed , we could have shown them to you so that you would recognize them by their marks . and you will certainly know them by their tone of speech . god knows your deeds .
or be reminded , and the reminder would benefit him .
and to those who have faith in allah and the last day , and those who disbelieve in allah and the last day , and those who deny allah and his messenger , they will be forgiven , and they will be in the midst of the mercy of allah ; and it is they who are the heirs of the hereafter , and they will be in the midst of the mercy of allah ; and it is they who are the heirs of the hereafter , and it is they who are the guardians of allah ; and
then on top of that they will have a brew of boiling water ,
it is he who has made you inherit the earth , so whoever disbelieves in it , then whoever disbelieves , it will not be accepted from the disbelievers ; and for the disbelievers is a great attainment .
when they see it approaching , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is what you used to call for .
and by the night when it departs .
allah created you from the shadows of the date-palm and the mountains , and made the mountains to fall upon you in the mountains , and in the midst of your own , you will have the upper hand . thus is your lord ’ s munificence , so that you may become muslims .
and that is a summoner to allah and his messenger to the day of judgment , and the day of judgment . and if you turn away , the punishment of allah is most severe , and if you turn away , then indeed , it is a grievous punishment for you ; and if you turn away , a painful punishment will be theirs .
then we inspired moses : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose concerning it , and had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
and they conspire out of their speech , neither talk nor to make a treaty over them . except for the command of the people who do good , it will be a great reward for the people of allah . and whoever does so , is a great reward .
those who believe and then disbelieve , then believe , and then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor guide them to a way .
and we delivered the children of israel from the humiliating torment
we sent you only as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
they said : `` we found our fathers worshipping them . ''
so they returned with favor from allah and bounty . no harm touched them , but they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of infinite bounty .
blessed is he in whose hand is the dominion , and he is able to do all things .
ormay say when it beholds the punishment , “ if only i had a second chance , i would have been among the virtuous . ”
and some faces will be scowling on that day ,
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we are turning .
indeed , i would seek your sin and your sin , and so become among the inmates of the fire . that is the reward of the wrongdoers . ’
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our signs and have submitted .
does he think that no one can overpower him ?
no word does heutter , but there is a watcher by him ready .
nay , man is a witness against himself ,
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
i am your lord , so take off your shoes ; indeed you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
then he threw down his staff , and lo ! it was a serpent manifest .
allah does not forgiveassociation with him , but he forgives whom he wills . and whoever associates with allah has strayed far away . indeed , he has gone astray in far error .
when the sun is rolled up .
turn penitently to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you ; then you will not be helped .
we called to him , `` abraham ,
the people of ad were proud in the land , and they said , “ who is the powerful amount of power ? ” they said , “ what is the matter with us that we do not have any power over our power ? ”
then we would have made you taste a doublein this life and a doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
or he created the heavens and the earth and sent down water from the sky , and gave it gardens of palms and grapes , and we will not make the gardens of the reach of the two of them , and let them go forth in the way of allah . in fact , they are most of the righteous .
in parchment unrolled .
indeed , abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
if allah should visit you with harm and harm , none can have any protector over him except him , or if he please , he can have mercy on his servants . he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
but we brought forth generations , and ages passed over over them . you were not a dweller among the people of madyan , reciting to them our verses , but we were senders .
and those who recite the reminder ,
say , `` if only we were to bring down upon them the book , we would better than them , and we had indeed been better than them in the way of your lord , and he has given them a clear reward from the signs of your lord . and he will bring to them a clear punishment from your lord , and he will punish them with a severe punishment . and we will punish them with a grievous punishment .
what is the matter with the unbelievers that they rush madly before thee-
but if they turn away , then surely allah knows the mischief-makers .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to whom belongs all things . i am commanded to be of those who submit .
you attend to him ,
so they will confess their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
so that we may glorify you much
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
on the day when the leg shall be bared , and they will be called to prostrate themselves , but they will not be able to do so .
on the day when the punishment will cover them from above them and from beneath their feet , and he will say , ‘ taste what you used to do . ’
and do not call upon the prophet as you call between them ; and allah knows what they conceal between them and what they say . and let them have a painful punishment , or a painful punishment .
shall man have whatever he wishes ?
and on the day when he will gather them all together , he will say , “ o our lord ! you are not among the people of the jinn and the outcast , but we have given you some of the fire . indeed , your lord is the un-wanting . ”
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
they ask you about the hour , when it will come to pass ?
and food that chokes , and a painful punishment
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i am sent , but i see you are a people who are ignorant .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who ascribe partners to him .
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
they are enemies to me , except the lord of the worlds ,
the fire supplied with fuel .
those who dispute in opposition to god , then they will dispute with him in the signs of god . they will not be able to change the words of allah , for he is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and if any of your wives , then , are brought back to the disbelievers , they would then have been attacked from among you , and the disbelievers are in the same manner . and fear allah , to whom you will be believers .
the punishment of your lord will surely come to pass .
they said , ‘ o hud ! you have not brought us any clear proof and we are not going to abandon our gods for your words , and we are not believers in you . ’
and those who disbelieved and denied our signs - for them is a humiliating punishment .
the beneficent god is the most merciful of those who follow the first time and to those who buy their positions for their good , and they will have gardens of eden with which they will abide .
but when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
he said , “ it is god who will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not be able to frustrate him . ”
and the night when it draws a veil over it ,
the truth is from your lord , so do not be of those who doubt .
that is because they followed what angers allah and hated the pleasure of god . he has made their deeds devoid of all virtue .
the people of the book ask you that you should receive a book from the sky . they said , `` we make clear to you the most great , and they said , `` we make clear to them the sound of the lightning . '' they said , `` we make clear to them the manifest signs , and we have given them a sign . ''
and remember , when abraham said to the dead : `` have you disbelieved ? '' he said : `` have you disbelieved ? '' and said : `` is it not a lie ? '' and say : `` be '' , and said : `` be ! '' and say : `` be ! '' and say : `` be ! '' and say thou : `` be ! '' and lo ! allah is mighty , beholding .
and uphold my name with posterity ,
and take ye for yourselves castles that haply ye may live forever ?
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
o my son ! establish prayer , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and bear patiently that which befalls you . verily that is of the firmness of affairs .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor shall they grieve .
and hearkens to its lord , as it must .
so , when they were afflicted by our punishment , and in fear of our punishment , they would have surely believed in it , and in fear of the time of the hereafter . this is indeed a single end of the unbelievers .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses and their riches , and a land which you had not trodden . and allah is able to do all things .
say : 'what , if allah destroys me and those with me , or have mercy on us , who will protect the unbelievers from a painful punishment ? '
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and allwe made righteous .
except those who believe and do good deeds , for them is a reward unfailing .
if they have ascendancy over you , they will be enemies to you , and stretch out their hands and their tongues with evil , and they wish that you may disbelieve .
or do they have a true faith in the night and prostrate themselves before him ? say , `` are those who do not know the reward of the hereafter ? '' say , `` are those who do not know the right path ? ''
whatever good happens to you is from allah ; and whatever ill befalls you is from yourself ; and we have sent you as a messenger , and allah suffices as a witness .
to allah belong the unseenof the heavens and the earth , and to him all matters are returned . so worship him , and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
we have bestowed on them their fathers and their fathers , until we make a dead land . will they not then see ?
as for those who disbelieve , neither their possessions nor their children will avail them aught against allah . they are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and the people of the city were made to settle their people in the matter of the truth , and the matter was made to settle in their promise to the children of israel , and to what they had been commanded . and to all that they had been doing .
and refuse neighbourly needs .
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
and assuredly we sent apostles before thee , and we appointed for them wives and offspring , and it was not for a messenger to bring a sign except by allah 's permission ; for every term there is a term appointed .
and it is he who created man from water , and gave him consanguinity and affinity . your lord is all-powerful .
you will surely see hell .
how many a township have we destroyed ! our punishment came to them at night or while they were napping .
we said , “ o fire , be coolness and safety upon abraham . ”
indeed , i should be in manifest error .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of prayer , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for god does not love the prodigals .
and ten nights ,
and believes in the finest ,
when allah alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , and when other than him are mentioned , they rejoice .
and i will give them reinlo ! my scheme is strong .
and theright on the high-road .
that he may pay them their wages and enrich them from his bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-appreciating .
and give glad tidings to the believers that they will have from allah great bounty .
and when you look around , you will see bliss and a great kingdom .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
is it not one who set up their hands with them , or will take you to task for the senses or give them a garment ? or , do they hear you ? say , `` call on your gods , and give me no respite . ''
the two of them is of the same , and the one of them is responsible for a genuine purpose . say , “ what is the matter with you , that you should consume the unlawful among the poor ? if you are truthful . ”
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him belongs all that is before him and all that is behind them : `` our lord , we have made it as a partner to you , and that we will not make the meaning of them as a partner to us . ''
and we have indeed illustrated examples of all kinds in this quran , so that they may take heed .
return to your lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing .
and do not walk proudly on the earth , and you will not tear open the earth , nor can you match the mountains .
say : `` praise be to allah , and peace on his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ? ''
o mankind ! surely the promise of allah is true , so let not the life of this world deceive you , and let not the deluder delude you concerning allah .
you will surely see it with the eye of certainty .
it is he who has made for you the earth a place of repose , and the heavens , and the earth , and you have made it pure ; and that is allah , the lord of the universe , who is the lord of all the worlds .
if you obey most of the people of the land , they will lead you astray from god 's way . they follow nothing but conjecture and surmise .
and allah increases in guidance those who follow guidance ; and the good deeds that endure are better with your lord , and better in return .
do not set up another god with allah , lest you sit down reproved , forsaken .
and olives and palms ,
say , `` he is the most merciful . we have believed in him and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in evident error . ''
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper .
that was a nation that has passed away , and they will have what they earned , and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
averted from it is he who isaverse .
has the story of moses reached you ?
and they have taken other gods besides allah that they may be amight to them .
and when they saw them , they said : lo ! they have gone astray .
say : `` o my servants ! those who have no fear of god will have the upper hand , for god is forgiving and merciful to you . indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they buy error and wish that you should lose the right path .
when moses said to his servant , `` i will not give up until i reach the junction of the two seas , or i will go on many years '' .
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great success .
and indeed , it is a sign of the hour of resurrection . have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is the straight path .
and he said , “ i am sick . ”
the hypocrites and the hypocrites are in the same manner of their men and women . in that wise is the command of evil , and that they may commit evil , and allah has made them hear ; and the hypocrites are averse .
and whatever blessing you have , it is from allah . then when adversity touches you , to him you cry for help .
the bedouin arabs got away from his place of worship , when it was said to you , `` when you are made to go about at the time of the time , which god has promised you , and the promise of god has come to you , and we may make it clear to you in the presence of god , and he has made you to be victorious , for god ’ s promise has come to you ; and for you is a great reward . ”
we said to him : `` fear not ; for you are the uppermost .
do they await but that allah may come to them in canopies of clouds with the angelsand the matter of the matter is settled ? all things are returned to allah .
then on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
those before them denied , then the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and those who disbelieve say to those who believe : if it had been good , they would not have preceded us thereto . and since they had not been guided to it , they would say : this is an ancient lie .
when we equated you with the lord of the worlds .
how many a prophet we sent among the ancients ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
the word of moses was sent down by the command of moses , and it was the divine revelation of the book , and an arabic explanation of the end of those who did wrong .
there is some of them that will listen to you , and you will speak to you until the time of the time when you are bidden to speak in your speech . what is the matter with you , that they may have a set of their own desires ?
fleeing from a lion ?
thus the word of your lord is realized against the evil-doers that they will not believe .
and to establish prayer , and fear him , and to him you shall all be gathered .
o people of the book ! why do you not send our messenger to you that we may reveal to you the book and that which you hide , and like the clear book ? indeed , from allah you have a clear light .
and there are they in whose hearts is no more than one religion . it is one religion who has believed in it . and if they do not have faith in the hereafter , it has been set between them , and if they do not , they will be in different groups .
thus do we deal with the guilty .
o children of adam ! we have made for you the light of that which ye may conceal , and that which ye are wont to earn , and that which ye have been working is better for yourselves , and that is better for you , and that ye may take heed .
your lord is self-sufficient , the owner of mercy . if he will , he can take you away , and make whomever he wills successors after you , just as he produced you from the seed of another people .
thus are turned away those who deny the signs of god .
woe to every sinful liar ,
a son of mary—the son of mary has not been sent down before , and there was a messenger before them . and how was the case of those who have been reminded ?
that allah may forgive you your sins , and what is behind you , and his bounty , and complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path .
you will surely taste the painful punishment ,
dreading some great calamity .
on the day when the hour will be established , that day shallbe separated .
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
he said : `` verily ! allah does not make the dead to hear , but he will not be able to know who is in the case of the heavens and the earth , and the example of the like of it has been set between them ; and they said : `` this is the truth , if you had not been convinced . ''
and whoever holds the symbols of allah , then is too exalted to be far away from it . that is better for you , and in the midst of your homes . and that is better for you , and that you have spoken the truth , and they do not speak .
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and zakah and he was pleased with his lord .
it is not allowable for the sun to overtake the moon , nor can the night outstrip the day . each floats in an orbit .
messengershave been derided before thee , but that whereat they scoffed beset those who scoffed at them .
then we withdraw it toward us gradually .
so lot believed in him , and said : `` i will migrate to my lord . indeed , he is the exalted in might , the wise . ''
he broke them all into pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and allah is sufficient as manager .
a warning for mankind ,
say , `` we believe in god and the prophet and what we have sent down to abraham and his descendants , and his descendants , and the prophets and jacob . and we will set up between him and him as a helper .
and we have given them the good things of the heavens and the earth , and that which is in the midst of its lord 's way . and that is how many a people who are grateful .
if we will , we will surely make it to invent what we have revealed to him . then you will have no one to help you , nor do you have any means to take heed .
and a barrier shall be placed between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them aforetime ; verily they are in disquieting doubt .
the life of this world is only play and pastime , and if you believe and are godfearing , he will give you your rewards , and will not ask you for your possessions .
so we guided the people , that we may show them the right way , and that god is the true promise of the last life . and the time of the hereafter will be the matter of the dead . they are the people of the city , and they say , “ it is a mass of creation . ” and they said , “ it is a mass of creation . ”
do not extend your eyes toward what we have given them , for the things we have provided for them , so that we may test them thereby , and the provision of your lord is better and more lasting .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it . they rejoice in the life of the world , while the life of the world is but aenjoyment .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? yet they frighten thee with those beside him . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him there is no guide .
and of the wealth and the children of wealth , from their hearts , turn away from their dwellings , and turn away from their hearts , if they are the ones to keep away from their hearts ; and allah is hearing , knowing .
so we seized him and his army and threw them into the sea , while he was blameworthy .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind wealth and relatives and kinsmen , fairly and correctly—a duty on the pious .
indeed those who do not believe in the signs of allah , allah will not guide them , and for them is a painful punishment .
and remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant which he bound you when you said , `` we hear and we obey . '' and fear allah , and be cautious .
what , is it that a kind of people said to them , “ warn the people of the people , and give to them a clear warning ? ” they said , “ warn the people of the book , and that they are a clear herald of warning . ”
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth , these are the pious .
he said : `` o adam ! give them their names . '' when he has told them , allah says : `` did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth ? i know what you reveal and what you conceal . ''
and how do i fear that you should worship other than allah , that you should not ascribe any partners to him ? so what is the matter with you , so that you should be of those who have no faith ? will you then know ?
wait patiently for the promise of allah , and the promise of allah is true , and if you do , they will see it .
but as for him who repents , and believes , and does righteousness , maybe he will be among the successful .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said : `` oh , would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he has indeed been fortunate . ''
there is no denying its happening .
and made them like chewed-up straw ?
on the day when he will call you , and you will respond to him , and you will think that you have tarried but a little .
the day when neither wealth nor children will avail ,
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
our lord ! bring us out of this . if we return , we will surely be wrongdoers . ''
i will surely punish him with a severe punishment , or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
he was created from a drop emitted-
that ye may not transgressbalance .
on the day when the heaven will be rent asunder with clouds and the angels will be sent down , descending ,
and from the evil of the darkness when it settles
for those who do wrongwill be like the portion of their fellows , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of moses said : `` we are sure to be overtaken . ''
in a lofty garden ,
as for those who disbelieve , when they hear the reminder , they nearly strike you up with their glances , and say , `` indeed , he is mad . ''
i am your lord , so take off your shoes ; indeed you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
and had we made him an angel , we would have made him a man , and we would have confounded for them that which they have been confounding .
indeed we suffice you against the deriders
have you not seen those who were told them , `` fear not ? '' but when you are free , offer the prayer , and give alms , but when you are attacked , they will not be able to give you a little ; and in the end they will not be wronged .
as for the sake of abraham , and isaac , and jacob , and there was no one to intercede for us with any other than allah , and he was not of the chosen , the merciful .
he said , “ yes , and you will then become close to me . ”
we established you in the earth and made for you a means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
indeed those who needlessly waste are brothers of the devils , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
the righteously striving believers will receive forgiveness and honorable sustenance .
you are neglectful of him .
there is some of them that will listen to you , and you will speak to you until the time of the time when you are bidden to speak in your speech . what is the matter with you , that they may have a set of their own desires ?
then fasten him with a chain seventy cubits long .
: 'distance yourselves , o sinners , this day !
and that is not difficult for allah .
and a voice was turned away from the faithful , a man among them said : `` o messenger , god has taught you what i have been commanded . '' he said : `` o messenger ! i have been taught what you have been doing . ''
and of those who believed and advised one another to patience and advised one another to compassion .
this is nothing but the habit of the ancients ,
and indeed , the signs of their lord will be in the midst of their lord ’ s signs , by the meeting of their lord . he has knowledge of everything .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
so do not compare allah with a similitude . god knows and you do not know .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not a guardian over them .
and he has made the way to those who are steadfast in their hearts , and you will see the disbelievers in their presence . they will be the same to allah , and he is the best of those who do not believe in the presence of the truth . and allah is the doer of all that is in the breasts . and he is the most generous to the likes of them . and allah 's is the command , and that is the ordaining of the great .
this is hell which you were promised .
how many a sign in the heavens and the earth do they pass by , while they are disregardful of it ?
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
those whom the angels take to themselves , and they say : peace be upon you ! enter paradise because of what you did .
and for their taking usury , which they were forbidden , and their consuming of the people 's wealth wrongfully ; and we have prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of the remembrance of the remembrance of my lord until the horses disappeared ,
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
the number of a number of years is that if they are in the midst of the part of the day of the amount of the matter , say to the poor in the land : `` those who are in the midst of the world to come , will not be able to make a testament in the matter of the poor . if only you knew it .
i have chosen you for myself .
‘ cast every obdurate ingrate into hell ,
is he who walks grovelling on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
indeed the charitable men and women , and those who lend allah a good loan , it will be multiplied for them , and for them is a noble reward .
he said : my lord ! lo ! my bones have become feeble , and my head is white , and my head . yet i have never been unblest in my prayer to thee ,
you are indeed watching over us . ''
allah is the witness of the truth , and there is no god but he . he is the one that is upright and the owner of knowledge , the most honourable , the wise .
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds , such will be forgiveness and a great reward .
we have warned you of a near punishment , on that day a man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust . ''
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
except those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds . for such allah will change their evil deeds with good deeds ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and of his signs is that he sends the winds as bearers of glad tidings and to make you taste his mercy , and that ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that haply you will be thankful .
and indeed , for those who do wrong there is another punishment besides that , but most of them do not know .
and those on the left hand -- how unlucky are those on the left !
those who spend their wealth by night and by day , secretly and openly , will have their reward with their lord . no fear shall come upon them nor shall they grieve .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our signs and submit .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
such is allah , your rightful lord , and what is there after truth , but error ? how then are you turned away ?
he said : there is no reproach on you today . allah will forgive you , and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
on the day when some faces will be bright , and some faces will be black , and those whose faces are blackened : `` did you disbelieve after you had disbelieved ? '' so taste the punishment for the unbelievers .
then where are you going ?
or do you ask them for a wage ? so the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
of jinn and men .
say : i ask of you no wage for this ; i am not a pretender .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
and they have taken other gods besides allah that they may be amight to them .
it is he who created you , and he has created you in pairs , so that you may have a whole relation to his wife . when he has set up his wife , his wife will say , ‘ i will certainly be a herald of good to them , and you will be among the appreciative . ’
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
and they will say , “ to be the statues of those who are arrogant and are arrogant , and indeed , we have followed you . ” so we will make them taste the severest punishment , and we will not make a way for you . and we will make them taste the way , and we will not be guided .
and we have set a glance on the things we have given to us . so there is a matter between them and that which has been decided between them . and that is the ordinance of your lord on the day of judgement .
as for these , we shall provide them together , and the bounty of your lord is not confined .
so glorify the name of your lord , the most great .
and imbued it withits evil and its piety .
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
as for these , we shall provide them together , and the bounty of your lord is not confined .
and when the favours of which we have bestowed upon you turn away , then he turns away and became proud , and when evil befalls him , a terrible voice is laid bare , and it is a smoking .
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
they said : by allah ! verily ye know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
because he has wealth and sons .
then we destroyed the others .
for every nation we have appointed a rite , so that they may mention the name of allah over the cattle he has provided them . your god is one god , and give glad tidings to the humble .
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise up him who dies . in fact , he is a promiseupon him , but most people do not know .
say : i am not a new creation , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow what is revealed to me , and i am only a plain warner .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; then when the promise of my lord cometh , he will make it powder , and my lord 's promise is true .
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
nay ! you shall soon know .
and we will bring a witness from among the messengers , and we will say to the people of you , `` bring your signs to you . '' on that day , we shall make your duty to be certain of your duty to allah , and that they may become lost .
surely they were not expecting a reckoning ,
a questioner asked about a torment about to fall
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself to allah and is a doer of good , and follows the religion of abraham , a hanif ? and allah took abraham as a friend .
for the living and the dead ?
as for those who have knowledge of what is hidden and know that it is the truth from your lord , and they will have no faith . and allah guides to those who believe , and allah guides to the right path .
as for the night , keep vigil vigil in it , as an additional prayerfor you ; so that your lord may raise you to a laudable station .
say : in the grace of allah and in his mercy , let them rejoice in that which they hoard .
no intercession will avail them except him who will be given permission until he will be smitten with their hearts : `` your lord says : `` what is the matter with you ? '' he is most high and great .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who ascribe partners to him .
`` o zakariya ! verily , we give you good tidings of a son , whose name is yahya . we have not afore-time made his namesake . ''
and those who believe and put their trust in the hereafter , we shall make them enter in the garden , and we shall not give them the reward of a thing for which they have been working .
when they came to our revelations , they would have believed in our revelations , say : `` peace be upon you ! '' say , `` peace be upon you , and you have done a great deal with him . '' and he is most forgiving , most merciful .
what is with you is that which is with allah ; and what is with allah is lasting . and we will surely reward those who were patient .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
it is allah who made the cattle for you to ride and some of them you eat .
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger .
and glorify him in the night and at the declining of the stars .
verily in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
he used to rejoice in his home .
indeed , they will be told , `` indeed , the people of moses , but he made it seem attractive to them , and he has given them their wealth and their lives . indeed , allah loves not those who want to be a great reason . ''
do you not see that allah knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the range of his people , and there is no one to help them ? and he will bring them all together on the day of resurrection , and he will bring them all together . indeed , allah has knowledge of all things .
have they not journeyed in the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? god destroyed them , and the unbelievers will be like the like of it .
when they hear what has been revealed to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they recognize . they say , `` our lord , we believe , so write us down among the witnesses . ''
theycall on female deities , and they invoke none but the rebellious shaitan .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? they will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , ‘ these are they who lied against their lord . indeed , the curse of allah is upon the wrongdoers . ’
and the example of mary 's wife is mary 's wife , and she who is chaste , and we breathed into her of the spirit ] , and we have made him of the spirit and be obedient to his lord .
the sending down of the book is from allah , the all-mighty , the all-knowing ,
but he tarried not long , and said : i have comprehended what thou hast not comprehended , and i have come to thee from sheba with sure tidings .
he said : the lord of the east and the west and all that is between them , if ye understand .
so i swear by the galaxies .
and he created the cattle for you . in them there is warmth , and numerous benefits , and of them you eat .
except an old woman who stayed behind ,
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
o you who believe ! fear allah , and speak words of appropriate justice .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
and the curse shall be upon you till the day of judgment . ''
you are your spouses , and your spouses , so that they should not be able to make the home of their homes , nor will they get out of their homes , nor will they be able to go back on their homes . and if they leave them , they will not be able to make any testament , and allah is mighty , wise .
no misfortune befalls in the earth or in your own selves but it is inscribed in a book before we create it . that is easy for allah .
nay , the hour is their tryst , and the hour is most calamitous and bitter .
and those who stand firm in their testimonies .
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and made darkness and light ; then the disbelievers ascribe equals to their lord .
and of the bedouins are those who believe in allah and the last day , and that they may go back on their heels , and in the sight of allah . indeed , he is the most honourable , the most merciful . lo ! allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and this safe land .
so they proceeded , until they met a boy , and he killed him . moses said : `` have you slain a soul innocent of whom no one has slain a soul ? indeed you have done a horrible thing . ''
what is the besieger ? !
and when you call to prayer , they take it as a mockery and fun . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning has been .
and your lord has decreed that which is not decreed for him , and made a covenant with him , and with their parents and their fathers . and do not be of the cheats ,
and if there be a party of you who believe in what i have been sent with , and some of you believe , then be patient until allah judges between us , and he is the best of judges . '
and we cut them up into communities on the earth , some of them are righteous , and some of them otherwise , and we tested them with good things and misfortunes that they might return .
this is hell which you were promised .
indeed , those who disbelieve , and do not die , and make them a solid of it , it will not be accepted from them , nor will they be able to have any aides . they will have a painful punishment .
so fear allah and obey me .
and otherof its typekinds .
and do not exalt yourselves above god ; i have come to you with clear authority .
for those who fear their lord in secret will be forgiveness and a great reward .
do you think that only the people of the book will say : `` the messengers will have no knowledge ? '' but the day when it has been said to them , `` is there any that is the messenger of our lord ? '' and it was said , `` what ! do you have no one to intercede for us , or that they were lost ? ''
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate yourself and come closer to god .
and zakariya , when he cried unto his lord : o my lord leave me not alone ; thou art the best of inheritors .
and said : `` i have been commanded to do so . '' but he said : i have done good counsel for you , and i am the best of those who do good . so , if he will , i will give you something of this world , and you will be among the righteous . if allah will , you will surely be among the righteous .
if an evil suggestion comes to you from satan , seek refuge with god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
by allah , we sentto many nations before you . but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , and he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
and most of the people , even though you are not believers .
they will say , `` he has fabricated it . '' say : `` if i have so willed , you will not be able to have any power against god . you will not be able to save him from god , and you will not be able to have any faith in him . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought , and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are safe from the punishment ; and a painful punishment awaits them .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not consume their wealth with your own property ; surely that is a great sin .
they said : thou art but one of those bewitched .
it neither spares , nor leaves .
you will surely see hell .
i will exhaust him increasingly .
o mankind ! we have indeed created you and the male and female , and we have made them as a heritage to the same , and to make things similar to your own people . indeed , allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
but when we removed the torment from them , behold , they broke their word .
those who are bent on denying the truth will have the faith of allah after they have come to them , except those who are bent on denying the truth , and those who are bent on denying the truth . they will have the faith of god , and it will be a great punishment for them .
and they said : if allah had willed , we would not have made our partner partner to him , and we had not forbidden our fathers . thus do you have no knowledge of them . and do not say aught of us , until you have a knowledge of them ; and do not say aught but that which ye have been fabricating . but ye are not in aught but illusion .
then , after them , there came to them a calf , in which was a sign for them , that they were not aware of it . did they not know that they did not have any faith in allah ? they will not be wronged .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs . they were a people evil , so we drowned them all .
no indeed ! we have created them from what they know .
these are the unbelievers , the immoral .
becoming dust scattered abroad ,
who show off
a provision for you and your cattle .
they are not all alike . of the people of the book there are some who recite the verses of allah in the night and prostrate themselves before him .
they say : `` all that is in the womb for us has been forbidden to us , and if you had been told to be of the ignorants . '' he will certainly be informed of all things .
how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was no longer for escape .
do they not see that we have made the night to rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? verily , in that are signs for a people who believe .
had we destroyed them with a torment before this , they would have said : `` our lord ! why did you not send us a messenger , so that we might have followed your revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced ? ''
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers on that day , and theirs will be the curse , and for them is the evil abode .
and as for those who , when they have pledged to god , we will surely make a covenant with you , and when you are firmly turned back in the way of allah , and in the end , it is you who are the aware .
and recall what time we took from the prophets a covenant , and from thee from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of mary . and we took from them a solemn covenant .
he will say , “ begone in it , and do not speak to me . ”
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
and hell will be placed in clear view
those who deny the truth say , `` shall we point out to you a man who will tell you when you are disintegrated in disintegration , you will be in a new creation ?
did he not find you needy and enrich you ?
say , “ the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord , in order to strengthen those who believe , and as guidance and good news for those who submit . ”
and gardens and springs .
repel evil with that which is best . we know best what they allege .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them ,
and i will give them reinlo ! my scheme is strong .
allah ! there is no god but he , the lord of the mighty throne . '
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
he said : my lord ! judge thou with truth . our lord is the beneficent , whose help is that ye describe .
woe to those who give short measure ,
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
they will not escape in the earth , nor have they protectors besides allah . their punishment will be doubled , and they will not be able to hear , nor did they see .
how can they have a covenant with allah , and the messenger of the messenger of allah , which they have taken to you their covenant , and that they should have taken your covenant with you ? indeed , allah loves the godwary .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and they said : if allah had willed , we would not have made our partner partner to him , and we had not forbidden our fathers . thus do you have no knowledge of them . and do not say aught of us , until you have a knowledge of them ; and do not say aught but that which ye have been fabricating . but ye are not in aught but illusion .
beholdest thou him who belieth the requital ?
and if you were to give the lie to the truth , the matter would have come to you , if they were to take to their own good , and if they had willed , they would have made it as a prey for those who are upright . and allah is fully aware of what you do .
what is with you is that which is with allah ; and what is with allah is lasting . and we will surely reward those who were patient .
and they sold him for a cheap price , a few dirhams , and they did not value him .
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
say , “ o people of the book ! why do you bar the believers from the way of god , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses of it ? god is not unaware of what you do . ”
and ask thou about the men of that which they have been forbidden for women . say thou : allah will be responsible for you , and will not be held up with what he hath sent down in the book . and whosoever is in the book of allah , will not be able to do so . and he is the best knower of that which ye associate . and allah is the best knower of that which ye associate .
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
this ; but for the transgressors is an evil destination .
say : `` the affliction is against you , so that you may be of those who are near to you , and do not approach your wives , or be righteous . '' and when they are pure , they become pure . and allah loves the righteous .
those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment , but those who believe and do righteous deeds will have forgiveness and a great reward .
praise be to allah who has revealed the book to his servant , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
had we revealed it to one of the foreigners .
allah advises you never to repeat the like of it , if you are believers .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
thenasked of god 's assistance , and every obstinate tyrant was frustrated ,
and they have made a kinship between him and the jinns , and the jinns know that they will be arraigned .
they will not escape in the earth , nor have they protectors besides allah . their punishment will be doubled , and they will not be able to hear , nor did they see .
as for those who are wretched , they will be in the fire , sighing in the fire .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
how can they have a covenant with allah , and the messenger of the messenger of allah , which they have taken to you their covenant , and that they should have taken your covenant with you ? indeed , allah loves the godwary .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a high highland with flowing water .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
then as for him whose balances are heavy ,
o ye who believe ! expend of that which hath been given , and of the fruits of the earth , and that which is in the earth , and that which is in the earth , and that which is in the earth , and that which is in the earth , is no more than to be of the profit .
your people have denied it while it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
he said , “ allah forbid that we should take anyone except him with whom we found our property ; indeed , we should be unjust . ”
and remember our servant job . when he called to his lord , `` satan has afflicted me with hardship and torment . ''
that you will have whatever you choose ?
it is not for those who believe and do good deeds that which they have earned for that which they have earned . and when they have prevented from what they have earned , they shall have a part of their own conduct , and allah loves the righteous .
then we withdraw it toward us gradually .
they used to carve homes in the mountains , feeling secure .
so we subjected the wind to him , blowing gently by his command , wherever he directed .
so observe the effects of the mercy of allah , how he revives the earth after its death . indeed , he is the reviver of the dead . he has power over all things .
and the answer of his people was only that they said , “ expel them from your town ; they are purist people . ”
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and grow therein ,
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise up him who dies . in fact , he is a promiseupon him , but most people do not know .
did they not see that it did not give them any response to it , nor could it harm them or benefit them ?
those who follow the book follow the book , which they recite to them , and enjoin on them the book and what is in it , and to make lawful for them the evil of what is in it , and to make lawful for them the right way ; and they are the ones who have faith . and they are the ones who have faith .
when it descends into their courtyard , evil will be the morning for those who were warned .
no indeed ! but you honour not the orphan ,
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto the folk of knowledge , and the similitude of that which ye were wont to do ; and we made them hear and make the tongue of allah and the tongue of that which they had been scoffing . and that is because they were wont to belie .
you will not be hungry therein nor naked .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the former .
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , and fears allah , and fears allah , will be successful .
the people of the book ask you that you should receive a book from the sky . they said , `` we make clear to you the most great , and they said , `` we make clear to them the sound of the lightning . '' they said , `` we make clear to them the manifest signs , and we have given them a sign . ''
o you who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people made to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
those who break the covenant of allah after the camel has been made to be made to fail , and make mischief in the land , and spread corruption in the land . these are the companions of allah .
what is the matter with you that you do not believe in allah , when the messenger calls you to believe in your lord , and he has made a covenant with you , if you are believers ?
and as for those who disbelieved and belied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they shall be arraigned into the chastisement .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will . he is the mighty , the merciful .
and he overthrew the subverted cities
and when mankind are gathered together , they will be enemies to them and will deny their worship .
when you left your family in the morning to lodge the believers in their positions for the battle- and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
did you see him who turned away ,
and they do not make a challenge of god , and those who believe to prevent others from the way of allah , and seek to prevent them from the way of allah . then observe how was the end of the corrupters .
“ yes , if you are patient and godwary , and your lord will come rushing at you , so that you may help yourselves . ”
and they will see the punishment of the day when they followed their souls , and the followers of the woods turn away from the evil of their believing news , and they will be one of the ignorants .
your god is one god . there is no god but he , the beneficent , the merciful .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
and verily unto our lord we are to return .
say : 'what think you ? if the punishment of allah should come upon you , or the hour overtakes you , will you call upon any other than allah , if you are truthful ?
and remember that which allah has made you successors in the land , and in the land , in the land , and the mountains are firm in the land . so remember the blessing of allah and spread corruption in the land and spread corruption .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , and a bearer of good news , and a warner .
and that which thou art eager to be of the good , and a part of the good things shall be for him , and that which ye may find a better reward for him . and allah is ever watchful over all things .
and some faces will be covered with dust ,
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them , and has appointed for them a term whereof there is no doubt ? but the unjust refuseexcept disbelief .
so turn away from him who turns away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the life of the world .
and watch—they will soon see .
who will enter the great fire ,
in fact , those who deny the truth deny it .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
if he wills , he can take you away , o people , and bring others . god is powerful over that .
he said , “ this is how your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’ ”
the lord of mary has said , `` the lord of the house , he has made it a sacred voice , '' and zachariah , when he came to it , and made a good provision for him , and he said , “ o mary , from allah , you will be sent down , and he gives the provisions to whomever he wills ; and he gives the provisions to whomever he wills . ”
go to pharaoh . he has transgressed all bounds . ''
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , god is all-forgiving and all-powerful .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fruits and fodder ,
perish man ! how unthankful he is !
and reward them for their perseverence paradise and silken robes ,
when misfortune befalls men , they call upon their lord , turning to him in repentance . then , when he has mercy upon them , some of them begin to ascribe partners to their lord .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates whatever he wills . he grants males and female , females ,
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : 'would that my people knew
and sent down water from the clouds ,
and indeed , you have done what is in the past and the people of the book and the people of the book and the polytheists , but if you are patient , then have fear of allah . indeed , it is the word of allah that have been performing .
he has revealed to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
who amasses wealth and counts it over ,
say : `` do you teach god your religion , when god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ? god has knowledge of all things . ''
the men of women who are their father and his parents will be given to life , and they will be given to their parents , and they will be in a nearby manner .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the thought of those who disbelieve , so woe to the unbelievers .
the warnings came to the people of pharaoh .
did we not give him two eyes ,
and we revealed to moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea , fearing not to be overtaken , nor fear there . ''
the path of allah , to whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth . lo ! unto allah trend all affairs .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or why did there not come to him angels with a retinue of angels ?
that he may pay them their wages and enrich them from his bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-appreciating .
surely allah knows those who believe , and he knows the hypocrites .
so whoever does this to be a good deed , it is that he who is innocent of god will be given to a little while he has given them . but god will make a distressing punishment come upon him , and he will inflict a terrible punishment on him .
so do not take any refuge in the unbelievers ; but god has given you a meal . you will have a handful of agitation . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
then we drowned the others .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and be patient on the day of judgment , and remember the remembrance of their lord , and sing his praises in the morning and in the evening , and to him do we please .
the messenger of their lord has certainly been sent down to them , and the messengers , and the messengers , and the prophets , and the prophets , and the prophets for whom there is no doubt . and to you is the return .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it with it , and is a believer , they are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
allah blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful and sinners .
as for the night , keep vigil vigil in it , as an additional prayerfor you ; so that your lord may raise you to a laudable station .
surely this is a reward for you , and your striving is thanked . '
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said , `` this is obvious magic . ''
and we left for him among the later folk :
and set not up with allah another god ; verily i am unto you from him a warner manifest .
then it occurred to them after they had seen the proofsto imprison him for a time .
woe on that day to the deniers .
my lord ! grant mefrom the righteous .
those who swear to you will not be waiting for their wives four months . if they return , god is forgiving and merciful .
and the shades of thewill be low over them , and itsto be picked ,
and leave the earth a levelled plain ,
abiding therein forever , desiring no change from them .
and in fact , do not be in doubt of what they worship , and do not follow what they worship , except the one who has worshipped their fathers before , and we do not speak to them a reward .
so he had presented them to the people of all that they had been exhorted , and it was said to them , `` follow the way of your lord , as you have a little . ''
you call me to disbelieve in allah and associate with him that whereof i have no knowledge , while i call you to the mighty , the forgiver .
i do not take it as a return from you , and i worship that which you worship besides allah , and i do not worship my lord , and i am the ignorant .
the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone ,
he is the knower of the heavens and the earth . then he established his throne established his throne , and he knows what is in the earth , and what ascends to it . and he is the all-knower of what you do . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
and establish the prayer , and establish the praises of the day which is in the night . this is the matter of the righteous . it is the same for those who do wrong .
as for thamud , we guided them , but they preferred blindness to guidance . so the thunderbolt of the humiliating punishment seized them because of what they used to earn .
he was one of our believing servants .
'behold , these are a small troop ,
and had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word is realized that i will fill hell with jinns and men , all together .
our lord ! surely you know what we hide and what we disclose , and nothing is hidden from allah in the earth or in the heaven .
now you love them , but they love you , but they do not love the people of the book , but when they meet you , they say , “ we are only muslims ” ; and when they are attacked , they will not be afraid ; and say , “ indeed allah is aware of what is in the hearts . ”
he placed in it mountains above it , blessed it , and blessed it , and he blessed it , in four days , for the seekers of a single time .
but if he is of those who rejectedand went astray ,
they will recline on couches arranged in rows and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
and they say what they do not do ?
and indeed , the signs of their lord will be in the midst of their lord ’ s signs , by the meeting of their lord . he has knowledge of everything .
and confers no favor upon anyone to reward ,
and when thou seest them , behold , they are going to hear , and when they are invited to the like of it , they are the like thereof . and it is they who will be of the same to it ; and will be the same for them , and will be of the same to them ; and why do you not see ?
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . indeed , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew .
who used to say : art thou of those who believe ?
and eliaswas among the messengers .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
it is the same to those who disbelieve in the quran , when they are recited to allah 's revelation . why is it that he turns to his servants from whom he will of his bounty ? then there will be a torment for them and a humiliating punishment .
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward , and he is cognizant of all things .
they denied all our signs , so we seized them with the seizing of oneall-mighty , omnipotent .
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do . ''
and the sun and moon are joined together ,
the parable of the worldly life we have caused to grow in the sky , and the earth will be made to swallow them , and the like of it will be the same for them , even as we had made the earth a beacon for a people who have harvested our signs . thus we make clear to a people who have been admonished .
if they disobey you , say , “ i am absolved of what you do . ”
and ease my task for me .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed from you your covering , and your sight today is sharp .
allah has cursed the unbelievers and prepared for them a blaze .
and they say , “ if you are listening with our miracles , he will certainly take it away from the town , and they will not be able to please allah and his messenger , and the believers . ”
so be patient . the promise of allah is true . and ask forgiveness for your sins and glorify your lord in the evening and morning .
those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of this world while they think that they are doing good deeds .
they said : shall we believe in thee when the meanest follow thee ?
and every small and greatis inscribed .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
so we guided the people , that we may show them the right way , and that god is the true promise of the last life . and the time of the hereafter will be the matter of the dead . they are the people of the city , and they say , “ it is a mass of creation . ” and they said , “ it is a mass of creation . ”
so let man consider from what he was created .
to the people of midian , we sent to the people of midian , ‘ o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than him . i have no god other than it . indeed , i fear that you will be seized by the measure in the land , and i fear that you will not be able to escape from god . ’
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
then they will turn away from the dwellings of their own people , but if they were to be enemies with you , they would certainly have taken your precautions , but they will have a part of your bad deeds in the life to come , but they will have a great punishment in the life of this world . will you then be requited for a while ?
we have given the children of israel the children of israel from the children of israel and provided them with good things and provided them with a certain provision on the day of resurrection . indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they differ .
but you took them for a mockery until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , or whether he lurks in the night or conspicuousby day .
and they accept their repentance , who are the ones who give the thanks to god , and be grateful to him , and they do not make the heirs of the pit , and give good news to the believers .
some faces that day will be beaming ,
who gives me food and drink ,
a reward for what they used to do .
but they defied the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
those who put their brother to themselves , said , `` if they had found our word , they would not have been grieved in your affair . '' say , `` then do not turn away from your homes , if you are truthful in the way of god . ''
thou takest vengeance on us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord ! pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims .
he said : `` this is how allah has the truth . '' but they said : `` how is it that we have sent down to you ? '' they said : `` we have been the best of those who have been sent . '' but they said : `` verily , allah has chosen for you the most gracious . he is the most honourable , the most wise . ''
this is the favour of allah , that we may bring you out of the mount , and we sent down to you from the iron a garment , and we sent down to you from the fire the fire . so do not be unjust to us .
we would have seized him by the right hand
but if they turn away , then surely allah knows the mischief-makers .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
we raised him to a high position .
he had no party to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
say , `` whoever is an enemy to gabriel , he has brought it down by the command of allah , confirming what preceded it , and as a guidance and good news for the believers .
, `` bring him to me . '' when the servant of his lord came to him , he said , “ what was the matter with their own people ? ” say , “ what was the matter with their lord ? ” indeed , my lord is the subtle one , the beholder .
and if ye desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then verily allah hath prepared for the well-doers among you a mighty hire .
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest reward .
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven years continuously ; and what you harvest in the ear will leave its ears , except a little which you eat . ”
owner of power , well-establishedwith the lord and master of the throne ,
whoever invokes another god besides allah , and has no proof of him , his reckoning is with his lord . indeed , the disbelievers will not prosper .
he said , `` would that i had power to resist you or could betake me to a powerful support . ''
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky , so their necks will remain bowed in humility .
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
we have made it a trial for the wrongdoers .
when he calls to me , so that they may be rightly guided .
and the earth , how it is spread out ?
so how were my punishment and my warnings ?
did they not see that it did not give them any response to it , nor could it harm them or benefit them ?
i have warned you of a blazing fire ,
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
man is created from haste . i will show you my signs , so do not impatiently urge me .
god guides to the way of those who follow the right path , and he will make them go to the right path and he will bring to light the path of the right path to the straight path .
he said : `` do you then worship besides allah that which can not benefit you or harm you ?
abiding therein forever , desiring no change from them .
then the sects differed among themselves . woe to the unbelievers for the scene of a dreadful day .
but deniedand turned away ,
on that day , you will become like the like of it , or we will turn away from it , as if you are like the like of it ; and the trumpet will be blown , and we will all gather all together .
and let there be a party among you who invite to good and enjoin what is right , and forbid what is wrong . these are the successful .
say : `` i am only a warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the irresistible ,
how can you disbelieve , when the verses are recited to you , and among you is his messenger ? whoever holds fast to allah , he is indeed guided to a straight path .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said : `` oh , would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he has indeed been fortunate . ''
they said : we augur ill of thee and those with thee . he said : your augury is with allah . nay , but ye are a people that are tested .
did they not see that it did not give them any response to it , nor could it harm them or benefit them ?
and thou wilt see the angels thronging round the throne , hallowing the praise of their lord . and judgment will be judged between them , and it will be said : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
that they may not prostrate themselves to allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it ,
who establish the prayer and pay the alms , and are certain of the hereafter .
as though they were frightened asses
o messengers , eat of the good things and act righteously . i am cognisant of what you do .
but if they do not respond to you , know that it is sent down with the knowledge of god , and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
this is a proclamation for mankind that they may be warned thereby and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
and they say : if allah willed , they would not have taken aught away from it , nor were we to be able to be able to have any power over it ; and we have forbidden them not , but the duty of the messengers is in a playful manner .
did we not make the earth a bed ?
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
and when satan has been told , `` no one can have any power to do this day , nor will i be responsible for you this day , and i am the guardian of you . '' and when he saw it , he said , “ i am absolved of you . indeed , i fear that you will be punished . indeed , i fear allah , severe punishment . ”
so bear with patience what they say , and celebrate the praises of your lord before the rising of the sun and before the setting .
and forgive my father—he was one of the misguided .
and remember you much .
indeed he thought and deliberated .
and press out to their prayer , saying : `` lord , the most merciful . '' glory be to them , and their lord is the lord of the universe .
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the eternal , the self-subsistent him ; and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
if thou couldst see when they are stationed before their lord , he will say : is it not the truth ? they say : aye ! by our lord , he shall say , `` taste the penalty of the blazing fire-
but if the bounty of allah comes to you , he will say , as if there had been no friendship between you and him , if i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success .
that is because they say , `` we have been the messengers of the messenger of the messenger . '' but they are not a jew or a pagan . but they are in doubt of this . they are in doubt about this . and they are in doubt of this . and they are not to be of the doubters .
we have given you abundance .
or do they say , `` there is madness in him ? '' nay , he has brought them the truth , but most of them are averse to the truth .
marked from your lord , and never far from the unjust .
he said , ‘ by your might , i will surely pervert them ,
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the might of pharaoh , we will certainly be victorious . ”
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the thought of those who disbelieve , so woe to the unbelievers .
they respect not the ties either of kinship or of covenant . they are the transgressors .
prosperous is he who purifies it ,
`` this is our gift , '' so withhold or withhold , without reckoning .
for the beggar and the outcast ,
so that we may test them thereby . and whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will cause him to enter a severe punishment .
this is a reminder , so whoever wills , let him take a way to his lord .
o you who have faith ! be firm in the truth of allah , and let you bear your testimony , and your parents are averse , and if you do so , their parents will be of no more , if you do so , or turn away from them . and if you do so , confine them to the right way , or if you are truthful .
verily thy lord is ever watchful .
these will be given their reward twice , because they are patient , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have provided them .
if you do not help them , allah will certainly defend them when those who disbelieve , and when they are destroyed in the cave , they will not be able to make a cave in the cave , and he has made them to be victorious in the cave , and he has made them to be victorious , and allah is the exalted in might , the wise .
then they will say , “ by god , our lord – we were not polytheists . ”
as for you , and that you worship ,
`` o zakariya ! verily , we give you good tidings of a son , whose name is yahya . we have not afore-time made his namesake . ''
then depart from the place whence the people depart , and ask forgiveness of allah . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
those who oppose god and his messenger will be among the most abased .
and when the people of their own trouble has come to them , we will say to them , `` god 's people are responsible for all of our signs . '' say , `` god has the power to carry out of their plot . ''
may allah forgive you ! why did you grant them permission until those who told the truth had come to you , and who were liars ?
they said : `` thus is your lord . he is the wise , the knower . ''
say : `` in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and who protects , and protects , if you know ? ''
he said , “ do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me . ”
thereinis decreed every affair of wisdom ,
why do you not bring down the angels , if you are truthful ? ''
and the answer of his people was only that they said , “ expel them from your town ; they are purist people . ”
he said , ‘ this is the parting between me and you . i will inform you of the interpretation of that you could not patiently bear .
as a mercy from your lord , he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
so it is ; and we shall wed them to wideeyed houris .
it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter for them in the matter of which they have been decreed . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , he is indeed astray .
and as for him who was freed and faithful , and said : `` o my task ! will ye now be brought back to life after this ? '' and this is the case of the people of old ; and this is the word of old , and the end of the former peoples is , and they will be told : `` this is a happening of old . '' the promise of god is true .
and such fruits as they prefer
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
have you not seen how your lord dealt with ad
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
or say : `` if only allah had guided me , i would have been of the righteous . ''
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he wills . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say : `` is it other than allah , that i am the lord of the universe ? '' and he is the lord of all who is the lord of all being , and he is the lord of all the worlds . he will not be able to make any one to go back on you , and you will be among the same .
but whoever seeks to go beyond that—these are the transgressors .
and of the people of the people of the book will be given a great provision for you . so tell them : `` have you come to know that some of the people of the city have no faith ? '' they will know it .
allah abrogates or confirms what he pleases , and with him is the mother of the book .
and as a summoner to allah by his leave , and as a lamp resplendent .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the disbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
whoever is an enemy to god and his angels and his messengers , and gabriel and michael , god is an enemy to the unbelievers . ''
he is allah , there is no god but he , the knower of the unseen and the seen , he is the most merciful , the most merciful .
and we communicated to him the decree that the unbelievers would be destroyed .
he said , “ i am only a messenger of your lord , so that i may give you a pure son . ”
so that they may eat of its fruit , yet it is not their hands . will they not then be grateful ?
and we admitted him into our mercy ; he was of the righteous .
we have made the quran easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
and indeed , for those who do wrong there is another punishment besides that , but most of them do not know .
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . indeed , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew .
and some faces will be covered with dust ,
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat thereof whence ye wish , but do not approach this tree , lest ye become wrong-doers .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers on that day , and theirs will be the curse , and for them is the evil abode .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
what are they asking one another about ?
indeed , he was a sign for the righteous among them , but they were in doubt concerning the religion of faith until the messenger of god had come to you in faith . then , when the messenger of the messenger came to you , he said to them , `` god has no faith . ''
so turn away from them for a while ,
by the sky and at-tariq .
say , `` indeed , if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a great day . ''
and what is the matter with us that we do not believe in the lord of the throne , while it is he who has guided him to a straight path , and to whom you will be guided , and we should fight for them in god 's cause .
they will say : `` woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? '' this is what the beneficent allah had promised , and the messengers spoke truth .
it is he who has sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what is the matter with you that the hour is nigh ?
indeed , the likeness of jesus is as the likeness of adam . he created him from dust , then he said to him , `` be '' , and he was .
indeed your god is one ,
and yusuf'sbrethren came , and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
and in the heaven is your provision , and what you are promised .
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , and therein they shall abide .
say , `` indeed , i am a man like you , but it is revealed to me that your god is one god . he is only one god . he is the one who wills , and he is not equal to him . ''
by your lord , we will gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them round hell on their knees .
know that that which you have been promised is an army to come to god and his messenger and the dwellers of the wayfarer , if you believe in allah and the last day , that we may have sent it down on the day of resurrection . god has power over all things .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and verily we ! we are the ranged ones .
blessed is he who , if he wills , will assign you better than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will assign for you palaces .
and if he had been my parents , they would have made it a sign for me , and that there is a sign for them in the world to come ; and to me you will be returned .
have they not reflected that there is no madness in their companion ? he is but a plain warner .
he said : `` this is how allah has the truth . '' but they said : `` how is it that we have sent down to you ? '' they said : `` we have been the best of those who have been sent . '' but they said : `` verily , allah has chosen for you the most gracious . he is the most honourable , the most wise . ''
your possessions and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
and you did not hide yourselves lest your ears and your eyes and your skins should bear witness against you , but you thought that allah did not know much of what you do .
and indeed , we will make clear to them the signs of their own ideas , and this is because they are the truth , and that is the truth , and is not aware of all things .
who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah , and denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not in hell an abode for the disbelievers ?
indeed , we have sent messengers with our signs and clear proofs and clear proofs , and we have made a clear measure for them in the matter of the truth , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the things that they had been concealing . god is majestic and all-merciful .
o you who believe ! enter not houses other than your own until you have asked permission and greeted the people thereof . that is better for you , haply you will remember .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , god is all-forgiving and all-powerful .
and among the devils were some who dived for him and were other than that , and did other deeds .
o my people ! i fear for you the day of summoning ,
and he does not fear the consequence .
my lord ! grant me wisdom and join me with the righteous .
and created the jinn from a flame of fire .
indeed , they will soon come to know .
whomever allah leads astray has no guide , and he leaves them blundering in their rebellion .
if allah should visit you with harm and harm , none can have any protector over him except him , or if he please , he can have mercy on his servants . he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful .
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
and we have made a party of them to be the lowest of the heavens and the earth . some of them are evil . some of them are righteous , and some of them are righteous ; and some of them are in the same way . it is they who are the multipliers .
and preferred the life of the world ,
it is he who has created you from a single soul , and then a place of residingand a place of storageor in your affairs . we have detailed our revelations for a people who understand .
nor did we feed the destitute .
it is naught but a revelation revealed ,
and shake the trunk of the palm-tree towards you , and it will drop fresh ripe dates upon you .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and the sleeprepose , and made the day nushur .
neither heaven nor earth wept for them , nor were they respited .
and makea radiant lamp ?
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , god will give them their wages in full , and increase them in his bounty . but those who have rejected god will have a humiliating punishment , and they will find a painful punishment .
do you then hope that they would believe in you , while a party of them heard the word of allah , and then tampered with it after they had understood it , after they had understood it ?
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes , indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them . enjoy yourselves , but you will soon come to know .
such is allah , your lord , there is no god but he . the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
had it not been for a previous ordainment from allah , a mighty punishment would have afflicted you for what you took .
say : 'what do you think , if this is from allah , then , then , you will deny it ? then , you will know that there is a way between you and them . '
those who invent falsehood about the truth of what they have falsely invented is the guilt of slander , and a great punishment .
and to him belongs all that is in front of you , and in the presence of the enemies of allah , so that you may be subject to the enemies of allah , and keep your duty to him , and do not follow the enemies of allah . you will not be able to make such as go to your own enemy , and you will not be wronged .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the recordwill be placed , and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought , and it will be judged between them with truth , and they will not be wronged .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the rumour mongers in medinah do not desist , we will surely urge you against them , and they will not be your neighbors therein except for a little while .
and they say what they do not do ?
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , and a bearer of good news , and a warner .
`` and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , except that my lord is forgiving and merciful .
and makea radiant lamp ?
when they were made to look with him , then he turned to them , and said , `` do not be afraid , '' and they said , `` do not be afraid , and do not be one of the unjust . ''
respond to your lord before there comes a day from allah which can not be turned back . on that day you will have no refuge .
to us is their return .
and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
o you who believe ! when you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them , there will be no period for you to reckon . so give them an honourable waiting provision .
whomsoever allah guides , he is rightly guided ; and whomsoever he leads astray , they are the losers .
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
yet they play in doubt .
and you will be three sorts .
do they want to hasten our punishment ?
those who have been bent on denying the truth say to those who have received the good , “ they will not be able to make any side of the way of god , and they will have a humiliating punishment . ”
for what day is it timed ?
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
when they are at the time of the time , they have full knowledge of your works . do not leave them in regard to their works , or that they may go back on their faces . and whoever is conscious of god , will be a fourfold , and he will bring to light what is in the hereafter ; and whoever fears allah , he will cause him to succeed .
when joseph said to his father , `` o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ''
he is the knower of the heavens and the earth . then he established his throne established his throne , and he knows what is in the earth , and what ascends to it . and he is the all-knower of what you do . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
and they worship besides allah that which has not been sent down upon them , and that which they have no knowledge of ; and for the wrong-doers there is no helper .
as for those who believe and those who emigrate and struggle in the way of allah , they will have hope of the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
verily those who disbelieve after they have believed and thereafter wax in unbelief , their repentance will not be accepted , and it is they who are the astray .
and press out to their prayer , saying : `` lord , the most merciful . '' glory be to them , and their lord is the lord of the universe .
and they have advantages and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
and when hell is set ablaze ,
are you not at all present for them ? when the children of his children said to them , `` what do you worship , your fathers , and the son of old ? '' and they are obedient to him .
and when the messengers areappointed a time .
to allah belong the unseenof the heavens and the earth , and to him all matters are returned . so worship him , and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
those who believe and are cautious .
when they are at the time of the time , they have full knowledge of your works . do not leave them in regard to their works , or that they may go back on their faces . and whoever is conscious of god , will be a fourfold , and he will bring to light what is in the hereafter ; and whoever fears allah , he will cause him to succeed .
it will be only a single nudge .
and when they confronted goliath and his troops , they said : our lord ! pour out upon us patience and help us against the disbelieving people .
o you who believe ! when you have finished the prayer , your faces are with you , and then you will have the upper hand , and you will have the upper hand to you , and you will have the inclination of a great thing in the matter of your own people , and you will have your faith in your own way , and he wills to make you to succeed .
and do not defraud people of their goods , and do not spread corruption in the land .
and those who do not associatewith their lord ,
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
did you produce its tree , or are we the grower ?
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then allah will judge over him , and he wills to whom he wills , and he wills to whom he wills . will you then take heed ?
so when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said , “ this is a cloud that will bring us rain . ” in fact , it is what you were impatient for , a wind that is a painful punishment .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us the cow ” ; he said , “ he says to the cow ” ; he said , ‘ the cow is that neither old nor too young , but what you are commanded . ’
he said : o my people ! there is no folly in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
and of them are some who listen to you , so can you make the deaf hear , even though they do not understand ?
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great success .
so see what was the outcome of their plan , that we destroyed them and their people , all together .
it almost bursts with fury . every time a group is thrown into it , its keepers will ask them : `` did no warner come to you ? ''
an arabic koran , without any deviousness , so that they may ward off .
but when he gave them of his bounty , they became niggardly , and turned away .
and put thy trust in allah , and allah sufficeth as a trustee .
rude and fake ,
god has heard the words of her who pleads with you concerning her husband and complains to allah . god hears the contentions of both of you . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
those who do not believe in allah and the last day , and do not forbid what allah and his apostle has forbidden , nor forbid the true religion , and those who are given the book will be given the tribute of the book , until they pay the tribute .
and these similtudes ! we propound them for mankind , and none understands them save those who understand .
and otherof its typekinds .
and he came to him a book from his own side , he said , “ in fact , you are in it . rather , you are before it , in fact , and you are responsible for the best of your deeds . and allah is responsible for you . ”
none beside allah can unveil it .
o reassured soul ,
the runners , the sinkers ,
so the shriek seized them , and we turned them into scum . so away with the wrong-doing people !
that is what allah has given his bounty to those who believe , and do righteous deeds . say : `` no reward do i ask of you for it , nor do i ask of you any reward for it ; for allah is oft-forgiving , most appreciative . ''
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who have faith ! allah has sent down to you a reminder ,
then , when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put his drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : o camel-riders ! surely you are thieves .
we established you in the earth and made for you a means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
and if you die or are killed , to allah you will all be gathered .
on that day allah will pay them in full their due reward , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
those who prefer the life of this world to the hereafter , and bar from the way of allah , desiring to make it crooked , they are in far error .
and there are advantages for you in them , and that you may attain to them a need which is in your breasts . and upon them and on ships you are carried .
and of those whom we have created there is a nation who guide by truth and act justly .
he has counted them and has counted them all .
except the prayerful ,
it has not been brought down by the devils .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will increase his tillage . and whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter , we give him some of it , and in the hereafter there will be no share .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and warn your nearest kinsmen .
they said , “ we miss the king ’ s cup , and whoever brings it will have a camel-load , and i personally guarantee it . ”
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
as for the thief , male or female , cut off the hands of both , as a recompense for what they have done , a recompense from god . god is mighty and wise .
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be a warner to the nations .
indeed we suffice you against the deriders
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a terrible thing ,
do you not know that allah is the kingship of the heavens and the earth ? and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
say , `` i do not ask you any reward for it , except for the one who wants to take the way to his lord . ''
the believers are only those whose hearts tremble when allah is mentioned , and when his verses are recited to them , they increase their faith , and in their lord they trust .
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts that which they feared from them .
and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , so they became motionless bodies in their homes .
nay , it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they will not be able to repel it , nor will they be respited .
have you not seen those who were told them , `` fear not ? '' but when you are free , offer the prayer , and give alms , but when you are attacked , they will not be able to give you a little ; and in the end they will not be wronged .
you will not be hungry therein nor naked .
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above the nations ?
except for those who repent and do righteous deeds , and do good deeds in the way of god . they will be well pleased with the believers , and allah will give them a great reward .
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
and otherof its typekinds .
you are neglectful of him .
the chiefs of pharaoh 's people said : `` will you abandon your people in the land , and in the earth , and abandon the evil ones ? '' and pharaoh said , `` then , to be a yellow crush . ''
these are clear proofs for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy for a people who have certainty .
do not set up another god with allah , lest you sit down reproved , forsaken .
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
and made your sleep for rest ,
they said : we augur ill of thee and those with thee . he said : your augury is with allah . nay , but ye are a people that are tested .
, `` we feed you only for the sake of allah . we seek no reward from you , nor thanks .
say : `` those who have done the right path will be called to a people of evil , and they will be called to a people with whom they have done a people , or themselves , they turn away from it . but if they turn away , then they will be among the muslims , and if you turn away , for you is a painful punishment . ''
nay ! but they do not fear the hereafter .
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
and the punishment shall be averted from her if she swears four times by allah , that he is a liar .
and allah will say to those who believe , “ these people do not believe in it , and in fact , it is a matter of life to come ; and in fact , it is he who will lead them astray ; and he is the wrongdoers . ”
and when you have withdrawn from them and all that they worship besides allah , seek refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you and will make for you a means of decision .
verily those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after guidance hath become manifest unto them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fail .
shall we treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who spread corruption in the earth ? or shall we treat the pious like the wicked ?
they will be given to drink with their spouses , abiding eternally therein .
say : `` who can protect you from the torment by night and by day , but they turn away from the remembrance of their lord ? ''
certainly allah has conferred a favour upon the believers when he has sent a messenger from among themselves , reciting to them his verses and purify themselves , and teaches them the book and wisdom , and before them were in manifest error .
and why do you not eat the name of allah while it is that he has forbidden for you ? only for them is a thing which is forbidden to you . but most of them are iniquitous .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it and what descends from the sky and whatever ascends into it . he is the most merciful , the most forgiving .
our lord ! surely you know what we hide and what we disclose , and nothing is hidden from allah in the earth or in the heaven .
he said , “ whoever does wrong , we shall punish him – then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
such is the call on you , that you may be the means of allah ’ s bounty , but it is the same for him who is niggardly , and if you turn away , he will make it seem fair to you ; and if you turn away , he will make it seem fair to you ; and if you turn away , it is a very substitute for you . and if you turn away , you will not be able to turn away from you .
and when the angels said , 'mary , allah hath chosen thee , and purified thee , and he hath chosen thee above all women .
their eyes will be humbled , humiliation will cover them . they were invited to bow down while they were sound .
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her alone to graze on god 's earth , and do not touch her with harm , lest a near chastisement will seize you . ''
and remember ismail and al-yasha and zulkifl ; and they were all of the best .
we made our favour to the children of israel . is there one who is a lesson and a lesson for the people who are mindful of god ?
: 'distance yourselves , o sinners , this day !
and when you are made to live with your spouses , and your skins , and allah is the like of you , and allah is the most acceptor of all wants , and do not take a place to stay in the land , but those who are in the midst of the hereafter will be told , `` god is the most gracious , so that you may take the account of the land , while you are the ones who are bent on denying the truth . '' and it is in the end that you will
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and that he might degrade the ungodly .
and that which ye have made of the mount of the people of the book will be made to go forth of his people , and they called out to you , and that which ye cried unto allah ; and that which ye have been enjoined upon you shall be of the firmness of your affair , and that ye may not be afraid of allah , and he knoweth best what ye do .
and if you do not find any one in place of it , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , then go away . that is purer for you . god knows all that you do .
those who disbelieve , it is the same for them whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the best reward of the hereafter ; and allah loves those who do good .
every tiding has its appointed time . you will soon know .
he is the omnipotent over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him away , and they do not neglect .
say : `` what is the matter with you that you judge in the truth ? '' say : `` allah is the witness of the truth , and to me is the witness of the truth . '' and say : `` allah is the one who is a witness between me and you . '' say : `` indeed , allah is the one who is the truth , and i am one of the witnesses . ''
when we equated you with the lord of the worlds .
but you prefer the present life ,
when allah is mentioned , they pay you in charity , and if there are some of them that are guided , it is you who have been made to be weak . but allah is well aware of what is in your hearts . indeed , he is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
and they cried lies to him , and we saved noah and those with him in the ark , and we made them a maintainer of stars , and so how was the end of those who were warned .
we sent noah to his people : `` i have come to you with a clear warning . ''
why should i not worship him who created me , and to whom you will be returned ?
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' and they prostrated themselves except iblis , who was not of those who prostrated .
it is said to us : `` it is our message who has been called to us as you invite us to our own accord , '' and we will make it a barrier between you and us . and we will surely make our effort smooth and constant .
their security during winter and summer journeys .
those who obey allah and the messenger , are with those whom allah has blessed , and the prophets and the truthful , the martyrs and the righteous ; and how excellent a company are they !
if you stretch your hand to kill me , i will not stretch mine to kill you , for i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
in scorching wind and boiling water ,
say : 'allah gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will cause you to die on the day of resurrection , but most men do not know . '
so eat of that over which allah 's name has been mentioned , if you believe in his signs .
he will call for destruction
we are indeed able to show you what we promised them .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , god will give them their wages in full , and increase them in his bounty . but those who have rejected god will have a humiliating punishment , and they will find a painful punishment .
those who committed crimes used to laugh at the believers .
enter my paradise !
butmercy from us and for enjoyment till a time .
a book whose verses are well-expounded , an arabic qur'an for a people who know .
say : `` indeed , my lord is not going to believe in me , but if you are impatient for me , the judgement is only with me . he is the best knower of the truthful . ''
yes indeed ; his lord was ever watching him .
and if we willed , we could have made our verses firm . but he is the in the earth , and he is the one who is the in the earth , so that it may be equal to him ; and this is the case of those who deny our signs .
they will come forth from the graves as if they were scattered locusts ,
and by the night when it darkens ,
“ stamp your foot on the ground ; this is cool waterto wash and drink . ”
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings , in the mornings and the evenings .
they descend on every lying , sinful person .
have you not seen those who have changed the favour of allah with ingratitude , and landed their people in the house of ruin ?
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i favoured you , and fulfil my covenant , and i shall fulfil your covenant , and fear me alone .
allah is with those who fear and those who do good .
he said , “ i am only a messenger of your lord , so that i may give you a pure son . ”
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour is come , 'admit the people of pharaoh into the severest punishment . '
and verily the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and ward off .
then see what was the end of those who were warned .
so this day no ransom will be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved . your abode is the fire , and that is your resort . it is a hapless journey 's end .
he will say , `` thus , our signs came to you , but you forgot them . so will you be ignored this day . ''
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we rescued at dawn .
we seduced you . we ourselves were erring . ''
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
where they will hear no idle talk .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
they said : we give you glad tidings of truth , so do not be of those who despair .
and whomsoever allah guides , none can lead him astray ; is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
that he may make what satan proposeth a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened . indeed , the wrongdoers are in extreme dissension .
and when satan has been told , `` no one can have any power to do this day , nor will i be responsible for you this day , and i am the guardian of you . '' and when he saw it , he said , “ i am absolved of you . indeed , i fear that you will be punished . indeed , i fear allah , severe punishment . ”
he said , “ you will find me , if allah wills , patient , and i will not disobey you in any matter . ”
do they desire a religion other than the religion of allah while to him belong the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
or do they possessthe unseen , so that they write it down ?
indeed , those who disbelieve , and do not die , and make them a solid of it , it will not be accepted from them , nor will they be able to have any aides . they will have a painful punishment .
go to pharaoh . he has transgressed all bounds . ''
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . allah is aware of what you do .
the god of mankind ,
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their protector because of what they used to do .
and those who spend the night prostrating themselves before their lord and standing .
and you will come to know its truth after a while . ”
had it not been that a blessing from his lord had reached him he would have been cast into the wilderness .
`` peace be upon you for that you persevered in patience . how excellent is the final home ! ''
those who dispute our verses may know that they have no asylum .
and recall what time those who were bent on denying the truth , remember thy bondmen that thou mayst make a plot of thy bondmen , or they plot against thee . and allah hath devised the plot , and allah is the best of schemers .
you have by day prolonged occupations .
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it . but they ruin none except themselves , and they do not perceive .
the messenger of their lord has certainly been sent down to them , and the messengers , and the messengers , and the prophets , and the prophets , and the prophets for whom there is no doubt . and to you is the return .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
then he glanced a glance on the stars .
and what will make you know what the night of power is ?
and when moses had said to his people : `` cast it down by your staff . '' and we said to him : `` cast it down by your staff . '' and be not a man of pure water , and do not be of the agents of corruption .
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
indeed , upon us is guidance .
and if we will , we will drown them , and there will be no one to help them , nor will they be saved .
it is he who has made the earth subservient to you , so walk in its tracts , and eat of his provision ; and to him is the resurrection .
the example of those who disbelieve in their lord do so that they will become a wind from the destructive wind , and that which they have earned will not be led astray .
and his armies of jinns and men and birds were gathered together with the jinn and birds , and they were set in bands .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth , and their abode is the fire ; and evil is the resort .
in a book well-guarded .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a state of confusion .
then peace be unto thee from the companions of the right hand .
they said , `` have you brought us the truth or are you joking ? ''
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes indeed ; he has power over all things .
establish prayer from the declining of the sun from the night until the darkness of the night , and the recitation at dawn is witnessed .
as for him who thinketh himself independent ,
see what they liken you to ! and they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
so the magicians were gathered at a set time on a day appointed .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , then she has lied , and he is the truthful . ''
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
and remember allah , that he may make a breach with the people in the day , and there is no sin on the day of resurrection , nor will they be able to escape from allah . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
they are the ones who buy error for guidance , and punishment for forgiveness ; how bold they are patient .
and wideeyed houris
and when it is said to them : `` come to that which allah has sent down and to the messenger , '' they say : `` it is we who have been sent down to the messenger , and that we are the following of their fathers . ''
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , and they will not return to them ?
it is lawful for you to eat out of the sea , and for you the ships and the sea , for you and the travelers , and for you are the travelers . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
witnessed by those brought near .
and mention in the book moses . he was a chosen one , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
there is no blame on any other people for any harm , if they are concerned for the way of their lord , so that they may be mindful of the way of their lord , and that they may be mindful of their lord , and that he may bring to light their hearts , so that they will have no fear , and for allah is the return .
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : 'this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our fathers of old . '
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be among those who prostrate .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh , 'shall we have a reward if we are the winners ? '
tasting neither coolness nor any drink
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds , such will be forgiveness and a great reward .
and fear a day when no soul will compensate for another , nor will any intercession benefit it , nor will intercession be accepted from it , nor will they be helped .
and a sign for them is that we carried their offspring in the laden ship ,
and admit them to paradise which he has made known to them .
those who invent falsehood about the truth of what they have falsely invented is the guilt of slander , and a great punishment .
o mankind ! are you eager to be in the way of allah ? is there any that is more than allah in the heavens and the earth ? and in the heavens and the earth , there is no god except him , so how can he be one of those who turn away ?
how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was no longer for escape .
and that allah may help you with a mighty help .
and they will not be absent from it .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , then then he sends down the rain in the earth , then he will bring it forth , and then it will be a light for them ? in this there is a lesson for those who have been reminded .
gardens and vineyards ,
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
and those who believe in the day of judgment ,
some of them will say : `` if a chapter is sure to be sure , then indeed , you are going to know that you are with those who are with it , and you will know that the hearts of those who are with it will be a heavy people , and they will surely find a way on that day . ''
so woe to me , because of that which is in the way of allah , as a message for whom ye are wont to worship . and if ye ascribe a partner to allah , then ye shall have no faith .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will . he is the mighty , the merciful .
there are others who await the decree of allah , whether he will punish them or whether he will pardon them , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
effective wisdom ; but warnings avail not .
they swear by god by their strongest oaths that if you command them , they will go forth . say : `` do not swear . obedience to you . god is well aware of what you do . ''
and it is said to them : `` it is to you that we have made it a seal over their hearts , if there is a sign for them that they may be called to you , unless they come to you . ''
say : `` what ! you dispute with us about allah , while he is our lord and your lord , and to us our deeds , and to you your deeds ? and we are sincere to him . ''
and when they were confronted by the mount , they went out in the ark , and he said , `` do you want this to fall on the sea ? '' he said , “ you are indeed the uppermost . ”
to the lord of the universe that i may tell the people of the knowledge of the law . '' in order to say to the people of the book : `` even though i am a lying , '' in the way of pharaoh , indeed , the guile of the pharaoh is in the way .
and we have not sent down upon the people of the fire but the angels , but it is only for a trial for those who disbelieve , and to those who disbelieve , in order that the disbelievers may have the faith of the book , and to those who have faith . and those who have the faith of the book will have a lesson from their lord . and those who have faith and do not believe in the book , allah will make it a clear account for those who have faith .
honorably seated in the presence of the all-dominant king .
and those who have been given knowledge and faith will say : `` you have tarried in the presence of god until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ''
do not plead for those who deceive themselves . god does not love the treacherous and the sinful .
and when they argue in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then give us a share of the fire ? ”
do they await but that allah may come to them in canopies of clouds with the angelsand the matter of the matter is settled ? all things are returned to allah .
he said : my lord ! verily i fear that they will belie me .
and it is he who has spread out the earth , and has made therein mountains standing firm , and in the midst of the two of them ; surely in that are signs for a people who reflect .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring allah and the angels face to face .
o you who believe ! when you meet those who disbelieve in battle , do not turn your backs to them .
who make mischief in the land and do not reform . ’
throw down your staff . and when he saw it writhing as it were a serpent , he turned to flee , and turned not back . `` o moses , have fear of god and do not fear . ''
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we rescued at dawn .
and they cried lies to him , and we saved noah and those with him in the ark , and we made them a maintainer of stars , and so how was the end of those who were warned .
those who deny the book and what we have sent with our messengers will soon come to know .
they were defeated and turned belittled ,
a command from us . we are indeed sending
then they reversed their minds , “ you know well that these do not speak . ”
when we revealed to your mother what was inspired .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who invents a lie against allah , or says : `` i have come to know the message of those who have been sent down to us , and to whom is the message of those who have been sent down to god . '' but if you do not see the book , to make it a clear book , it will be said to them : `` i have been sent to the message of those who do not believe in the revelations of god . ''
o you who have wrapped up in your mantle !
those who dispute in opposition to god , then they will dispute with him in the signs of god . they will not be able to change the words of allah , for he is all-hearing and all-seeing .
they say , `` if we had followed a guidance , we would have made a human being with ourselves in our ways , and we could have made for them a stream of misfortune , and we have given them a stream from us , but most of them do not know . ''
so the word of our lord has been realized against us , and we are tasting it .
as sustenance for the servants , and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
no nation can anticipate its term , nor can they delay it .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be with the truthful .
he said , “ by allah , you almost ruined me . ”
lo ! hell lurketh in ambush ,
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah with their faces blackened . is there not in hell a lodging for the haughty ?
no misfortune befalls in the earth or in your own selves but it is inscribed in a book before we create it . that is easy for allah .
the people of ad were proud in the land , and they said , “ who is the powerful amount of power ? ” they said , “ what is the matter with us that we do not have any power over our power ? ”
and laugh and not weep ,
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus do we reward the doers of good .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of clay , layer on layer ,
and they say , “ if you are listening with our miracles , he will certainly take it away from the town , and they will not be able to please allah and his messenger , and the believers . ”
we seduced you . we ourselves were erring . ''
he said : o harun ! what prevented thee , when thou sawest them going astray ?
the like of which was never created in the land ,
a goblet from a spring will be passed round to them ,
there is nothing but our life in this world . we die and we live , and we shall not be raised again .
they will not hear the slightest sound thereof , while they abide in that which their souls desire .
or do they possess the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
say , `` if the home of the hereafter with allah is specially for you alone and not for other people , then wish for death if you are truthful . ''
indeed , those who did not destroy their own children , and do not think their own own own hands have made them , and those who have been given their share in their divinity will be guided .
i will cast him into hell .
we sent forth to solomon the command , and there was a folding one of them . and we made it a shining spring , and we made them a folding .
a command from us . we are indeed sending
do they await anything but that they are waiting for the day of resurrection , or the word of your lord will come to pass , and those who passed away before them ? they are not unjust to themselves .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
tell my servants who believe , to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before a day comes in which there will be neither traffick nor befriending .
o my servants ! there is no fear for you today , nor will you grieve
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor betray your trusts while ye know .
and theright on the high-road .
and if the armies had been stormed , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have committed it and would have hesitated in it but a little .
upon them is a padlocked fire .
then he followed a road
and lot , when he said to his people : 'do you commit such indecencyin a way that none in the world has committed before you ?
and most of them believe not in allah except that they associate others with him .
say : `` are you one of the righteous ? '' but they are content to reach themselves , and we will be waiting for them , and we will be waiting for them , and we will be waiting for you . indeed , we are waiting .
until when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back
and hell will be brought forward for those who see ,
jonah too was one of the messengers .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , none will speak except him whom the most merciful will speak .
and those who strive in our cause , we shall surely guide them to our paths . verily , allah is with the doers of good .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
i am a trustworthy messenger to you ,
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
he said , “ allah forbid that we should take anyone except him with whom we found our property ; indeed , we should be unjust . ”
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan while they perceived not .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
he said : `` o adam ! give them their names . '' when he has told them , allah says : `` did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth ? i know what you reveal and what you conceal . ''
they said , “ o lot , we have your lord , your lord , who will not succeed you by night , and you will have a part of your family in the watches of the night . what , do you not see that it is the one who is near at dawn ? ”
will be gathered together for the appointment of a known day . ”
it has not been brought down by the devils .
what is the matter with you that you do not have fighting with the allies of god and the weak men and women who say , `` our lord , pour down upon us the people of this city from your own people , and make us a victorious ,
and as for those who believe and do good works , we shall admit them to gardens underneath which rivers flow , and they will be in the midst of gardens , and to dwell therein , and we shall admit them to the midst of the dam .
o wives of the prophet ! in the way of your wives , do not make a testament in the cause of god , and do not make a tremor in it , and establish the prayer , and give the zakat , for allah only desires to be a felicitous .
you are your spouses , and your spouses , so that they should not be able to make the home of their homes , nor will they get out of their homes , nor will they be able to go back on their homes . and if they leave them , they will not be able to make any testament , and allah is mighty , wise .
follow the best of what has been revealed to you from your lord before the punishment comes upon you suddenly while you are unaware .
and there is no one comparable to him . ''
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what has escaped you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
say , `` indeed , i am commanded to serve allah , consecrating my devotion to him .
the shocker .
say : `` who is the dry ones to god , who has made for you the good things of his own ? '' and who has given them good things in the life of this world ? say : `` the believers are in the life of the world and on the day of resurrection . '' thus do we explain the revelations to those who have knowledge .
and by the night when it withdraweth
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come forth in multitudes .
and if we had sent down this qur ’ an , in the mountains , you would have seen the mountains , and all that they would differ , and it is they who will be in awe of allah ; so that they may take heed .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
and if they deny you , messengers before you were denied , and to allah are all affairs returned .
you will surely taste the painful punishment ,
nay , the hour is their tryst , and the hour is most calamitous and bitter .
no indeed ; they do not believe in it , and that which they were doing was far away from what they used to earn . this is what they used to do . and if they are truthful , they are liars .
and we turnedupside down , and rained on them stones of baked clay .
and the unbelievers said , “ if a herald of the lie and the noble messenger – they will certainly have a herald of warning , and they will have no faith in it . ” and when there came to them a noble messenger from among them , they remained in aversion .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
did you produce its tree , or are we the grower ?
what do they wait except for the days of those who passed away before them ? say , `` then wait . i am waiting with you . ''
by thosewho extract with violence
so prostrate yourselves before allah , and worship him .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
the league will be routed and turn their backs .
some of us have surrenderedand some of us have deviated . those who have embraced islam have the right way .
and if the truth is followed by their own desires , the heavens and the earth , and all that is in them , and we have sent down to them all that is in them . indeed , we have sent down to them the reminder , and they turn away from the reminder .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that receptive ears may retain it .
so this day no ransom will be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved . your abode is the fire , and that is your resort . it is a hapless journey 's end .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and they will abide therein .
but if you do not , then you will never be able to do it , but fear the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
in gardens and fountains ,
and they went at early morning , able to deprive .
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
on the day when the leg shall be bared , and they will be called to prostrate themselves , but they will not be able to do so .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
, `` we feed you only for the sake of allah . we seek no reward from you , nor thanks .
the angels and the spirit descend therein by the permission of their lord , to every command .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and has sent down rain from the sky and has sent down abundant fruits for you through the sea , and subjected for you the ships of the sea , and subjected for you the rivers .
the day when no friend will avail another friend , nor will they be helped .
he said : ye will not eat of that which i have been sent to you , but what i have been commanded , and that i am a people who do not believe in allah and the last day .
thus the word of your lord is realized against the unbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
nay , thou marvellest ; and they scoff .
whoever does good , it is for his own soul , and whoever does evil , it is against his own soul ; then to your lord you will be returned .
what is the idea of those who invent falsehood against allah on the day of resurrection ? indeed allah is bountiful to men , but most of them do not give thanks .
burn therein , and it is the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
and that man shall have nothing but what he strives for .
undoubtedly , they will be the losers in the hereafter .
and we made a trail of solomon , but the tongue of us is the sound of the wise , and the birds , and the birds , and in the midst of the sun and the traveller , and we have made our service to them , prostrating .
who say : `` our lord ! avert from us the torment of hell , for its punishment is surely adhering ;
and do not take the consequences of what they do , lest they fall down upon themselves by their own hands , and we will not give them the record of their own deeds ; then they will be returned to their lord . then they will be returned to their lord .
he is allah , there is no god but he , the knower of the unseen and the seen , he is the most merciful , the most merciful .
and they go to him , to him , saying , `` we are the ones to whom we have been sent , and the offspring of your lord , '' and let them be told , `` we have been sent to the lord of the universe , and the punishment of those who follow guidance . ''
for those who call the call of their lord , and are in satisfaction ; and for those who answer the call of their lord , will be in the earth , and that they may be in the earth , and it is the same for them . their abode is the fire , and evil is the destination .
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with awe because they are returning to their lord .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the almighty , the wise .
and what will make you know what the night of power is ?
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward , and he is cognizant of all things .
the day the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills , and all will come to him humbled .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and when allah has bestowed his favour upon you , he is the almighty , the most honourable , and he will say , “ your wife has come to you , and you will have no relation in your homes . ” and when it is said to the faithful , “ keep your family towards you , and have fear of god . ” and when it is said to the faithful , “ you are your chosen people . ”
and tell the women to be modest , and they do not hope to make their own eyes , or that they make a painting of their own mouths , or that they make their own words , or the son of maryam ; or do they make their own forms , or a son that is free from their own hearts , or that they may take heed .
and if they dispute with you concerning the covenant of allah , say to them , `` come , '' and say , `` come to our sons and give us daughters and we belong to you , and we will be a liar '' .
as for the boat , it belonged to poor people who were seizing every boat by force .
they will say : `` praise be to allah , who has promised us the promise of which we have promised us . '' and we shall assign to him the best of the good things , and excellent is the final reward .
and he propoundeth for us a similitude , and forgetteth his creation , he saith : who shall quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
and said : `` shall we abandon our gods for the sake of a mad poet ? ''
and if we have mercy on them and remove the distress that is with them , they would still persist in their transgression , wandering blindly .
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when eyes were stupefied with horror and your hearts leapt to the throats , and you were imagining matters about allah .
say : `` is this better or the garden of eternity which is promised to the righteous ? it will be their reward and their destination .
as such we did make the people of joseph and his place to grow in the midst of their people , in order that he may cause them to enter in the land , and we will make a provision for them , and do not reward the virtuous .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
yes , whoever fulfills his promise and guards - god loves the pious ones .
the fire of allah , kindled ,
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then allah will judge over him , and he wills to whom he wills , and he wills to whom he wills . will you then take heed ?
i will surely punish him with a severe punishment , or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
and his wife and his brother ,
you ask them what you have the lawful and the good . say : `` the lawful and good things has been made lawful to you , and that you have made lawful for you and the things you have to make . '' and if you are able to bring the fruits of it , then you will be told . god is swift in reckoning .
as for the prophet , and those who are with you , say , `` we have come to you with your own people , and we do not believe in you , and we believe in allah , and that we may make the faith of you in worship with him , and he has said to them , `` he is your forgiveness and the religion of allah , and he has said to you , `` he is the lord of the universe , and he is to you a model . ''
when he came to solomon , he said : `` you want to spend in my wealth 's wealth and children . '' i am better than what you have given me . i am better than that you have done . i am indeed the best of you .
the knower of the unseen and the visible , he is above what they associate with him .
and if those who do wrong are the people of the earth , and even as it is with them , they are with it , and on the day of resurrection , they will be the punishment of hell , while they see not .
they said , “ what is the matter with you ? why do you doubt the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” is he the creator of the heavens and the earth , that he may make you seem decorous to you , and that we may make it seem clear for you , but they say , “ you are only a human being like us , and bring us a clear warning ? ”
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said , `` these are their religion . '' but whoever puts his trust in allah , then surely allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
nothing prevented men from believing when guidance came to them , except that they said , “ has god sent a human being as a messenger ? ”
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
and they sold him for a cheap price , a few dirhams , and they did not value him .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the disbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
except him who created me , and he will guide me . ''
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , `` would that i had not been given my record
and the trumpet will be blown . this is the day of the threatening .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you . if you do so , you will be among the wrongdoers .
and couldst thou see when they are terrified with no escape , and they shall be seized from a place drawn near .
and it is only the command of the spider which has been recited to you , and its cattle . and if any one of the provisions of allah , it has been enjoined upon you , and if any one of them is held in iniquity , he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways of access
they said , ‘ do you wonder at allah ’ s command ? the mercy of allah and his blessings are upon you , o people of the house ; indeed he is praiseworthy , glorious . ’
and to make the poor , to make lawful for you , or a part of them , and to give them some of their wives . and allah will give them a description of what they have been doing .
say , `` indeed , if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a great day . ''
alif . lam . mim .
but if they turn away , then surely allah knows the mischief-makers .
allah vindicates the truth by his commands , howsoever much the guilty might detest that . '
by no means ! verily man exorbitateth .
those who disbelieve say : lo ! allah is a messenger ; say : if allah decreeth a son , he is a messenger in the heavens and the earth . and who is there in the way of allah that which is in the heavens and the earth ? and allah is over everything potent .
verily i have been wont to say to the men of old , and verily , he is the heir of the children of israel , and we shall make it a utility for the sun and the moon . and i shall make it a way to the straight path .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds pleasing to them , so they wander blindly .
the parable of what they spend in the life of this world is like a biting frosty blast which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and destroys it . allah is not unjust to them .
who say : `` our lord ! avert from us the torment of hell , for its punishment is surely adhering ;
had god willed , they would not have associated others with him . we have not made you a guardian over them .
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
and those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a slur he has fabricated , and other people have helped him at it. ” and they have been unjust and false .
and on the day when we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them together , leaving none behind .
but he denied and disobeyed ,
and the stupor of death will come in truth : 'this is what you were trying to avoid '
but those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are the companions of hell .
and because of what fear has been revealed to you , in the land , that he may cause them to turn away from it , so that he may turn away from them their cords and solomon . moses said to them , `` indeed , you are a muftari . ''
and to him only you will be brought back to him , the promise of allah , and he is the reality . and he will create the believers , and will have a painful punishment for their disbelief . and those who disbelieve will have a painful punishment for their disbelief .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? yet they frighten thee with those beside him . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him there is no guide .
so we guided the people , that we may show them the right way , and that god is the true promise of the last life . and the time of the hereafter will be the matter of the dead . they are the people of the city , and they say , “ it is a mass of creation . ” and they said , “ it is a mass of creation . ”
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay , allah hath cursed them for their infidelity , and little is it that they believe .
is he then who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only men possessed of minds remember .
we have sent you with the truth , as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner , and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
he said , ‘ my lord ! forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy , for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ’
in gardens and fountains ,
he said : did i not tell you that thou couldst not bear with me ?
and these are the ones of you that have your fathers , and your fathers ; and allah is not a sign to them , but what is in the way of their lord , and they are the guided .
so when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . whatever you spend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
when moses said to his family : `` i have seen a fire . i will bring you some news from it , or bring you a burning brand in the fire that you may warm yourselves . ''
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
we established him in the land and gave him a way to everything .
and they have the same , as to him , the like of it ; and in the earth , it is in the land , and the secrets of the heavens and the on the on resurrection day . and exalted is allah , the exalted in might , the wise .
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth glorify god , and the birds , and the birds , and glorification , and he knows what they do ?
he said , 'and what is your business , envoys ? '
allah chooses messengers from angels and from mankind . indeed allah is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and that which she worshipped instead of allah prevented her . she was of a disbelieving people .
and set not up with allah another god ; verily i am unto you from him a warner manifest .
sovereignty on that day belongs to god , and he will judge between them . those who believe and do righteous deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
surely those who disbelieve and do wrong , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to any way ,
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
we know what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the wrongdoers deny .
allah has decreed : `` verily ! i will prevail , i and my messengers , i will surely prevail . ''
and we sent forth the israelites from the sea after the people of the heights , who divided their hearts into the sea , saying , `` o moses , do not be a people who are divided in their religion , and say : `` you are a people who have no faith . ''
indeed , they have disbelieved in the truth , and said : `` o children of old ! worship allah , and worship the lord of the children of mary and your lord , and that which is in your obedience . and for them is the guerdon of the fire , and there will be no helpers for them .
some faces that day will be beaming ,
this is the fire which you used to deny .
and created the jinn from a flame of fire .
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
and reminder is a reminder to you , and to deliver the book to him , and to make it clear to him . he is the guidance and the most merciful .
who created the heavens and the earth , what is with you , and the mountains are scattered in the land , and with it we have made it grow in the land . and we have sent down to them the rain of the sky and in the land as a beautiful water .
why do the rabbis and the priests not prohibit them from theiruttering sinful words and devouring unlawful unlawful earnings ? evil indeed is what they used to do .
then pharaoh sent heralds to the cities .
or do they possess the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls . these are the transgressors .
and it is in the original bookwith us , sublime and wise .
indeed , we have sent messengers with our signs and clear proofs and clear proofs , and we have made a clear measure for them in the matter of the truth , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the things that they had been concealing . god is majestic and all-merciful .
if allah were to hasten the evil , as if they were to hasten the good , their term would have been decreed . but we leave those who do not expect to meet us , so we leave them in their insolence wandering blindly .
on that day they will be burnt in the fire ,
so lot believed in him , and said : `` i will migrate to my lord . indeed , he is the exalted in might , the wise . ''
from which you are turning away .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming that which they had been given , a party of them threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they knew not .
turning away haughtily that he may leadastray from the way of allah ; for him is disgrace in this world and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the torment of burning .
but those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are the companions of hell .
but those who disbelieve and belie our verses shall be the inmates of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
no indeed ! we have created them from what they know .
other than god . they will say : `` they have gone astray from us . nay , we did not invokeanything before . ''
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
the groundis against those who ask you for exemption while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . allah has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and allah 's is the sublime similitude , and he is the mighty , the wise .
nay , but those who disbelieve are in self-exaltation and opposition .
`` bring them back to me . '' then he began to stroke their shanks and necks .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
a grace and favour from allah ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and remember when we made a covenant with the children of israel , besides allah , with his parents and your parents , and the poor and the orphans , and the needy , and the orphans and the traveller , and the prayer and the poor-rate , and you turn away , but most of you turn away .
we have bestowed on them their fathers and their fathers , until we make a dead land . will they not then see ?
“ yes , if you are patient and godwary , and your lord will come rushing at you , so that you may help yourselves . ”
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that ye may be successful .
the adulteress and the adulterer—whip each one of them a hundred lashes , and you will not be granted any pity to the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day , and let a party of the believers are witnesses .
thus we have sent it down as a lecture in arabic , and have explained therein in detail threats in order that they may be cautious .
this is the guidance of allah that he guides whom he will of his servants , and if they had associated others with him , they would have failed them .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
surelymy servants , you have no authority over them . your lord is sufficient as a guardian .
and we gave moses the book , and we sent to him the clear signs of the truth , and we gave him the signs of the angels , and we did not send to you a messenger , but you were proud , and you would not have a messenger in your presence , but you are a liar .
then we shall say to those who believe : `` is it you who have been with us ? '' we have certainly been the believers of you , and in fact , you have been told , `` yes , and you have disputed about it . '' in fact , the one of them is in the same manner , and in the way of allah , you will have a field of which you have been inventing .
they glorify him night and day without tiring .
and recall what time those who were bent on denying the truth , remember thy bondmen that thou mayst make a plot of thy bondmen , or they plot against thee . and allah hath devised the plot , and allah is the best of schemers .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
but he who made a covenant with you , who made a covenant with you , and then made a covenant with him , and did not help you , and they did not help you . indeed , allah loves the godwary .
and of the wealth and the children of wealth , from their hearts , turn away from their dwellings , and turn away from their hearts , if they are the ones to keep away from their hearts ; and allah is hearing , knowing .
the indubitable event !
melting their insides and their skins .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand up ,
then he frowned and scowled ,
there is no animal on earth , nor a bird that flies with its wings , but they are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book , then to their lord they will be gathered .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall admit them to gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . and who will not be able to change his promise ? and whose promise is truer than allah ?
surely this is a reward for you , and your striving is thanked . '
and we saved those who believed and were godfearing .
respond to your lord before there comes a day from allah which can not be turned back . on that day you will have no refuge .
we have bestowed on them their fathers and their fathers , until we make a dead land . will they not then see ?
there are two parties who will be disputing with one another in the way of allah , and he compose the faith of the disbelievers , and he compose their duty to them . indeed in that is a reminder for those who are oblivious .
say : `` be ye stones or iron ,
be moderate in your walking , and your voice . the most repulsive voice is braying of the donkey . ''
say : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you . lo ! he is aware of his slaves , and he sees .
they will say : `` our lord ! '' and glory be to thee . we are not but one of them , or we have set a thing other than you ; and we have turned your affairs in a state of aversion . and we have caused a people to turn away from you and a people who have forgotten .
and certainly we tried solomon and placed a bodyupon his throne , then he repented .
and abraham who paid his debt ,
and clustered bananas ,
allah is gracious to his servants . he provides for whomever he wills . he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
have you not seen how the ships sail through the sea by the favor of allah that he may show you some of his signs ? surely in that are signs for every patient and grateful .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what is it that you worship ? ”
say , “ o people of the book ! why do you bar the believers from the way of god , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses of it ? god is not unaware of what you do . ”
his wealth will not avail him when he falls headlong .
and also the shayatinfrom the jinnsevery kind of builder and diver ,
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . he has power over all things .
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
we revealed to you , as we revealed to noah and the messengers , and we revealed to abraham , and isaac , and jacob . we gave david and jacob , and conferred a clear tongue .
o people of the scripture ! we have sent our messengers to you that we may make us a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to you . but allah has power over all things .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
has there come upon man a period of time when he was not a thing unremembered ?
say , `` indeed , my lord has committed evil for what is wrong and what is right , and what is wrong , and what is wrong , and what you do not make unlawful to god . and do not make unlawful to him in the name of god , and you have no knowledge of the knowledge .
and they say : the beneficent allah has takena son .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
and those who disbelieve say : wherefore hath not a sign been sent down unto him from his lord ? thou art but a warner and a warner unto every nation .
and those who say : our lord ! grant us of our wives and offspring to our eyes , and make us a model to the godfearing .
allah abrogates or confirms what he pleases , and with him is the mother of the book .
some of them believed in it and some of them turned away from it . hell is sufficient for a blaze .
this day no soul will be wronged in the least , nor will you be recompensed except for what you used to do .
he is god . there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the judgement and to him you will be returned .
say : 'what think you ? if your water is the water of the water , who will bring you running water '
and they called out to each other in the morning ,
and how do i fear that you should worship other than allah , that you should not ascribe any partners to him ? so what is the matter with you , so that you should be of those who have no faith ? will you then know ?
when their brother noah said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
and when they despair of a place of safety from him , he said , `` do you not know that your fathers have been made to be a covenant with you ? '' he has said , `` do you not know that your fathers have made a covenant with me , and that he has been the best of those who do good ? ''
and olives and palms ,
when you see those who gossip about our verses , turn away from them until they engage in some other topic . if satan causes you to forget , then do not sit with the unjust after remembering .
and say : 'truth has come and falsehood has vanished . indeed falsehood is bound to vanish . '
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick , and a magician will not succeed . ’
and do not give the weak-minded your property which allah has assigned to you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them words of kindness and justice .
and allah said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , i have given you the honor of your own , and when i have been given to you with the angels , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an , he has given you a clear hold of the torah and the gospel , but when i have been given to you , you will have no other reason but a clear herald of warning . ”
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
he said , “ o people , i do not have any knowledge of that which allah has ordained for you , o haman , and you , o us , and bring me a drink , and bring to me a noble spring in the matter . ”
you attend to him ,
they said , “ you are an evil omen in your own conduct . would you then remember ? ” in fact , you are a people who are iniquitous .
the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone ,
that it is indeed the speech of a noble messenger .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and we had already made clear to you the message of allah , and have fear of god . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
you are not responsible for any part of a part of it , nor do you have any share of it . in the heavens and the earth , they will be recorded in the land , and in a clear register .
and the angels will be on its sides , and on that day eight of them will carry the throne of your lord above them .
only those who believe in allah and the last day , who believe in allah and the last day , and establish prayer and pay the obligatory charity , will have no fear except allah , so that they may be among the guided .
say , `` indeed , i am commanded to serve allah , consecrating my devotion to him .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
he is only a man possessed . so wait for a while .
we made our favour to the children of israel . is there one who is a lesson and a lesson for the people who are mindful of god ?
the one who has done good in the world to come , will say : `` i will punish him with my punishment , and he will tell me that i may be a mercy from among those who fear our revelations , and give the poor-rate and they are the ones who believe in our revelations .
except those who repent after this and reform themselves , for god is forgiving and merciful .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of night and day , and that which is in the heavens and the earth will be made to appear to the heavens and in the earth , and in the land , and in the earth , it is the same for those who are in the heavens and the earth , and they are the like of the lord of the universe .
they said , ‘ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that you may be the supreme authority in the land ? we will never believe in you . ’
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them so we reinforced them with a third . they said , `` indeed , we are messengers to you . ''
by the mount ,
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting into a muddy spring , and found a people in place of it . we said : `` o zul-qarnain , either you punish or treat them with kindness . ''
so when he came to it , he was called : `` blessed is whosoever is in the fire and those around it . and glory be to allah , lord of the worlds !
and we will surely test you until we know the warriors and the steadfast among you , and we shall test your proclamations .
those who have been bent on denying the truth say to those who have received the good , “ they will not be able to make any side of the way of god , and they will have a humiliating punishment . ”
say : `` woe to you , or peace on you . '' they ask the name of you . they are the best names , and do not be in the midst of your prayers .
some of us have surrenderedand some of us have deviated . those who have embraced islam have the right way .
o you who believe ! do not take any other group apart from yourselves , and do not come to your own words . they will have a new creation in their hearts , and that they will have a new creation in their hearts , so that they will have the inclination to hide from it , and in their hearts they will have a great reason .
so give a respite to the unbelievers . respite them gently .
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting into a muddy spring , and found a people in place of it . we said : `` o zul-qarnain , either you punish or treat them with kindness . ''
indeed the godwary will be amid shades and springs ,
the knowledge of the book was the book of the book that he said to the book : `` i will bring it into the eye of the twinkling of my lord . '' then he said : `` this is the favour of my lord , that he may be of those who give thanks . '' and he is the best of all who will be well thankful to him ; and he is the owner of the bounty of his lord , and he is the all-sufficient , the owner of mercy .
had we sent down to you a book on parchment , and they touched it with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , `` this is nothing but obvious magic . ''
these are the ones on whom are blessings from their lord and the mercy of those who are guided .
surely i am allah , there is no god but i , therefore serve me , and establish prayer for my remembrance .
their recompense is hell , because they disbelieved and took my signs for a jest and my messengers .
if you obey most of the people of the land , they will lead you astray from god 's way . they follow nothing but conjecture and surmise .
then i called them openly .
so remind , you are only a reminder .
do you not see that allah knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the range of his people , and there is no one to help them ? and he will bring them all together on the day of resurrection , and he will bring them all together . indeed , allah has knowledge of all things .
seek help in patience and prayer ; but it is hard except for the humble ,
and he overthrew the subverted cities
no sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
what , can you make the deaf hear or guide the blind or one who is in manifest error ?
and grieve thou not over them , nor be thou straitened for what they plot .
and i know not , perhaps it may be a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a while .
this is how the people of the city are the people of the city and the dwellers of the city , who will be in the midst of god 's messenger . that is not a thing for the cause of god . he has no knowledge of those who do good , and allah does not like the doers of good . god does not reward the doers of good .
they will remain in it forever , and their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be reprieved .
verily those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after guidance hath become manifest unto them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fail .
and paradise will be brought near for the righteous .
allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ; and woe to the faithless for a severe punishment .
indeed , in the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers .
it is the same to those who disbelieve in the quran , when they are recited to allah 's revelation . why is it that he turns to his servants from whom he will of his bounty ? then there will be a torment for them and a humiliating punishment .
theirs shall be a bed of hell , and above them coverings . thus we recompense the wrong-doers .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . and his is the religion , so will you fear other than allah .
and your lord has said , “ pray to me , i will answer you . those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell , disgraced . ”
they were among our believing servants .
this is how the people of the city are the people of the city and the dwellers of the city , who will be in the midst of god 's messenger . that is not a thing for the cause of god . he has no knowledge of those who do good , and allah does not like the doers of good . god does not reward the doers of good .
and if any one of the polytheists seeks asylum with you , grant him protection , so that he may hear the word of allah . then escort him to a place of safety . that is because they are a people who do not know .
and they say : we believe in allah and in the apostle , and we obey . then a party of them turn away . such are not believers .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
and we destroyed no township but it had warners
indeed , on that day their lord will be fully informed about them .
it is not for a prophet to have prisoners until he has sufficiently suppressed . you desire the goods of this world , and allah desires the hereafter , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
the example of those who disbelieve in their lord do so that they will become a wind from the destructive wind , and that which they have earned will not be led astray .
then after that , you turned away , and were it not for allah 's grace and his mercy on you , you would have been among the losers .
the messengers say : `` we are only a human like you , and we will not be like you , but allah will make a favour of his servants , and we will not make any of his servants a favour for you . ''
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
say : `` the affliction is against you , so that you may be of those who are near to you , and do not approach your wives , or be righteous . '' and when they are pure , they become pure . and allah loves the righteous .
thou art but a mortal like us . so bring a sign if thou art of the truthful .
the word will not be changed with me , and i am not unjust to the servants . ''
and he bears witness to that .
it is he who has made the sea to be a breach with you , so that the people of the land may be of the like of it , and the ships will come upon them from the sea , so that you may be grateful .
he said : `` no one shall be brought to me until i have taken no one to be worshipped until i have taken no one to bring you up . but , when he has no power to bring it to me , there is no god but he , and he is the guardian of the truth .
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
in the neighbouring land . but after their defeat they will conquer
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return . ''
so eat of the lawful and good things allah has provided you , and be grateful for the favor of allah , if it is him that you worship .
but abides the face of your lord , full of majesty and splendor .
reclining therein on adorned couches , they will see neither the sun'snorexcessive cold .
and they ask you about the hour . say : `` the message is with my lord , and it is not for the final end of the people . '' the hour is only with allah , and the final end of the hour is only with the day of resurrection , and most of them do not know .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty lot .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and do not follow the footsteps of satan . he is your open enemy .
god will forgive those who believe , and he will bring them to the light of the light of the light , and they will say , `` the people who are bent on denying the truth will be the unbelievers , and they will be in the midst of the blazing fire . ''
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will . he is the mighty , the merciful .
tasting neither coolness nor any drink
how many a township have we destroyed ! our punishment came to them at night or while they were napping .
except an old woman who stayed behind ,
they and their spouses will recline on couches in the shade .
or have we given them a book beforeso that they are holding fast thereto ?
do you feel secure that he will not cause the earth to swallow you , and loose a squall of rocks in the land ? then you will find no protector or helper .
and by the witness and the witnessed ,
or have they the knowledge of the unseen , which they write down ?
those who disbelieve think that they will not be resurrected . say : `` yes , by my lord , you will certainly be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did . and that is easy for allah . ''
if they had followed the path , we would have given them abundant water to drink .
such are those whom allah has made for them , and he has made them standing with many of them , and there are many sects before them ; and they are the losers .
and said : `` shall we abandon our gods for the sake of a mad poet ? ''
those who fear their lord in secret , and are apprehensive of the hour .
and she who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for the worlds .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
but whoever seeks beyond that—it is they who are the transgressors .
whoever allah guides , he is rightly guided ; and as for him who is a believer , he will find none to protect you on the day of resurrection , nor will he be able to call you to account on the day of resurrection , and their abode will be the fire , and they will be the inhabitants of the fire .
but my call added only to their flight .
i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , `` would that i had not been given my record
indeed , to your lord is the return .
say , `` you have all that you do . god is well aware of what you do , and he will tell you all that you do . he will inform you of what you do , and he will tell you what you do . ''
and when our punishment came to them , their cry was nothing but that they said : lo ! we were wrong-doers .
but the blast struck them in the morning .
when abraham said to his father azar , 'takest thou idols for gods ? i see thee and thy people in manifest error . '
it is he who has created the water and the palm trees and the palm trees and the cattle for which there is a variety of crops and crops . and eat of the fruits , and do not be of the cheats .
they have rejected the truth when it came to them . but there will come to them the news of what they used to mock at .
say : 'it may be that a part of what you wish to hasten is close to you .
and no friend will ask a friend ,
in parchment unrolled .
they ask you about the truth , and say : `` the way of matter is better than what is best , and if you do not find their property , god will give you their wealth and your selves . god is majestic and all-wise . ''
and when they argue in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then give us a share of the fire ? ”
we gave moses the book , and made it a guide for the children of israel , so that they should take no other guardian besides me .
moses said : `` woe not to allah ! '' he said , `` do not lie in the name of god , he has the power to make the birds to pass away , and he has the power to do so . ''
so put your trust in allah , for you are on the clear truth .
and say : 'truth has come and falsehood has vanished . indeed falsehood is bound to vanish . '
murmuring among themselves : `` you have tarried but ten days . ''
give glad tidings to the hypocrites that for them is a painful punishment .
so when they persisted in pursuing that which had been forbidden , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
as for those who disbelieved and denied our signs , they shall be the inmates of the fire , where they will abide for ever .
how can they have a covenant with allah , and the messenger of the messenger of allah , which they have taken to you their covenant , and that they should have taken your covenant with you ? indeed , allah loves the godwary .
it is allah who sends the winds , so that they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land and revive the earth after its death . even so is the resurrection .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
the heavens are nearly torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
messengershave been derided before thee , but that whereat they scoffed beset those who scoffed at them .
had the people of the book believed and been godfearing , we would have remitted their sins , and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
certainly we tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
and corn-fields and noble buildings ,
and we sent forth the israelites from the sea after the people of the heights , who divided their hearts into the sea , saying , `` o moses , do not be a people who are divided in their religion , and say : `` you are a people who have no faith . ''
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it was dead . likewise will you be brought forth .
we gave abraham his integrity formerly , and we knew him well .
and as for the people who do not want to take a benefit from us , we would certainly have made them independent of the children of israel , and they will have no one to save the people of the heavens or the earth , and most of them will have a humiliating punishment , and most of them will have no way in the least , and most of them were unjust .
and indeed your lord knows what their hearts conceal or reveal .
he it is who has made the sun a lamp and the moon , and has made the sun a beacon for it . but allah has made the clear signs for those who have no understanding .
when they are at the time of the time , they have full knowledge of your works . do not leave them in regard to their works , or that they may go back on their faces . and whoever is conscious of god , will be a fourfold , and he will bring to light what is in the hereafter ; and whoever fears allah , he will cause him to succeed .
there is no animal on earth , nor a bird that flies with its wings , but they are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book , then to their lord they will be gathered .
to allah belongs the last and the first .
and whosoever blindeth himself to the remembrance of the beneficent , we appoint for him shaitanto be a qarinto him .
indeed , this is the word of a noble messenger ,
we shall save your body today , that you may be a sign for those after you , but many of mankind are heedless of our signs .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the former .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and the sleeprepose , and made the day nushur .
satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to commit sin . god promises you forgiveness from him and bounty . god is bounteous and all-knowing .
allah did not make it but as a good news for you , and to reassure your hearts thereby . victory comes only from allah , the almighty , the wise .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he attains the age of strength , and fulfil the covenant ; surely the covenant will be questioned .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us the cow ” ; he said , “ he says to the cow ” ; he said , ‘ the cow is that neither old nor too young , but what you are commanded . ’
so that we may glorify you much
who created and shaped ,
such is allah , your rightful lord , and what is there after truth , but error ? how then are you turned away ?
so woe to those who pray
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
but if he is of those who rejectedand went astray ,
say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . and those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , it is they who are the losers . '
have you raised up the kingdom of the garden , with the sacred mosque ? those who have faith in allah and the last day , are not the ones who have faith in allah and the last day , and allah does not guide the unjust people .
when it is recited to them , they say , “ we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed , we were muslims . ”
honorably seated in the presence of the all-dominant king .
so we brought forth from there the believers .
by the lote-tree of the boundary
and we have indeed illustrated examples of all kinds in this quran , so that they may take heed .
so give a respite to the unbelievers . respite them gently .
do not covet what god has given to one another , and some of the women to have a share in what they have earned , and the women of a share in what they have earned . and ask the people of a share in their homes . god has knowledge of all things .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , and you will know who is the owner of the right path , and who is guided . '
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates whatever he wills . he grants males and female , females ,
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
and in the mount , we will not call him to the trunk of the mount , when we called out to moses with a mercy from your lord , that you may warn a people who have been warned .
we have made it easy in your tongue so that they may remember .
but allah will not defer any soul when its time has come ; and allah is aware of what you do .
'put him in a wooden box , and cast it into the river , and let the sea go into the river , so that i may make our enemy to you , so that you may be under our feet .
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
and the mountains as pegs ?
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
say : `` i do not know that the thing has been revealed to me from one who has been able to make things known to it , or that it is the same for him who has been given to it , or is the same for him . if only you were to be able to give the fruits of their numbers , it would be the same for them , and if only you were to be blamed . ''
is not he able to give life to the dead ?
praise be to allah , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . his is the praise in the hereafter , and he is the wise , the aware .
except the prayerful ,
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
the heavens will be rent asunder , and his promise is bound to be fulfilled .
sotaste ! we shall increase you in nothing but torment .
which guides to the right path . we have believed in it and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
and you serve all that you worship besides allah , and of your fathers ; and allah has not sent down any proof upon you ; and the judgement is no more than allah , but most of them do not know .
and we send forth the israelites with the sea , and to lead them to a wrong , so that pharaoh ’ s angels said , ‘ there is no god except allah , who has no faith , and i am the muslims . ’
prosperous is he who purifies it ,
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky , so their necks will remain bowed in humility .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will be better for them and a better resting place .
we have sent down to you the book that they may understand , and whoever follows the guidance , he has guided him ; and he has led astray his way ; and you will not be able to make them go astray .
that was a nation that has passed away , and they will have what they earned , and you will have what you earn . you will not be questioned about their deeds .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear ? ''
and do not call upon any other god besides god . there is no god but he . everything will perish except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
he said : even if i bring thee something manifest ?
whatever misfortune befalls you is what your own hands have earned . and he pardons much .
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy .
then moses threw down his staff , and behold , it swallowed up their conjurations .
so allah will forgive you , and will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and gardens and beautiful gardens . that is the supreme triumph .
and it is in the original bookwith us , sublime and wise .
then he went back to his family arrogantly .
and olives and palms ,
say : `` praise be to allah , and peace on his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ? ''
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and if a disaster should seize them forthat their hands have sent forth , they would say : 'our lord , why did you not send a messenger to us that we might have followed your verses and be among the believers ? '
she said , `` how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ? ''
and we left for him among the later folk :
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
he said , `` get out of here , despised and driven away from you . i will fill hell with all of them . ''
for the day of judgement .
and the one who has taken the hands of him from his own hands , and the good deeds , is a part of it ; so they will be seized by a thing in which he has been sent down , and allah does not like the mischief-makers .
a guidance and a reminder for men of understanding .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
a guidance and good news for the believers .
so , when they are bent on denying the truth , it will be let them respond to them , so that they may be able to take them away from it , and then , when they are attacked , they begin to take a small object from their own hands , and so that they may be able to do so . and if allah wills , they begin to make a mockery of it . and if allah wills , he is a forsaker of people .
and we are the glorifiers . ”
and the shade of black smoke ,
the fire of allah , kindled ,
is he who walks grovelling on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
if an evil suggestion comes to you from satan , seek refuge with god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
allah will not leave the believers as like what you have been doing . and indeed , allah will not show you the like of what you have been doing . indeed , if you believe in the world to come , allah will not show you the world to come ; and if you believe in allah , then indeed , it is a shameful reward .
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
until the day of the known time . ''
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , their only argument is : `` bring our fathers back , if you are truthful . ''
they will say : nay ! no welcome for you . it is you who have brought it down . evil is the resting-place .
they said : shall we believe in thee when the meanest follow thee ?
they descend on every lying , sinful person .
`` go ye to your tilthin the morning , if ye would pluck the fruits . ''
'there is nothing but our first death , and we shall not be raised again .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is the most high , the most great .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is like the likeness of one who shouts to that which heareth naught except a call and a cry . deaf , dumb , blind , so they do not understand .
“ this is the day of judgement which you used to deny . ”
and they used to say : when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far off .
and there is no one to whom you will have any power or any one to whom you will have any power to make your own hands , and those who do not want to be saddened by their own property , and they are free from what is in their hearts . and for the sake of allah , they will not be aware .
faces on that day will be joyful ,
those who are the lord of the throne will say , `` the lord of the throne , those who are constant will be subdued . '' and they will say , `` our lord , you have the mercy of you , the mercy of you , and the mercy of you , and those who have faith . ''
they said , `` we will not prefer you over the evidence of that which has come to us , and to him who has created us . so decide whatever you decide . you can only decree for this present life .
and indeed , the signs of their lord will be in the midst of their lord ’ s signs , by the meeting of their lord . he has knowledge of everything .
glory be to him who created all the pairs of what the earth produces , and of themselves , and of what they do not know .
and as for those who disobey , their abode is the fire . whenever they desire to go forth from it , they will be brought back to it , and it will be said to them , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
so when they forgot what they had been reminded , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their evildoing .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
other than god . they will say : `` they have gone astray from us . nay , we did not invokeanything before . ''
say : it is a message of importance ,
and we left for him among the later folk :
and you devour inheritance all with greed ,
except the family of lot ; we shall save them all .
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you ; and whoever fears allah , he will remove his sins and will punish him with a great reward .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the best reward of the hereafter ; and allah loves those who do good .
and laugh and not weep ,
and we have created for them the like of it , which they ride .
except your chosen servants among them . ''
he said : o my people ! why do you seek to hasten evil before good ? why do you not ask forgiveness from allah , so that you may receive mercy ?
if they have ascendancy over you , they will be enemies to you , and stretch out their hands and their tongues with evil , and they wish that you may disbelieve .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ''
if you stretch your hand to kill me , i will not stretch mine to kill you , for i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
we gave moses the book , and made his brother aaron his minister .
lo ! thesepeople are saying :
a lesson and a reminder for every penitent worshiper .
he said , “ you are of those reprieved . ”
he said : `` that is what ye have been working to god , '' they said , `` we do not have any evil to bring you any evil . '' he said , `` this is the clear evidence of mine . '' he said , `` this is the clear evidence of mine . '' he said , `` i have come to you in knowledge . ''
you are indeed watching over us . ''
these will be given their reward twice , because they are patient , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have provided them .
then his wife came forward , clamouring , and she smote her face , and said , “ a barren old woman ! ”
so he resolved to scare them out of the land , but we drowned him and all who were with him .
and what they used to earn did not avail them .
as for those who fear their lord , for them are lofty chambers , above which rivers flow , beneath which rivers flow ; this is the promise of allah ; and allah does not fail inpromise .
and if we had sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered together all things before their eyes , they would not believe unless allah wills . but most of them are ignorant .
on the day when the hour riseth the guilty will swear that they stayed not but an hour . thus they were deceived .
jonah too was one of the messengers .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the almighty ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
he said : `` that is what ye have been working to god , '' they said , `` we do not have any evil to bring you any evil . '' he said , `` this is the clear evidence of mine . '' he said , `` this is the clear evidence of mine . '' he said , `` i have come to you in knowledge . ''
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , that you may become righteous .
therein they will live for ever . an excellent abode and abode !
the beneficent god is firm in power .
and wideeyed houris
bring back our fathers if you are truthful .
a flame of fire and smoke will be lashed at you , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
they said , “ o lot , we have your lord , your lord , who will not succeed you by night , and you will have a part of your family in the watches of the night . what , do you not see that it is the one who is near at dawn ? ”
those of your women who commit lewdness against your women will bear witness against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for them someway .
we are indeed able to show you what we promised them .
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
but if the right is on their side , they come compliantly to him .
and on the day when we will gather them all together , then we shall say to those who associated others with allah , “ where are your partnerswhom you used to claim ? ”
o ye who believe ! be not as those who disbelieve in the earth , or are they at the midst of the land , or they say : if ye had been present with us , they would not be able to cause any loss , and in their hearts , and allah is the beholder of that which they do . and allah is seer of what they do .
but as for those who disbelieved , : 'were my verses not recited to you , but you were arrogant and were a guilty people ? '
but they turned away from him and said : `` taughta madman . ''
save him who bringeth unto allah a whole heart .
he said , `` get out of here , despised and driven away from you . i will fill hell with all of them . ''
it is from solomon , and it is from the most gracious , the most merciful .
say : 'what think you ? if your water is the water of the water , who will bring you running water '
and do not walk proudly on the earth , and you will not tear open the earth , nor can you match the mountains .
say : `` be ye stones or iron ,
those before them said it , but what they earned did not avail them .
they will have no intercessors of their idols , and they will reject their partners .
and you devour inheritance all with greed ,
allah blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful and sinners .
he will say , `` thus , our signs came to you , but you forgot them . so will you be ignored this day . ''
if the punishment of the punishment seized them for a while , they would say : `` what is the servants of your servants , who have come after it ? '' in fact , it is a day that will not be lightened for them , and it will be a recompense for them .
`` seize him and drag him into the midst of the blazing fire ! ''
that is because they say , “ the fire will not touch us except for a limited number of days . ” in their religion they are deluded .
we gave the children of israel the book and wisdom , and the prophethood , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above all beings .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
o you who believe ! do not prohibit the good things which allah has made lawful to you , and do not transgress . god does not love the transgressors .
round about them willyouths of perpetual ,
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
and by those who swim smoothly ,
againwe bestowed our favour upon moses and aaron .
so when there came to them a disaster from your lord , they said , “ o moses , in the way of your lord , you will surely have the compact with us , and we will certainly make our favourite. ” in the way of allah , that we may give him a reputation of truth .
he said to his pages , ‘ put their moneyinto their saddlebags . maybe they will recognize it when they return to their folks , so that they may come back . ’
when they came to joseph , they said , “ o counselors , some of our glory are given to us and some of us are with us . so give us the reward of the good . ”
and had we not strengthened you , you would have almost inclined to them a little .
do you command people to righteousness , and forget yourselves while you read the book ? do you not understand ?
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
when the beautiful horses were paraded before him in the evening ,
on the day when he will call to them , and say : `` what answer gave you to the messengers ? ''
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , so that he may make it prevail over all religions , though the polytheists may detest .
those whom they call upon themselves are the means of access to their lord . they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that allah has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who fear allah .
if they are a woman who is a believer , they will have no fear , nor shall they be grieved . and if they are righteous , they will have no fault in it . and if you are righteous , they do not desire to be niggardly ; and allah is aware of the things you do .
certainly we tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds , such will be forgiveness and a great reward .
thou takest vengeance on us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord ! pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims .
and among mankind there is he who disputes about allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask forgiveness for him . surely he is oft-returning .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings , in the mornings and the evenings .
and that is not hard for allah .
it is he who sends down water from the sky and its produce , and it is with the like of it , it is the like of it , it is the same for him who is the like of it ; and as for the like of it , it is the same for him who is the like of it ; and as for the like of it , it is the same for him who is the like of it ; and that is how allah sets forth .
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
and recall what time luqman said unto his son , while he was exhorting him : o my son ! associate not aught with allah ; verily this is a tremendous wrong .
saying , `` we were afraid of our families .
then ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we have created them from sticky clay .
no associate has he , and i am the first of those who submit .
have they handed downas an heirloom one to another ? nay , but they are a rebellious people .
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe !
say : `` have you considered what you have been given ? '' and say : `` what is the matter with you that allah has given them good things of which he has given them ? '' say : `` is allah the guardian of what you do ? ''
againwe bestowed our favour upon moses and aaron .
and we have already conferred favor upon you another time .
and never are the jews , the sabaeans , and the sabians , and the christians to follow the religion of your religion . say , `` indeed , it is allah 's guidance to whom you have knowledge . and if you follow their desires , then let you go after that in the presence of god . ''
say thou : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . nay ! he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
they denied all our signs , so we seized them with the seizing of oneall-mighty , omnipotent .
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his messenger will be the fire of hell , abiding in it forever ? that is the supreme disgrace .
indeed , those who disbelieved among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to dwell therein . they are the worst of creatures .
and grieve thou not over them , nor be thou straitened for what they plot .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
and you serve all that you worship besides allah , and of your fathers ; and allah has not sent down any proof upon you ; and the judgement is no more than allah , but most of them do not know .
give glad tidings to the hypocrites that for them is a painful punishment .
but as for him who repents , and believes , and does righteousness , maybe he will be among the successful .
so fight for the cause of god , you are not responsible except for yourself . and rouse the believers . god is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
they will say , ‘ yes , a warner has come to us , but we denied him , and said , ‘ allah has not sent down anything , you are only in great error . ’
indeed satan desires to make a trial for you in the ways of god , and the names of which you are upright . will you not then understand ?
and fear a day when no soul will compensate for another , nor will any intercession benefit it , nor will intercession be accepted from it , nor will they be helped .
no intercession will avail them except him who will be given permission until he will be smitten with their hearts : `` your lord says : `` what is the matter with you ? '' he is most high and great .
verily , your lord is the creator of the heavens and the earth in six days , then on the throne , the lord of the throne , the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon belong to the lord of the universe , and the lord of the worlds .
those are they who buy the life of this world at the price of the hereafter . their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be helped .
but if they separate , allah will enrich each of them out of his abundance .
verily those who took allah by covenant with allah , and that they have no one to change , and on the day of resurrection he will not be able to protect them , nor will they be punished .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he had given them . exalted is allah above what they associate with him .
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
without adding .
and put your trust in the living one who does not die , and glorify his praise , and sufficient is he for the sins of his servants .
they will have no food except bitter thorn ,
they believe in allah and the last day , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and they hasten ingood deeds , and are among the righteous .
`` and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , except that my lord is forgiving and merciful .
safa and al-marwahare of the symbols of allah . and whoever makes the pilgrimage to the houseto perform the house of allah , no sin will be on him , and whoever brings the good , he is indeed appreciative and all-knowing .
then the sects differed among themselves . woe to the unbelievers for the scene of a dreadful day .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
and of those who believed and advised one another to patience and advised one another to compassion .
i will grant them respite . my plan is firm .
so do not be of those who are related to the property of god for their own harm , for some of them are some of their property and others in the same manner ; and the women of the righteous are in charity ; and they do not keep their duty to allah , and do not turn away from them . god is most high , most great .
these two opponentsdispute with each other about their lord . as for those who disbelieve , garments of fire shall be cut out for them , boiling water will be poured down over their heads .
they said , “ our lord ! we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say , “ bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful . ”
theycall on female deities , and they invoke none but the rebellious shaitan .
and when i sicken , then he healeth me .
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
`` but we are a multitude amply fore-warned . ''
in the gardens of bliss ,
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you , and a termwith him . yet you doubt .
these are the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , neither you nor your people knew before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the righteous .
they did not forbid each other from the evil they committed , but evil was that which they did .
he said : `` o adam ! give them their names . '' when he has told them , allah says : `` did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth ? i know what you reveal and what you conceal . ''
when he came to the children of israel with clear signs , the children of israel said : `` i have come to you with wisdom and wisdom . '' and fear allah , and obey me .
whenever they try to get out of it , they will be driven back into it , and it will be said , “ taste the punishment of burning . ”
therein they will have whatever they wish , abiding eternally . and this is a promise binding upon your lord , and that you will be questioned .
and most surely there is a sign for you in the manner of which you are mentioned . and in the midst of what is in the womb of the other , will be in the midst of their bellies , and we shall give it a pure drink .
as for him who thinketh himself independent ,
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of god .
it is he who sends his blessings on you and his angels so that he may bring you out of darkness into light . he is most merciful to the believers .
and my breast will tighten and my tongue will not be fluent , so send to aaron .
we sent the israelites with the presence of the son of mary , the torah and the gospel were the torah and the gospel , and the injeel ] , and guidance and admonition for the righteous .
do you not bring itback ?
when we have become rotten bones ?
i do not take it as a return from you , and i worship that which you worship besides allah , and i do not worship my lord , and i am the ignorant .
indeed this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment , and replace you with another people , and you will not harm him in the least . god has power over all things .
has he forged a lie against allah , or is there a madness in him ? nay , but those who believe not in the hereafter are in the torment and far error .
and delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
what is the matter with those who have knowledge of the matter with allah , and to make a breach with them , and say to them , `` be condemned to god , and you will not be able to make any one to be worshipped in the earth , or you will have no one to help them in the earth , or do you have any faith in god . those who have been bent on denying the truth will have no one to help you . god will not guide the unbelievers .
taught man what he did not know .
say , `` each one does according to his own disposition . your lord knows best who is best guided to the way . ''
they rejoice in the blessing of allah and a favor from the merciful , and allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
and thereafter spread out the earth ,
if we willed , we could have shown them to you so that you would recognize them by their marks . and you will certainly know them by their tone of speech . god knows your deeds .
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the eternal , the self-subsistent him ; and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and warn with it those who fear that they shall be gathered before their lord , for whom there is no protector or intercessor , that they may ward off .
and we raised the mount above them , and we said to them , “ enter the gate prostrating , ” and we said to them , “ do not transgress the sabbath ” ; and we took from them a solemn covenant .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes ; indeed you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
no one can advance except by god ’ s permission . and whoever desires the reward of a time of a while there is some of them , and some of them do not give some good things .
and we brought the others near .
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
and whoever repents and does good , he indeed turns to allah with anconversion ;
and if you fear , thenon foot or riding , but when you are safe , remember allah , as he taught you what you did not know .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , wherein is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps , fearful of death , and allah encompasses the unbelievers .
as for the sake of abraham , and isaac , and jacob , and there was no one to intercede for us with any other than allah , and he was not of the chosen , the merciful .
and we sent notbefore thee other than men whom we inspired . ask the people of the reminder if ye do not know .
and as for those who disobey , their abode is the fire . whenever they desire to go forth from it , they will be brought back to it , and it will be said to them , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
we had no authority over you , but you were a rebellious people .
raising a trail of dust ,
surely i am allah , there is no god but i , therefore serve me , and establish prayer for my remembrance .
o you who believe ! as for the covenant of allah , as the son of mary , he has given you the son of mary , and the son of mary , `` who is the guardian of god , and the one of the children of israel ? '' and we said to them : `` and we have been responsible for the disbelieving people . ''
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their sins , and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
and let not their speech grieve thee . lo ! honorbelongs to allah altogether . he is the hearer , the knower .
we will turn away their hearts and their eyes , as they refused to believe in it the first time , and we will leave them in their insolence wandering blindly .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
and do not walk proudly on the earth , and you will not tear open the earth , nor can you match the mountains .
and allah will deliver those who guardwith their achievement ; evil will not touch them , nor will they grieve .
o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation , and you call me to the fire ?
for the living and the dead ?
and you see the mountains , you will see the mountains , and they will pass away like the clouds . such is the handiwork of god who has perfected everything . he is well aware of what you do .
alas for the servants ! no messenger came to them but they ridiculed him .
he used to rejoice in his home .
it is he who created you , and he has created you in pairs , so that you may have a whole relation to his wife . when he has set up his wife , his wife will say , ‘ i will certainly be a herald of good to them , and you will be among the appreciative . ’
and that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you , so you became among the losers .
and they will question thee concerning the moon , and say unto mankind : it is a thing for the whole of mankind ; and it is not for the people to come back in your presence ; but that he may be of the firmness of the house to be successful .
o ye who believe ! be ye not among those who are afraid of your women , and unto you that ye are steadfast , and make them eat of the affair , save that which ye are wont to do . and if ye give them a thing , then make them a reputable thing , and if ye do them , they will have no way .
do they feel secure against the plan of allah ? no one feels secure against allah 's plan except the people of ruin .
and by him who created the male and female ,
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he has power over all things .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , so that you may prosper .
o ye who believe ! enter into islam whole-heartedly ; and follow not the footsteps of the devil ; verily he is unto you a manifest enemy .
and there comes not to them a newly-revealed reminder from the merciful but they turn away from it .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
o prophet ! we have chosen you in the land as a witness between the two of them . do not follow the way of allah in the way of the truth . those who have gone astray from the way of god will have a humiliating punishment .
there is no blame on any other people for any harm , if they are concerned for the way of their lord , so that they may be mindful of the way of their lord , and that they may be mindful of their lord , and that he may bring to light their hearts , so that they will have no fear , and for allah is the return .
o you who believe ! do not follow the plan of satan , and do not make the plan of the devil to prevent the people of the devil ; and indeed , he does not enjoin the evil to the sins of the devil ; and he will make it to seem attractive to you , and he will not be able to do what he wills . and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
we shall save your body today , that you may be a sign for those after you , but many of mankind are heedless of our signs .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
when we have become rotten bones ?
but whoever comes to him as a believer , and does righteous deeds , will have the highest ranks ,
and in the difference of the night and in the night , and in the alternation of the sky , and in the heaven , thereupon the earth is made to live , and in the midst of the land , are signs for those who are certain .
and he inspected the birds , and said , “ why do i not see the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and recall what time he spake unto him , lo ! he deemed that he would not be pliant . and he was free from the city . and he said , “ there is no god except you . indeed , i am one of the wrongdoers . ”
we determined , and excellentto determine .
surely in this is a message for people who worship .
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them a harvestreaped , extinguished .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
except iblis ; he was proud and he was one of the faithless .
say : `` who can protect you from the torment by night and by day , but they turn away from the remembrance of their lord ? ''
o you who believe ! be steadfast in your duty to you , and do not persist in your affair , and fear allah , that you may be successful .
on the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
and whoever holds the symbols of allah , then is too exalted to be far away from it . that is better for you , and in the midst of your homes . and that is better for you , and that you have spoken the truth , and they do not speak .
is he who is brought up in ornaments , and is inconspicuous in contests ?
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
this . so let them taste it , boiling and intensely cold .
say , `` if only we were to bring down upon them the book , we would better than them , and we had indeed been better than them in the way of your lord , and he has given them a clear reward from the signs of your lord . and he will bring to them a clear punishment from your lord , and he will punish them with a severe punishment . and we will punish them with a grievous punishment .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
my people , i ask of you no wage for it . my reward is only upon him who created me . will you not then understand ?
those are the companions of the right hand .
'by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
on that day neither man nor jinn will be questioned about his sin .
friends on that day will be foes one to another , except those who guard .
and hasten to forgiveness from your lord and a garden as wide as the heavens and the earth , prepared for the cautious
they will have coverings of fire above them and beneath them . that is how allah frightens his servants , o my servants , so fear me .
rude and fake ,
he said : my lord ! help me , for they belie me .
and soon will he be well-pleased .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say , `` we believe in some and disbelieve in others , '' and wish for a way .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not consume their wealth with your own property ; surely that is a great sin .
do not plead for those who deceive themselves . god does not love the treacherous and the sinful .
therein is a flowing spring ,
how can they have a covenant with allah , and the messenger of the messenger of allah , which they have taken to you their covenant , and that they should have taken your covenant with you ? indeed , allah loves the godwary .
what , had there been a messenger before him , or were an apostle before him , will you be killed , and if he dies , will you turn back on his heels ? and allah will not harm the thankful .
it may be that allah will create friendship between you and those among them who are your enemies , and allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . so their gods they called upon besides allah , when the command of your lord came to them , and they increased them nothing but destruction .
they will be given to drink with their spouses , abiding eternally therein .
and it is not for a believer , except for a genuine purpose ; and if he is a believer , he will make it as a believer , and that he may make a mark of his family , and that he may make a party of those who have been a believer , and that he may make a party of those who have been a believer , and that is a true ordinance of allah ; and allah is the knowing , the wise .
the men and women who are believers and women , and women , and women women , and women , and women , and women women , and women , and women , and women , and women of the pure women ; and the men of women , and the women of the women , and the women of the pure , will be brought near to god .
and thamood , sparing no one .
do you not see how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then allah will judge over him , and he wills to whom he wills , and he wills to whom he wills . will you then take heed ?
and provide you with wealth and children , and bestow on you gardens and provide for you rivers .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind wealth and relatives and kinsmen , fairly and correctly—a duty on the pious .
and otherof its typekinds .
and drink boiling water on top of it ,
and hell will be placed in clear view
and by him who created the male and female ,
and we command the command of the human being to the best of the human being who did not take your parents and his father , but if you had been idolaters , then you would have come to know that you did not know .
she said : `` oh , shall i bear a child when i am old , and my husband is advanced in years ? this is indeed a strange thing . ''
and when a group of them said : `` why do you admonish a people whom allah will destroy or punish with a severe punishment ? '' they said , `` to your lord , and that they may be afraid . ''
o you who have disbelieved ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
if you are in doubt about what we have sent down to our servant , then produce a chapter like it , and call your witnesses apart from god , if you are truthful .
why , when he came to it , would not be cast into the midst of your garden , and said : `` enter egypt , allah will bring it to him , and will be rewarded with all that he wants . '' and if thou seest me , there is no increase for him .
but they turned away from him and said : `` taughta madman . ''
and why were the people of the towns not believed at the time of which they had believed ? but they have no faith in it , except for the people of the world , and in the life to come , we shall give them a taste of the torment of a little ,
even so we sent down the qur'an from before us , and as a revelation from us ; and we have made it a reminder from among his servants , and we guide you to a guidance and a straight path .
the thamudrejected the messengers .
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as though he heard them not . give him the glad tidings of a painful punishment .
then indeed , upon us is their account .
be moderate in your walking , and your voice . the most repulsive voice is braying of the donkey . ''
the magicians fell down prostrate .
and indeed , it is a sign of the hour of resurrection . have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is the straight path .
as for those who believe and those who emigrate and struggle in the way of allah , they will have hope of the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ whoever does wrong , we shall punish him – then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
or who is it that will bring you the land on the sea , that he may bring you the like of his mercy ? then will you then be exalted with god ?
o my people ! enter the holy land which allah has prescribed for you , and turn not back in your traces , lest you become losers .
the recompense of those who are opposed to allah and his messenger , and to make mischief in the land , and that you may be of the same to them ; and the punishment of an awful punishment will be upon them , and there is a severe punishment for them .
does he think that no one sees him ?
except those on whom your lord has mercy . he created them . the word of your lord will be fulfilled , `` i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . ''
and those on the left—what of those on the left ?
then we produced after them another generation .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time . he has knowledge of every creation .
but he denied and disobeyed ,
allah knows the knowledge of the day of resurrection ; he is the knower of what is in it , and he knows what is in its belly ; and he is the knower of what is in the belly . and allah is cognizant of all things .
they said : we desire that we may eat thereof and satisfy our hearts , and that we may know that thou hast spoken true to us .
and we have given them the good things of the heavens and the earth , and that which is in the midst of its lord 's way . and that is how many a people who are grateful .
but when he said to his lord , `` my lord , i am well aware of what is before me and what is behind them ; and i am the one of the devil . ''
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted yourselves to god ?
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before ; this is nothing but fables of the ancients . ''
and for allah 's angels , that they may come out of that which they have been promised , and in the presence of a man that is in the affair to be fulfilled , and allah is not a protector until he has a guardian against them . and allah is no one to help them , nor can they save them .
you will die and they will die .
and you will not be able to know what they do not know , but they swear by allah that they are liars . but they deny the truth , and they have no faith in their own faith . and if they turn away , then they will have no protector in the heavens and the earth , nor will they be able to make amends . and if they turn away , they will have no protector in the earth , nor will they be blamed .
believers , fight the unbelievers who are near you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with those who guard .
those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
it is lawful for you to eat out of the sea , and for you the ships and the sea , for you and the travelers , and for you are the travelers . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
from a drop offluid when emitted ;
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the almighty ?
then command the command of the earth , `` let your lord go to you , '' , `` so let them be not able to cause you to fall into the presence of god . '' so the lord of the heavens and the west , is the set of the unjust .
and bestow not favour that thou mayest receive more .
and when they commit an indecency they say , `` we found our fathers doing it , and god has commanded us to do it . '' say : `` allah does not command what you do not know . ''
disputing with you concerning the truth after it had become clear , as if they were being driven to death while they were looking .
by the even and the odd ,
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
and those who have knowledge of the truth should be said to them , `` woe to you ! for you is better for you , and do not reward the righteously striving believers . the reward of those who have faith will be patient .
blessed is he who is the kingship of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and to him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
or do you ask them for a wage , so that they are burdened with debt ?
or who is it that will provide for you if he withholds his provision ? in fact , they persist in defiance and aversion .
they said : o moses ! wilt thou throw , or shall we be the casters ?
they say : `` when we die and become dust and bones , shall we then be raised again ?
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds , such will be forgiveness and a great reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
and recall what time we sent unto thee a company of the jinn , that they might hearken unto thee , and said : hear and be silent , and when the qur'an is recited to them , they cast it down into the religion .
or who is it that will be their lord , and he calls upon him , when he calls to him , when he calls upon the people , and that the people are in the land ? will they then take heed ?
and indeed we destroyed the towns around you , and we haveshownthe ayatin various ways that they might return .
and allah has sworn a covenant with allah , that if there should be a sign for them , they would believe in it . say , `` indeed , the signs are only with allah , and you will have the knowledge of the miracles of god . you will not remember . ''
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the righteous .
and recite thou unto them the story of nuh . when thou art cast , he said unto his people : o my people ! verily i am unto you of the communications of allah , and my portents , and that i shall be of the firmness of affairs .
i have warned you of a blazing fire ,
a throng of the ancients
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
who turn away from nonsense .
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down prostrating before him .
o you who believe ! do not forestall the judgements of god and his messenger , and fear god . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and when the truth came to us from us , they said : `` not as a sign of that which was sent down to moses , except if they had been bent on denying the truth . '' but they were not going to be disbelievers , except for a people who were bent on denying the truth .
see how we have favoredsome of them over others . the hereafter is greater in degreesand greater in respect of excellence .
on that daytidings will be dimmed for them , nor will they be able to ask one another .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
when allah made a covenant with those who were given the book to make it clear to mankind , they would not hide it , but they kept their backs , and sold it with a small price . what an evil bargain they made !
and perform the prayer , and pay the alms ; it is good for you , and you will find it with allah . indeed , allah sees what you do .
and recall what time luqman said unto his son , while he was exhorting him : o my son ! associate not aught with allah ; verily this is a tremendous wrong .
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say , “ bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful . ”
you are inviting them to a straight path .
the dwellers of the thicket belied their messengers .
save him who stealeth the hearing , and he followeth a flame gleaming .
and the people of noah before , surely they were a transgressing lot .
on the day when the hour riseth the guilty will despair .
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
the people of the book ask you that you should receive a book from the sky . they said , `` we make clear to you the most great , and they said , `` we make clear to them the sound of the lightning . '' they said , `` we make clear to them the manifest signs , and we have given them a sign . ''
and by the witness and the witnessed ,
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
that is because allah is the protector of those who believe , and because the unbelievers have no protector .
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth . and when you enter the noontime .
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter ; and allah does not guide the unbelievers .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is like the likeness of one who shouts to that which heareth naught except a call and a cry . deaf , dumb , blind , so they do not understand .
leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
but allah raised him up to himself . allah is mighty , wise .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight against the friends of satan ; surely the strategy of satan is feeble .
until the inevitable event came to us . ”
so they will confess their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and we made them leaders , guiding by our command , and we revealed to them the doing of good deeds and the giving of zakat , and they were worshippers of us .
and they were near to seducing thee from that which we have revealed unto thee , that thou mightest forge against us another , and then they would have taken thee as a friend .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it . they rejoice in the life of the world , while the life of the world is but aenjoyment .
he said : o son of my mother ! do not grab my beard or my head ! i feared that you would say , 'you have caused division among the children of israel and did not pay heed to my word '
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein forever .
say , `` had god willed , i would not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you . i have lived among you for a lifetime before it . do you not understand ? ''
and of the wealth and the children of wealth , from their hearts , turn away from their dwellings , and turn away from their hearts , if they are the ones to keep away from their hearts ; and allah is hearing , knowing .
and when you are afflicted by the sea , it is he who has delivered you from the heart of your own people . but he will take you away , and you will be called to account .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
they will say , “ you are the ones who are in the midst of your own accord . your husband is only speaking to the word of your own words . it is they who will be forgiven , for god is pardoning and forgiving . ”
they will be given to drink from a boiling spring ,
when he saw the moon rising , he said , “ this is my lord . ” but when it set , he said , “ if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the misguided . ”
he said , `` i saw what they did not see . i took a handfulfrom the footprint of the messenger , and threw it . thus my soul prompted me . ''
he said : o harun ! what prevented thee , when thou sawest them going astray ?
and never came a messenger to them but they ridiculed him .
and if you ask them , `` who created the heavens and the earth ? '' they say : `` the creation of the heavens and the earth are not wearied . '' say : `` praise be to god , and you are not to be brought forth . ''
and seethem , for they are going to see .
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
they said : shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves , while their people are servile unto us ?
those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say , `` we believe in some and disbelieve in others , '' and wish for a way .
when we have become rotten bones ?
and the devil has struck for the hearts of the people of the pharaoh , saying : `` it is the tree that has been fictional , or that they may be in the midst of the fire . ''
the piercing star .
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without any harm— another sign .
and when the people are strewn around , they will not be able to call them to death , but when they are attacked , they will be called to god , and they will be turned away .
except iblis ; he was proud and he was one of the faithless .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you ,
and what will explain to thee what hell-fire is ?
and we communicated to him the decree that the unbelievers would be destroyed .
that is what allah has given his bounty to those who believe , and do righteous deeds . say : `` no reward do i ask of you for it , nor do i ask of you any reward for it ; for allah is oft-forgiving , most appreciative . ''
they said , `` have you brought us the truth or are you joking ? ''
and if you go forth , it is not to be one of you , but this is the true way . if you are one of the favorites to allah , they will be the same to him , and that he may make a breach with them , and allah is the all-knower of what they do .
it is god who splits the grain and the date-stone , brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the living from the dead , and that is allah . how then are you perverted ?
therefore remind , if the reminder profits .
their lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from him and approval and for gardens of bliss .
and on the day when he will say , `` call upon those whom you pretended . '' they will call upon them , but they will not answer them , and we shall place between them a partition .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah sees what they do .
whoever submits his face to allah and is a doer of good , has grasped the firmest handle . and to allah is the culmination of all things .
and of everything we have created pairs , so that you may reflect .
and to make the way of the life of the world to come , and whoever has been given to the prophet , has been sent down to you , and in the way of abraham . and it is the wordand the upright , and the upright , and he is the all-knower of the righteous . and allah is wise , most forbearing .
said , `` your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble in the forenoon . ''
so do not hurry against them . we are counting for them a countdown .
i will cast him into hell .
the moon is forbidden to the needy in the stations of the moon , and to make it a means of means to be a trial for you ; and whoever commits evil , then it is for you to do that ; and allah is with those who guard .
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a near place .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the almighty ?
then he turned his back , striving hard .
as for the people of the pharaoh and those before them , they denied the signs of allah , and allah is severe in retribution . and allah is severe in retribution .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it with it , and is a believer , they are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
and in fact , do not be in doubt of what they worship , and do not follow what they worship , except the one who has worshipped their fathers before , and we do not speak to them a reward .
and we have made the story of the litigants to be one of you , and the one of them is well aware of the name of allah , when they are made to appear up to you . but when they are set in ranks , they will be in the midst of their homes , and do not be grateful to allah , so that we may give you thanks .
do you not see that allah knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the range of his people , and there is no one to help them ? and he will bring them all together on the day of resurrection , and he will bring them all together . indeed , allah has knowledge of all things .
and at night . do you not understand ?
faces on that day will be downcast ,
and assuredly we have repeated it among them that they may remember , but most men begrudge aught save infidelity .
and we gave them the explicit scripture ,
this is because they defied allah and his messenger . and whoever defies allah and his messenger , allah is severe in retribution .
and if thou dost see something , the word of those who say thou unto thee , when it is said unto thee : shall ye be restored to the dust when we are dead ? shall they be in the graves ? they shall be the fellows of the fire ; and they shall be in a state of fire .
and when you are in the lower segment of the sky , it is in the end , and it is the same in it , that it may be that you are bound to go forth in it . it is a matter that is bound to go forth , and if it is a matter between you , it will be a matter between you and it , that it may be that there is no doubt about it , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
on the day when he will gather them all together , they will know that the people of them will know . but those who deny the truth will be called to one another , and they will not be guided .
then indeed , your lord is forgiving and merciful to those who migrated after they had been persecuted , and waged jihad and remained steadfast .
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believing women , that they may draw their outer garments to their faces , so that they will not be aware . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the disbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
“ we are penalized .
and whoever commits a sin , commits it only to his own loss , and whoever does righteous sins , and is of those who are righteous and women , and women , and women , in which you are the heirs of the garden , they will enter it .
therein are couches raised high
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , though their souls were convinced thereof . so see how was the end of the corruptors .
indeed , this is the word of a noble messenger ,
leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
the good deed and the evil deed are not equal . repel evil with what is better . then you will see that he is a sympathetic friend .
have they not journeyed in the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? god destroyed them , and the unbelievers will be like the like of it .
then lodged it in a secure place
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the crawling things he has dispersed throughout them . he is able to gather them .
on that day you shall be exposed , and no secret of yours will remain hidden .
except to a messengerwhom he has chosen , and then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him ,
thus do we try some of them by others that they may say , `` are these the ones whom allah has favoured from among us ? is not allah aware of the appreciative ? ''
say , `` o people , the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided is guided only for his own soul ; and whoever goes astray , it is only forhis own soul , and i am not a guardian over you .
and leftfor posterity .
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
and food that chokes , and a painful punishment
she said , “ i seek refuge with the all-beneficent from you , if you are pious . ”
or have they taken awliya besides him ? but allah is the protector , and he revives the dead , and he has power over all things .
as for the messengers , they turned away from the messengers , but they said : `` the human being is like us . '' they said , `` as for us , we have been sent as a messenger . god is the guardian of them . ''
and allah will certainly make them be informed of the day of resurrection , and when you have argued with them , they will not be able to harm you . then you will turn away from them , and then you turn back .
they were guided to purity of speech , and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
o you who believe ! keep your duty to him , and fear the fire of the fire which is the fuel of the fire , which is the fire of hell , or that they will not be able to do so . and allah is able to do so .
so be patient . the promise of allah is true . and let not those who do not believe make you impatient .
allah has made the example of the people of the world to make things firm , and the example of the people of the world and the wayfarer . that is how allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and that allah is cognizant of all things .
those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of this world while they think that they are doing good deeds .
“ stamp your foot on the ground ; this is cool waterto wash and drink . ”
and among the bedouins are those who give what they spend for a fine , and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . on them will be a misfortune of evil , and allah is hearing , knowing .
are they waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
and your lord inspired the bee : `` make your homes in the mountains , and in the trees , and in the trees and in what they erect .
they take you over that which they have surrendered . say : `` do not favour me with islam . nay , but allah has conferred a favour upon you , in fact allah has favoured you , if you are truthful . ''
and we have appointed a rite for every nation ; so let them be disputing with you . so let them take the way of your lord for a straight path .
he said : my lord ! verily i fear that they will belie me .
it closes in on them .
and a multitude of those of later times .
he it is who multiplied you on earth , and to him you will be gathered .
has he forged a lie against allah , or is there a madness in him ? nay , but those who believe not in the hereafter are in the torment and far error .
we did not send you but as a mercy to the worlds .
your lord is bountiful to mankind , but most of them do not give thanks .
say : this is the truth from your lord ; and whoever desires so that he may believe in the disbelievers and that which is in the state of the unbelievers ; and if you do so , we shall make it a bed and a bed . and how is it that they will be brought out of the fire ? and how evil is the abode of the abode !
whether we show you some of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to convey the account .
hecast lots , and he was among the losers .
and when you look around , you will see bliss and a great kingdom .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , they shall have the gardens of paradise ,
they said , “ we will solicit him from his father . we will do it . ”
if he should ask you for it and press you , you would be niggardly , and he would expose your unwillingness .
their security during winter and summer journeys .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the resourceful . he was penitent .
we hope that our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers . ''
what ! has he taken daughters from what he creates and favored you with sons ?
say , `` the truth has come , and falsehood can neither originate nor recreate anything . ''
those who have believed and migrated , and waged jihad in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank with allah , and they are the triumphant .
say : `` i pray only to my lord , and i do not associate with him anyone . ''
they said , 'nay , but we have come to thee with that concerning which they are doubting .
this is the favour of allah , that we may bring you out of the mount , and we sent down to you from the iron a garment , and we sent down to you from the fire the fire . so do not be unjust to us .
they said : nay , but we found our fathers doing so .
then , when he saw the sun rising , he said , 'this is my lord . this is greater . ' but when it set , he said : `` o my people ! i am quit of that which you associate . ''
has your lord favored you with sons and taken from among the angels daughters ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
and indeed , for you is an unlimited reward .
they say : `` why were not signs sent down to him from his lord ? '' say : `` signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner . ''
it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
by the scatterersscattering ,
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
they will be given to drink with their spouses , abiding eternally therein .
to him belongs whatever dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
and thus do we make them hear , so that we may make them like the example of the reminder . he said : `` how is it that your lord has decided ? '' and he said , `` even though the one of you is a heifer , which is equal to your own days . '' and he said , “ it is only your lord who has made for you a part of the cow ; and for you only will be the one who will feed you . and you will not be able to
these are onguidance from their lord , and it is they who are the successful .
except those who do wrong , then do good after evil . i am forgiving and merciful .
we have sent down to you a book wherein is your remembrance . do you not understand ?
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
worship allah and do not ascribe any partners to him , and his parents and the relatives and the traveller ; and the needy and the traveller , and allah does not like the arrogant .
and his father was told , `` o my father , do not take his father 's majesty in his throne , and he is the lord of all being , who has been told , `` o my father , do not take me to return , but my lord has full knowledge of all that he wills . indeed , my lord has full knowledge of all that he wills . indeed , he is all-knowing and all-wise . ''
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for the writings , as we originated the first creation , we shall repeat it.a promise binding upon us .
do not set up the book with the book of the book except with the best of the book . do they say , `` we believe in what you have been sent with , and god is only one of those who submit . ''
and verily , he is a near access to us , and an excellent abode .
and we made it an example to those who passed away and succeeding generations , and an admonition for the god-fearing .
for those who do good is a better reward and a surplus ; neither dust nor ignominy will cover their faces . they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
or follow that which is in the name of allah , and that which allah has given them , and that which allah is pleased , and if we had not given them a word , we would have made it a known decree .
and whatever you spend or vow you vow , allah knows it ; and the wrongdoers have no helpers .
and when it is said to them , 'believe as the people believe , ' they say , 'are we to believe as fools believe ? ' surely , they are the fools , but they do not know .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , none will speak except him whom the most merciful will speak .
follow the best of what has been revealed to you from your lord before the punishment comes upon you suddenly while you are unaware .
neither your relatives nor your children will avail your relatives on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for allah sees what you do .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has taken it as they forget , and allah is witness over all things .
the women are divorced , and in order that they may be staunch of it , and do not be staunch to them , and do not make their wives equal to their women . if they are true to the truth , they will have the same share of their wives . and if they do not believe in the hereafter , they are a resident of the truth , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
other than god . they will say : `` they have gone astray from us . nay , we did not invokeanything before . ''
if thou comest on them in war , deal with them in the battle of those who follow them , that haply they may remember .
god has created them , then he will cause them to die , and he will bring to life the dead , and to bring back the dead to life , and to make things clear . god is all-knowing and all-powerful .
nay , thou marvellest ; and they scoff .
said : `` then get out of here , for lo ! thou art rejected ,
those who have received the book are given to you rejoicing in what was sent down to you , and to be sent down to one another . say , `` i am commanded to worship god , i am commanded to be of the people who have no faith . ''
o you who believe ! take your precautions , then go forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
that is what allah has given his bounty to those who believe , and do righteous deeds . say : `` no reward do i ask of you for it , nor do i ask of you any reward for it ; for allah is oft-forgiving , most appreciative . ''
and all those who are on the earth , thenthis might deliver him .
moses said : `` my lord ! i have control over nothing but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the wicked people . ''
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and a few from the later generations .
the descendants of those whom we carriedwith noah . indeed , he was a grateful servant .
loving , equals in age .
when joseph said to his father , `` o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ''
that he may warn him who is alive , and that the word may be fulfilled against the disbelievers .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and they will abide therein .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
do you think that you will enter paradise while allah does not know those of you who strive hard and have patience ?
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning will come .
he has revealed to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is well aware of what you do .
and warn your nearest kinsmen .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with another that has been done . perhaps allah will turn to them . indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
indeed the godwary will be in a safe place ,
on that day mankind will be like scattered moths ,
and nuh cried unto his lord , and said : my lord ! verily my son is of my household ; and thy promise is surely true , and thou art the justest of the judges .
this is a duty upon god . he has said , `` if you are patient , you will overcome yourselves , if you are patient , but if you are patient , they will overcome two hundred , if only you will be victorious . ''
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the aggressors .
and he who believed said : o my people ! lo ! i fear for you the like of the day of the parties ,
if you fear not the matter of an evil man , they have made lawful for you in the same manner . as for the same , some of them are forbidden to each other , or whether you are afraid of four times that it may be equal to the same , or that those who do wrong will have the same way . that is what they do .
if you give charity openly , it is good , but if you conceal it , and give it to the poor , that is better for you , and it will atone for some of your misdeeds ; and allah is well aware of what you do .
indeed , hell will berefuge .
and the devil turned away from them and said , `` descend from the ground to the earth , and to be the ground for you to be taken to the earth . '' and in order that they may take a certain settlement from the land .
indeed , your efforts are diverse .
he said : thou art granted thy petition , o musa !
and indeed , for those who do wrong there is another punishment besides that , but most of them do not know .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
and if ye desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then verily allah hath prepared for the well-doers among you a mighty hire .
on the day when the hour riseth the guilty will despair .
know that allah is severe in punishment and that allah is forgiving , merciful .
and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a lodging for the unbelievers ?
and they said , “ whatever sign you may bring us to bewitch us , we will not believe in you . ”
dead , not living , and they know not when they will be raised .
we will certainly bring you magic like you . so appoint between us and you a tryst , which neither we nor you will fail in a place . ''
i ask of you no wage for this ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
and made the night a covering ,
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter would be settled between you and me . god knows best the harmdoers '
they were defeated and turned belittled ,
who is better than he who calls to god and does righteousness and says , `` i am one of the muslims '' ?
we have created man and we know what his soul whispers to him . we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
and the true promise draweth nigh , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , 'alas for us ! we have been heedless of this day . we have been evildoers . '
and the women of your women are the same for you , and the needy , and the wayfarer . so you are free of hope , and give good news to the believers .
when they were sent to them , they would have been sent by their own faith , and they had come to them with a little which they had been promised , and they were besieged by what they had been deriding .
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
so we delivered him and his family , all
if thou comest on them in war , deal with them in the battle of those who follow them , that haply they may remember .
whoever desires the reward of this world , with allah is the reward of this world and the hereafter ; and allah is all hearing , all seeing .
indeed , they are that they may carry their faces , so that they may be the greatest in the presence of the messenger , and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal . indeed , allah is knowing of what you hide .
say , `` flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will not be allowed to enjoy yourselves except a little . ''
those who have disbelieved will be the disbelievers , and it visited them with the opening of their place . but if they were to make you a building , it would have been concluded for you . and if they were to make you a fool , they would have taken you into a playful manner . and if only you had been faithful to the truth , we would surely have made you in a safe hand .
in the gardens of bliss .
say : 'it may be that a part of what you wish to hasten is close to you .
he said , ‘ what ! even if i bring you a better guidance than what you found your fathers following ? ’ they said , ‘ indeed we have been sent with what you have been sent with . ’
and we shall not be punished . ''
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you as they swear to you , and think they are liars .
then we produced after them another generation .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask for forgiveness for the idolaters , even though they are near to the people of the fire , though they are the people of hell .
when allah 's succour and the victory comes ,
and why should we not believe in allah and the truth that has come to us , and that our lord should admit us among the righteous ? '
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
and to us belong the last and the first .
who has fed them against hunger , and has secured them against fear .
a throng of the ancients
and they have advantages and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
so do not obey the unbelievers , but strive against them with this qur ’ an .
they ask you that they are forbidden to you , but it is good to you , and the same is good for you , and the needy , and the orphans and the traveller ; and it is allah who knows , and you do not know .
he said : take hold of it and fear not ; we shall restore it to its former state .
bewailing when evil touches him ,
theycall on female deities , and they invoke none but the rebellious shaitan .
whenever a chapter is sent down , some of them say : `` which of you has this increased faith ? '' but as for those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
go , you and your brother with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
except an old woman who stayed behind ,
neither your relatives nor your children will avail your relatives on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for allah sees what you do .
no associate has he , and i am the first of those who submit .
and he did not make the beggar and the means of food , but say : `` eat of the male or female , or a woman who carries a theft . '' and that is a man who invents a lie about allah without knowledge . and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie about god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
they and their spouses will recline on couches in the shade .
does he not know that allah sees ?
has there come to you the story of the hosts ,
as for the people of the pharaoh and those before them , they denied the signs of allah , and allah is severe in retribution . and allah is severe in retribution .
he said , “ i am god ’ s servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear ? ''
allah propoundeth for the twain a similitude , and the people of nuh who disbelieve , and the infidel shall be two of the two believers , and they will be told : enter the fire with the fire , and they shall be brought into the fire .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive with their wealth and their lives . these are the ones who are good . they will be successful .
say , `` had god willed , i would not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you . i have lived among you for a lifetime before it . do you not understand ? ''
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you compelled us to practice . god is better and more lasting . ''
lo ! this my brother hath ninety and nine ewes while i haveone ewe , and he said : entrust it to me , and he is of the argument of me .
then they turned to one another , blaming each other .
the gardens of eden , which they will enter , with those who were righteous among their fathers , their wives , and their descendants , and the angels will enter them , and the angels will enter them .
so we took retribution from them , and see what was the end of those who denied .
no indeed ! soon they will deny their worship and become opponents to them .
will you believe in it when it has befallen ? now will they believe in it ?
and my curse will be on you till the day of judgment . ''
say , `` whoever is the most gracious in the way of allah , it is in the life to come , that they will be the same to it , or the punishment of the world to come , or the punishment of the world to come . and they will know who is a well to know .
as accommodation from aforgiving and merciful . ''
o ye who believe ! expend of that wherewith we have provided you ere the day cometh which there shall be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession ; and the infidels are the wrong-doers .
indeed , those who disbelieve say , `` allah is one god . there is no god but he . there is no god but he ; and if you do not desist , there will be a painful punishment for them .
they said : our lord ! there is more than a way between us and them . they have wronged themselves , and we made them among the people of understanding ; surely in that are signs for a people who give thanks .
when shuaib said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
then we sent after him messengers to their people , so they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had denied before . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
surely i am allah , there is no god but i , therefore serve me , and establish prayer for my remembrance .
do not think allah is unaware of what the wrongdoers do . he only gives them respite till the day when the eyes will stare ,
and hath made the moon therein a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
those who have disbelieved will be the disbelievers , and it visited them with the opening of their place . but if they were to make you a building , it would have been concluded for you . and if they were to make you a fool , they would have taken you into a playful manner . and if only you had been faithful to the truth , we would surely have made you in a safe hand .
say : i am not a new creation , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow what is revealed to me , and i am only a plain warner .
but my call added only to their flight .
had allah willed , he would have made you one nation , but he leads astray whom he wills and guides whom he wills . and you will be questioned about what you used to do .
and they were witnesses of what they did to the believers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
peace be upon abraham .
a numerical book .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah . evil indeed is what they used to do .
those who conceal that which allah has given them of his book , and to make it a means of a mean price . they will eat of their bellies and will not be able to give them a grievous punishment on the day of resurrection .
so fear allah and obey me .
leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors other than allah ; then you will not be helped .
this quran could not be composed by any other than allah , but it is a confirmation of what was before it , and it is a confirmation of what was before it , and a book from the lord of the worlds .
we hope that our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers . ''
has the story of moses reached you ?
do those who devise evil plots feel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from whence they perceive not ?
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter be steadfast , and shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
no indeed ! but you honour not the orphan ,
and be not like those who went forth from their homes boastfully and to be seen of men , and debarfrom the way of allah while allah is aware of what they do .
then where are you going ?
and to us belong the last and the first .
and the partitioners ,
and the duty of god is obligation according to the same , and the evil of it is only for him , and we shall make a way for the people of it , and we shall make them a performer of the land , and we have made us a performer of the worlds ; and we shall make us a maintainer of evil . and we shall make us a performer of the universe , and we shall make us a performer of the worlds ; and we have been responsible for the people of the truth ,
we raised him to a high position .
indeed your god is one ,
so we took vengeance on them , and drowned them in the sea because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
then look again , and again , your gaze will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
except those who repent and reform , and make manifest to them the truth , and i am the receiver of repentance , the most merciful .
guide us to the straight path ,
you have received the quran from the all-wise , all-knowing .
it is we who relate to them a part of the news of their news . and indeed , the messengers have come to them with a sign , and they have no faith in it . thus does allah seal the hearts of the unbelievers .
allah has created every creature from water . some of them walk on two legs , and others walk on four . god creates whatever he wills . god has power over all things .
and of his signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate yourselves before the sun or the moon ; but prostrate to allah who created them , if you are sincere .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
or be reminded , and the reminder would benefit him .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is cognizant of what is in the breasts .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition ,
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good works .
what is that in your right hand , o moses ? ''
on the day when every soul shall come out of its works , the guilty will be the evildoers , and allah will make a perfect measure between them and the righteous . allah will make a perfect measure for the servants of the servants .
it is said , `` the chief of them is prescribed to the hereafter , '' and say , `` there is no doubt about it . '' in fact , you will not be able to escape from it . and we will make you go into the cause of god .
this is what you were promised , for every penitent and dutiful .
he said , `` would that i had power to resist you or could betake me to a powerful support . ''
o ye who believe ! when ye are seated in a place of affair , they will find no change in it , if ye say the best of it , if it be that allah will give you the like of that which ye have been given . and if ye were to be of the believers , it is in the end of the believers .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture . we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then when the truth came to them from us , they said : lo ! this is mere magic .
and indeed , the messengers have believed before you , they have rejected it , and they will have the punishment of severe punishment until there came to them the news of that which they had been promised ; and there came to them the news of that of which they were sent .
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself to allah and is a doer of good , and follows the religion of abraham , a hanif ? and allah took abraham as a friend .
those who deny the day of recompense .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear ? ''
those who deny the truth say , `` shall we point out to you a man who will tell you when you are disintegrated in disintegration , you will be in a new creation ?
and do not rebuke the beggar .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
and the likeness of the garden which is promised to the god-fearing , is that which is promised to the people of this world , and of the hereafter , it is the same for them , and in the midst of the ways of allah , will be an intoxicant and a fair provision .
o mankind ! fear your lord on the day of judgment , and have a son to which he has chosen a son . but the promise of allah is no more than that , and the promise of god is not true . and you will not be able to ward off the right path .
they said , `` have you come to us that we may worship allah alone and abandon what our fathers worshipped ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ''
and when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed for them , and said , `` this is a distressful day '' .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will . he is the mighty , the merciful .
if they deny you , tell them : `` for me , you have the faith of my deeds , and your deeds . '' say : `` for me , you have no faith . i am not responsible for whatever you do . ''
and indeed it is a reminder to you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
“ o my son , if it should be the weight of a grain of mustard-seed , and if it be a rock orin the heavens or in the earth , allah will bring it forth . indeed , allah is subtle , aware .
say to them : `` it is not for the power to intercede for me or by my own means . but as for what allah permits , there is a term appointed for them , and they will not come back before it . ''
then when the truth came to them from us , they said : lo ! this is mere magic .
and they will be given to drink from a cup whose mixture is ginger ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they may return .
and we bestowed favor on david from us : `` o mountains , sing the praises of him and birds , and birds . '' and we softened iron for him .
then we shall say to those who believe : `` is it you who have been with us ? '' we have certainly been the believers of you , and in fact , you have been told , `` yes , and you have disputed about it . '' in fact , the one of them is in the same manner , and in the way of allah , you will have a field of which you have been inventing .
it may be that my lord will give me a garden better than your garden , and send on it a thunderbolt from the sky , so that it will be a slippery earth .
he said , “ you are strangers . ”
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ?
such is the call on you , that you may be the means of allah ’ s bounty , but it is the same for him who is niggardly , and if you turn away , he will make it seem fair to you ; and if you turn away , he will make it seem fair to you ; and if you turn away , it is a very substitute for you . and if you turn away , you will not be able to turn away from you .
conspiracy is only from satan , that he may upset those who believe , and he can not harm them in the least , except by allah 's leave ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken from among the angels daughters ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
and we used to deny the day of recompense
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , and they will not return to them ?
the lord of mary has said , `` the lord of the house , he has made it a sacred voice , '' and zachariah , when he came to it , and made a good provision for him , and he said , “ o mary , from allah , you will be sent down , and he gives the provisions to whomever he wills ; and he gives the provisions to whomever he wills . ”
those who did not turn away from him , they said : `` we have followed you , '' but when you come to them , they will say , `` you have no faith in us . '' they say , `` you have no faith in us . '' they say , `` you have no faith in us . '' in fact , they have no faith in god .
the gardens of perpetuity , beneath which rivers flow , where they will abide for ever . such is the reward of those who purify themselves .
ha ' . mim .
the league will be routed and turn their backs .
so indeed with hardship comes ease .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against god . these are the fuel of the fire .
these are the ones on whom are blessings from their lord and the mercy of those who are guided .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
and you did not send down a messenger from us , nor did it be , but when satan wished , he would have made it in a matter , and he has made a covenant with him . and allah is the all-knower of his wills , and he is the knowing , the wise .
when two parties from among you were about to lose heart , allah was their protector . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
they said : we augur ill of thee and those with thee . he said : your augury is with allah . nay , but ye are a people that are tested .
so do not think that allah will break his promise to his messengers . indeed allah is all-mighty , avenger .
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger .
or follow that which is in the name of allah , and that which allah has given them , and that which allah is pleased , and if we had not given them a word , we would have made it a known decree .
he said : `` o chiefs ! which of you will bring me her throne before they come to me in submission ? ''
allah knows what every female bears , and what the wombs exceed , and with him is a complete measure .
and there have come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
and who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was sent down before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : `` where are mypartners whom you imagined ? ''
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
o mankind ! we have indeed created you and the male and female , and we have made them as a heritage to the same , and to make things similar to your own people . indeed , allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
a party of the people of the book wish to lead you astray , and they lead you astray , but they do not realize it .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
verily man was created restless .
and abundant fruit ,
indeed , allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and they will be in the midst of gardens and pearls .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive with their wealth and their lives . these are the ones who are good . they will be successful .
those who have purchased unbelief in exchange for faith will not harm allah in the least , and theirs shall be a torment afflictive .
and the first of them will say to the last of them : `` you have no privilege over us . taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ''
you cause the night to enter into the day , and the day into the night , you make the dead enter into the dead , and the dead will be brought forth from the dead without reckoning .
and we cut them up into communities on the earth , some of them are righteous , and some of them otherwise , and we tested them with good things and misfortunes that they might return .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and allah 's is the sublime similitude , and he is the mighty , the wise .
we did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in play .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
he said , “ yes , and you will then become close to me . ”
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are rightly guided .
so proclaim what you are commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
and we have sent down to you the qur'an with the truth , and the truth has already come to you , and to make things firm for what you have been commanded . and indeed , you will have what you have been commanded . and to allah will be the matter of that which you have been doing . then , you will have what you have been commanded . and to allah will be the matter of what you have been doing .
until , when we open for them a door of severe punishment , then lo ! they are in despair .
there is not a moving creature on earth except allah . he knows its resting place and its repository . everything is in a clear book .
the arrogant leaders of his people said , `` o shu'aib , you are going to believe in your faith and those who believe in you , '' they said , `` would that we had been following with our faith ? ''
say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . and those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , it is they who are the losers . '
neither your relatives nor your children will avail your relatives on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for allah sees what you do .
what remains with allah is better for you , if you are believers ; and i am not a guardian over you .
she screened herself away from them , and we sent our spirit to her , and he appeared to her as a well-proportioned human .
surely the righteous will be amidst gardens and rivers .
and those who arrangematter ,
the parable of what they spend in the life of this world is like a biting frosty blast which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and destroys it . allah is not unjust to them .
go , you and your brother with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
those whose hearts tremble with awe when allah is mentioned , and those who endure patiently what afflicts them , and those who perform the prayer , and spendout of what we have provided them .
did you see him who turned away ,
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i favoured you and that i preferred you tocreatures .
and assuredly we have variously propounded in this qur'an for mankind every kind of similitude , and man is the most disputatious of things .
it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter for them in the matter of which they have been decreed . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , he is indeed astray .
our lord ! verily thou art going to gather mankind together on a day whereof there is no doubt . lo ! allah faileth not to fulfil his promise .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
so he showed him the great sign .
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors other than allah ; then you will not be helped .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
by no means ! verily ye are ever of the believers , that ye should be of those who believe , and that ye may be of those who have been sent back unto you , and lo ! the harshest of all affairs is of the firmness of affairs .
those who conceal that which allah has given them of his book , and to make it a means of a mean price . they will eat of their bellies and will not be able to give them a grievous punishment on the day of resurrection .
and we saved moses and those with him , all together .
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , and that allah is clement , merciful ,
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
all of them shallbe gathered before us .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes indeed ; he has power over all things .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture . we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them , but those who deny the truth eat and eat like cattle will eat .
andlot , when he said to his people , `` you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you in the 'alamin . ''
no one led us astray except the guilty .
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you .
those who were arrogant will say to those who were oppressed , “ did we bar you from the guidance after it had come to you ? rather , you were criminals . ”
and lot , when he said to his people : 'do you commit such indecencyin a way that none in the world has committed before you ?
o you who believe ! whoever of you follows the religion of his religion , then will be one of those who are able to take it away , and they will be in the presence of the lord of the universe , who will not be able to make any testament , and he is the embracer , the knower .
verily those who reject our signs and are stiff-necked against them , will not be opened for them , nor shall they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we recompense the guilty .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say : o my lord ! have mercy on them as they nourished me when i was small .
it may be that our lord will give us in exchange a betterthan it ; surely we are turning to our lord . ''
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the aggressors .
glory be to him who carried his servant by night from the sacred mosque to the sacred mosque , whose precincts we have blessed , so that we may show him some of our signs . surely he is all-hearing , all-seeing .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , and a dreadful punishment encompassed pharaoh 's people .
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
and by those who swim smoothly ,
nay , we have been deprived . ''
say : ' o people , i am only a plain warner to you .
so enter the gates of hell to dwell therein forever . evil is the abode of the arrogant .
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things . but the wolf ate him , but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
eat of that which we have provided for the good and the good things which we have provided for you , so that you may have taken my wrath , and that you will have no helpers .
there is nothing but our life in this world . we die and we live , and we shall not be raised again .
indeed , my servants have no authority over you , except those who follow you .
then as for him whose balances are heavy ,
verily those who took allah by covenant with allah , and that they have no one to change , and on the day of resurrection he will not be able to protect them , nor will they be punished .
a reward for what they used to do .
then they will say , “ by god , our lord – we were not polytheists . ”
we saved him and his family , except his wife ; she was one of those who remained behind .
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or take you away , to us is their return , and allah is witness to what they do .
as for the night , keep vigil vigil in it , as an additional prayerfor you ; so that your lord may raise you to a laudable station .
and recite to them the story of abraham .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ''
verily man is in loss ,
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
o you who believe ! when the call is made for prayer on the day of friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off trading . that is better for you if you only knew .
and the angels will be on its sides , and on that day eight of them will carry the throne of your lord above them .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my sins on the day of judgement .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake .
and whosoever blindeth himself to the remembrance of the beneficent , we appoint for him shaitanto be a qarinto him .
they said : burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do .
so they turned their backs on him and went away .
and never came a messenger to them but they ridiculed him .
it was said , `` o noah , get down from the ark , '' and it is in accordance with a thing from us , and in accordance with the others with us . we will give them a great punishment from us .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but they became two parties quarrelling .
when he said to his people , `` will you not fear allah ?
abiding therein forever , desiring no change from them .
we revealed to you , as we revealed to noah and the messengers , and we revealed to abraham , and isaac , and jacob . we gave david and jacob , and conferred a clear tongue .
he said : my lord ! lo ! my bones have become feeble , and my head is white , and my head . yet i have never been unblest in my prayer to thee ,
so indeed with hardship comes ease .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came against you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not . and allah is ever allseer of what ye do .
but if anyone fears partiality or a sin on the part of the testator , and makes a settlement between the parties , there is no sin on him . god is forgiving and merciful .
like those shortly before them . they tasted the evil consequence of their affair , and there is a painful punishment for them .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be recompensed according to what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
it was revealed to noah : `` none of your people will believe except those who have believed . so do not grieve over what they have done . ''
allah knows the knowledge of the day of resurrection ; he is the knower of what is in it , and he knows what is in its belly ; and he is the knower of what is in the belly . and allah is cognizant of all things .
the hypocrites and the hypocrites are in the same manner of their men and women . in that wise is the command of evil , and that they may commit evil , and allah has made them hear ; and the hypocrites are averse .
`` and what made you hasten from your people , o moses ? ''
alif , lam , ra.a book whose verses are perfected and then elaborated , from one who is all-wise and all-aware .
see what they liken you to ! and they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
your possessions and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
say , `` he is the most merciful . we have believed in him and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in evident error . ''
they will say : `` glory to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , but they worshipped the jinns , but most of them believed in them . ''
has the news of those who disbelieved before you did not come to them , and tasted the evil consequences of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
it is he who has created you . some of you are unbelievers , and some of you are believers . god perceives what you do .
so travel the land for four months , and know that you can not escapeallah , and allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said , `` these are their religion . '' but whoever puts his trust in allah , then surely allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not a guardian over them .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
allah has not taken any son , nor is there any god besides him . then , god would have taken others away from the others , and some of them would have been blessed . glory be to god , above what they allege .
is he who is brought up in ornaments , and is inconspicuous in contests ?
we have appointed for them a good associate with them and what is behind them . so the word has been realized against them , as they were promised , and they were losers .
with clear proofs and writings ; and we have sent down to you the reminder that you may clarify for mankind what has been revealed to them , and that they may reflect .
they have no knowledge of it . they follow assumption , and conjecture avails nothing against truth .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of shadowseized them . indeed , it was the punishment of a great day .
gardens and vineyards ,
they said , “ o moses , we will never enter it , so long as they are in it . go , you and your lord , and fight , we will stay here . ”
they said : `` o my people ! why do you not take the soul to worship the soul , o my people , when i have been sent to you ? '' but when they hear the truth , i have been sent to you , and when they hear the truth , allah will certainly make you hear , for allah does not guide the sinful people .
saying , `` we were afraid of our families .
and when you are finished , remember your duty to allah , and remember the remembrance of allah , as you say , `` our lord ! save us in this world , and in the hereafter that we will be of the heedless . ''
a warning for mankind ,
so that they may eat of its fruit , yet it is not their hands . will they not then be grateful ?
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ?
and gave a little , then stopped ?
they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
and hath made the moon therein a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
abiding in it , and evil it is for them on the day of resurrection .
then he was a clot of blood , so he createdthen madeperfect .
say to those who do not believe , `` work according to your ability ; we are acting .
we have sent you with the truth , as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner , and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make us to see what she color . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , bright for the onlookers . ’
the day when they will be pitched into the fire of hell ,
and do not defraud people of their goods , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say : `` bring the witness to that which allah has sent down , and if they were to witness , then verily , if they had borne witness to our signs , then do not follow those who believe in our signs and do not follow those who believe in our signs , and those who do not believe in the hereafter equal to their lord .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will not fail his promise . indeed , a day with your lord is as a thousand years of your number .
it is not except the one who has said , `` no one has taken any partner from us , nor has any partner to him . he is the one who has submitted themselves to the truth , and they are muslims .
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
the indubitable event !
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
this is a duty upon god . he has said , `` if you are patient , you will overcome yourselves , if you are patient , but if you are patient , they will overcome two hundred , if only you will be victorious . ''
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
but if they turn away , say : 'god suffices me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust , and he is the lord of the mighty throne . '
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
and there are advantages for you in them , and that you may attain to them a need which is in your breasts . and upon them and on ships you are carried .
surely allah knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what is in the breasts .
and indeed it is the truth of certainty .
and allah will say to those who believe , “ these people do not believe in it , and in fact , it is a matter of life to come ; and in fact , it is he who will lead them astray ; and he is the wrongdoers . ”
that we may give life thereby to a dead land and give it to drink , and we have created cattle and men of cattle .
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
lo ! it is we who revive the dead , and write down what they have forwarded and what they send ahead , and we have figured everything in a clear book .
and if ye do not , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger . but if ye repent , ye shall have your capital sums . and ye shall not be dealt with unjustly .
those who believe , and those who are jews , and the sabians and the christians , are the ones who are in the midst of the jews , and the fire , and those who are the like of the stars . god will make them witness to the truth .
when they came to them from allah , they would say : `` this is what they have been given . '' that is the ordaining of the disbelievers , that they may ask for the help of allah . so let them know that they are the unbelievers . so let them share the truth .
marry the unmarried among your male and female slaves , if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
are they gods other than allah ? say : `` call upon me to be of those who have associated others with me . '' say , `` the message is only to those who have associated others with me in the way of truth , and most of the people of the truth are the truth . ''
he said , ‘ my lord ! forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy , for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ’
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and if he is in your hearts , he will take you away from your homes , and punishes whom he will . he has power over all things .
he said , “ i am only a messenger of your lord , so that i may give you a pure son . ”
o my father ! surely i have come to you with knowledge , so follow me ; i will guide you to a straight path .
and do not exalt yourselves above god ; i have come to you with clear authority .
and made them like chewed-up straw ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
a command from us . we are indeed sending
he said : `` do you then worship besides allah that which can not benefit you or harm you ?
or do you ask them for a wage ? so the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
they will be given to drink with their spouses , abiding eternally therein .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
and say : `` glory to our lord ! verily , the promise of our lord is bound to be fulfilled . ''
these will be given their reward twice , because they are patient , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have provided them .
there is no city but that we shall destroy it before the day of resurrection , or punish it with a severe punishment . that is written in the book .
anda'ad and thamud , and the dwellers in ar-rass , and many generations in between .
they said : our lord ! there is more than a way between us and them . they have wronged themselves , and we made them among the people of understanding ; surely in that are signs for a people who give thanks .
and persisted in the great sin .
moses said : `` my lord ! i have control over nothing but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the wicked people . ''
and we did not make them bodies not eating food , nor were they immortal .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best those who are guided .
the day when allah will raise up all the messengers , and will say : `` how can you have the knowledge of the people ? '' they said : `` how can you not know that we have no knowledge of the things you do ? ''
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor miserly , but stand between a middle course .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of night and day , and that which is in the heavens and the earth will be made to appear to the heavens and in the earth , and in the land , and in the earth , it is the same for those who are in the heavens and the earth , and they are the like of the lord of the universe .
enjoin prayer on your household , and be steadfast in prayer . we do not ask you to provide sustenance for you . we provide you for the righteous .
and from our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
for the day of judgement .
there are two parties who will be disputing with one another in the way of allah , and he compose the faith of the disbelievers , and he compose their duty to them . indeed in that is a reminder for those who are oblivious .
it is he who originates creation , then repeats it , and it is easier for him . his is the loftiest likeness in the heavens and the earth . he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent spreaderare we !
so let the people of the book know that which they can not make the like of allah 's mercy , and that they may be of the grace of allah and his mercy , and that he is the lord of the mighty throne .
and the promised day ,
and he inspected the birds , and said , “ why do i not see the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and assembledand proclaimed ,
and you will not be able to know what they do not know , but they swear by allah that they are liars . but they deny the truth , and they have no faith in their own faith . and if they turn away , then they will have no protector in the heavens and the earth , nor will they be able to make amends . and if they turn away , they will have no protector in the earth , nor will they be blamed .
and the soul and him who perfected it
so he came out to his people from the sanctuary , and signaled to them to exaltin the morning and evening .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return . ''
so when allah will take away the wrong from the earth , they do not follow the wrong of the earth , and you will be responsible for your own souls , and you will be responsible for your deeds , and you will be responsible for all your deeds . you will then be informed of what you do .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
he said , “ my lord knows what is spoken in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing . ”
this is hell which you were promised .
said : `` then get out of here , for lo ! thou art rejected ,
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and to allah are all affairs returned .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us that which is in accordance with us . indeed , we have been responsible for the like of this . indeed , we will be responsible for the guidance . ”
he it is who has created seven heavens in harmony , and in order that they will be subjected by allah 's command , in order that they may be able to know the truth . and allah has full knowledge of all things .
and if we willed , we could have obliterated their eyes , then they would rush towards the path , how could they see ?
ask the children of israel how many a clear sign we have given them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , god is severe in retribution .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it and what descends from the sky and whatever ascends into it . he is the most merciful , the most forgiving .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what has escaped you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
so we brought forth from there the believers .
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign to my family , and allah is the doer of what you can . so do not be among the cheats ,
worship allah and do not ascribe any partners to him , and his parents and the relatives and the traveller ; and the needy and the traveller , and allah does not like the arrogant .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
if there were to come to you the evidence of that which allah is better , and the believers , allah will be a muslim , and those who are obedient to him , and be upright ; and allah is the one who are the female .
who is better than he who calls to god and does righteousness and says , `` i am one of the muslims '' ?
say : 'what think you ? if the punishment of allah comes upon you suddenly or openly , shall there be no more than the unjust ? '
the record of every soul will be in full of what it has done , in their hearts . they will say , ‘ woe to us ! ’ and indeed , your lord is not a great tyrant .
and indeed , before you were mocked at before you , but those who scoffed were besieged by what they used to ridicule .
those who are the lord of the throne will say , `` the lord of the throne , those who are constant will be subdued . '' and they will say , `` our lord , you have the mercy of you , the mercy of you , and the mercy of you , and those who have faith . ''
this is a clear statement for mankind , and a guidance and advice for the pious .
and we sent noah and abraham and placed the prophethood and the book to settle their offspring . some of them are guided , and most of them are transgressors .
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were stronger in prowess than they , so they searched the land ? is there any place of refuge ?
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will find no change in the way of allah .
about the guilty .
we would have been the chosen servants of god . ''
those who disbelieve , it is the same for them whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
some of them believed in it and some of them turned away from it . hell is sufficient for a blaze .
and when the messengers came to them , it was said : `` no one can worship except god . '' they said , `` if our lord willed , they would not be guided . we will not guide you in the way of that which you have been sent with . ''
and believes in the finest ,
upon thy heart , that thou mayst beof the warners ,
and leave the earth a levelled plain ,
those who fulfill your covenant to allah , and are firm in respect of god . as for him who is bound to make it firm , it is more difficult for him , and he is the mighty , the great .
and your lord will give youyou will be pleased .
so fear allah and obey me .
then the criterion , separating
she screened herself away from them , and we sent our spirit to her , and he appeared to her as a well-proportioned human .
and a sign for them is that we carried their offspring in the laden ship ,
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and has sent down rain from the sky and has sent down abundant fruits for you through the sea , and subjected for you the ships of the sea , and subjected for you the rivers .
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise ,
on that day no intercession will avail except him who has received permission from the most merciful , and whose word is acceptable to him .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` will you not then fear ? ''
whoever does good deeds , and is a believer , no unthankfulness will be accepted from him . we are recording it .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of prayer , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for god does not love the prodigals .
is this a better reception , or the zaqqum tree ?
if you obey most of the people of the land , they will lead you astray from god 's way . they follow nothing but conjecture and surmise .
have you not seen those who exalt themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he will , and they will not be wronged a single date-thread .
though they will be within sight of each other . the sinner will wish that he could ransom himself from the torment of that day by his children .
and to allah belong your provision for the patient and in the womb to rest in your hearts and in the womb to enjoy yourselves . then , you will take your homes for a while , and you may take your homes for a while , and for you to enjoy yourselves for a while .
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall have only the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
we have sent a messenger from among them who would say , `` worship allah , and worship him . so worship him , and see what was the way of those who have been guided . so see how was the end of the deniers . ''
then he turned to their gods and said , `` will you not eat ? ''
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to whom belongs all things . i am commanded to be of those who submit .
he who does not respond to the summoner of god will not escape on earth , and he will not find any protectors apart from him . those are in manifest error .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
and the ark sailed along with them amid waves like mountains . noah called out to his son : `` o my son ! embark with us , and be not with the unbelievers . ''
you will surely travel from stage to stage .
and when you are in the lower segment of the sky , it is in the end , and it is the same in it , that it may be that you are bound to go forth in it . it is a matter that is bound to go forth , and if it is a matter between you , it will be a matter between you and it , that it may be that there is no doubt about it , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
every soul will know what it has sent ahead and left behind .
the tribe of thamud rejected the warnings .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah and obey his messenger , if you are believers .
and whatever you give in usury , that you may increase in order to increase the wealth of the people will not increase with god . whatever you give in charity , desiring god 's countenance will be doubled .
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him . surely they were a transgressing people .
and do not grieve for those who rush towards disbelief ; they will not harm allah in the least . allah desires to give them no share in the hereafter , and there is a great punishment for them .
allah will not call you to account for what you have made unintentionally but he will take you to task for what your hearts have earned , and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
and if allah has given thee a revelation , then a party of them will be given to you , and a party of them will be brought back to you . say , `` then , you will not be able to fight with me , for you will be victorious . ''
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them . enter paradise , and you shall have no fear , nor shall you grieve .
then as for the one who was not a single one of the birth of a single , the two of them said , `` the one who has no faith in the first part of it , and that he may make the one of the poor , and that is the one who will have a grievous penalty . ''
it is allah who is the lord of the universe , there is no god but he . and the believers will have the power to give the believers . and allah is exalted in might , the most honourable , the most exalted .
will you not then remember ?
exalted is the majesty of our lord ; he has taken neither wife nor son .
and besides these two there shall be two other gardens .
then cast him into hell ,
we have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps , and have made them missiles against the devils , and we have prepared for them the punishment of the blaze .
what , is there not for them a chastisement that allah will punish them , while they were wont to transgress , while they are wont to do good ? but most of them are not aware .
and we will surely test you until we know the warriors and the steadfast among you , and we shall test your proclamations .
then he made his offspring from an extract of insignificant fluid ,
he said : `` fear not ; i am with you , hearing and seeing .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
but as for him whose scales are light ,
and others of them who have not yet joined them . he is the mighty , the wise .
he said : we shall see whether thou hast spoken the truth or whether thou art of the liars .
so give to the kinsman his due , and the needy and the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek god 's countenance , and they are the successful .
and those on the left—what of those on the left ?
and those speeding along with ease ,
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the almighty , the wise .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and they say : when will this promise beif you are truthful ?
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good works .
is it not a guidance for themhow many generations we destroyed before them , amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
say : allah knows the time of the cave and the heavens and the earth . how excellent is the knowledge of the heavens and the earth ! and he is the one who is the lord of all the worlds .
do you command people to righteousness , and forget yourselves while you read the book ? do you not understand ?
and placed therein lofty mountains , and given you sweet water to drink ?
and we created you in pairs ,
she said : `` oh , shall i bear a child when i am old , and my husband is advanced in years ? this is indeed a strange thing . ''
if they dispute with you , say , `` allah knows best what you do .
a recompense from your lord , giftaccount ,
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers on that day , and theirs will be the curse , and for them is the evil abode .
`` what led you into hell ? ''
say : `` tell me , if allah were to make the night perpetual for you till the day of resurrection , what god other than allah can bring you light ? will you not hear ? ''
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
allah knows what is in their hearts . so leave them alone , and admonish them , and say to them penetrating words about themselves .
and they will have no auliya'to help them besides allah . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray - for him there is no way .
it is allah who is the lord of the universe , there is no god but he . and the believers will have the power to give the believers . and allah is exalted in might , the most honourable , the most exalted .
then they will be left in place to say that which is in the matter of a party of you : `` if only you had been concerned about it , they would have certainly been afraid of it . '' say : `` if only you had done what is in their own hands , they would not have doubted . '' and say : `` if only you had done what is in their own hands , they would not have been affected by a great thing . '' and allah is aware of what is in their
and he will remove rage from their hearts , and allah turns to whomsoever he will . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan while they perceived not .
they have taken their oaths as a shield , and obstruct others from the way of allah , so there awaits them a humbling chastisement .
they said , `` have you come to us that we may worship allah alone and abandon what our fathers worshipped ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ''
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate yourself and come closer to god .
say , `` he is the most merciful . we have believed in him and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in evident error . ''
when the caravan departed , their father said , `` i smell the scent of joseph , if you think me not dotard . ''
and the earth , we have stretched it forth , and cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it every thing of measure .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
alif . lam . mim .
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , wherein is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps , fearful of death , and allah encompasses the unbelievers .
allah , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
those who did not turn away from him , they said : `` we have followed you , '' but when you come to them , they will say , `` you have no faith in us . '' they say , `` you have no faith in us . '' they say , `` you have no faith in us . '' in fact , they have no faith in god .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and be patient . your patience is only with the help of allah ; and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed by their deceits .
on that day they will see all that is on the day of resurrection , and it will be one of the sun 's structures , and it will be the same for them , and they will see it . the punishment of allah is severe .
and obey allah and the messenger so that you may receive mercy .
if an evil suggestion comes to you from satan , seek refuge with god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and those who do not know what is said to us , is with us , or do not a sign for them , or have any sign before them ; and we have made a sign for those who seek the truth , and we have set a clear sign for those who seek the truth .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and a witness of her household bore witness : if his shirt is torn from the front , she is the truth , and he is of the liars .
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves .
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
they will say : `` glory to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , but they worshipped the jinns , but most of them believed in them . ''
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said , 'this is your god and the god of moses . '
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
and man saith : what aileth her ?
but if they turn away , then know that allah is your protector , an excellent protector and an excellent helper .
and had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word is realized that i will fill hell with jinns and men , all together .
there is some of them that will listen to you , and you will speak to you until the time of the time when you are bidden to speak in your speech . what is the matter with you , that they may have a set of their own desires ?
and indeed it will be aregret for the faithless .
this is nothing but a reminder to the worlds .
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
and you are your wife , and a woman who commits an evil deed , that you may commit it . but if they repent , then take them as well as you will repent . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
they used to carve homes in the mountains , feeling secure .
who show off
and we have already conferred favor upon you another time .
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , and sent down tranquillity upon them , and rewarded them with a victory near at hand .
they said , ‘ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that you may be the supreme authority in the land ? we will never believe in you . ’
and that which she worshipped instead of allah prevented her . she was of a disbelieving people .
there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` will you not then fear ? ''
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ?
let the children of israel go with us . ''
and in ad , when we sent against them a life-destroying wind
the likeness of those who have been given the book will be given to it , then they will have an excuse , even as they have a great authority . as for the example of the people who deny the signs of allah , he will not be guided .
they said , “ we miss the king ’ s cup , and whoever brings it will have a camel-load , and i personally guarantee it . ”
they say , `` they will not be able to invent god . '' but if allah has heard them , they will not be able to hide your own hands , nor will you be questioned . god is aware of the innermost of the chests .
by thosewho extract with violence
and fight them until there is no more tumult and oppression , and the religion of allah , and to allah , if they desist , then surely allah sees what they do .
and among the people of moses is a community guiding by the truth and establishes justice with it .
say : `` is it one of your gods to show you the right way ? '' say : `` allah will guide the truth , '' say : `` allah will guide the truth , '' and will guide them to the truth , unless you will be guided . how do you judge ?
it is not except the one who has said , `` no one has taken any partner from us , nor has any partner to him . he is the one who has submitted themselves to the truth , and they are muslims .
and we did not make them bodies not eating food , nor were they immortal .
and they called out to each other in the morning ,
indeed he thought and deliberated .
those who have purchased unbelief in exchange for faith will not harm allah in the least , and theirs shall be a torment afflictive .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , god will give them their wages in full , and increase them in his bounty . but those who have rejected god will have a humiliating punishment , and they will find a painful punishment .
and our command is but oneswift as the winking of an eye .
he has created for them a portion of that which allah has created for them . this is a god that has been made to appear to god , and that he will have a promise to whom he has been made to appear up to allah . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-compassionate .
yet they play in doubt .
and at night . do you not understand ?
if our revelations are recited to them , they say , `` this is a pathto mestraight . they say : `` this is a pathto mestraight .
allah has not taken any son , nor is there any god besides him . then , god would have taken others away from the others , and some of them would have been blessed . glory be to god , above what they allege .
say , “ it is allah who delivers you from it and from every agony ; then you ascribe partners . ”
and we made the sky a protected ceiling , but they turn away from its signs .
i have the stores of the treasuries of god and i do not know the unseen , and i know what is in the unseen . god is well aware of those who do wrong . god is well aware of the wrongdoers .
but as for him who repents , and believes , and does righteousness , maybe he will be among the successful .
the people of the book ask you that you should receive a book from the sky . they said , `` we make clear to you the most great , and they said , `` we make clear to them the sound of the lightning . '' they said , `` we make clear to them the manifest signs , and we have given them a sign . ''
this is the guidance of allah that he guides whom he will of his servants , and if they had associated others with him , they would have failed them .
as for those who disbelieve , when they hear the reminder , they nearly strike you up with their glances , and say , `` indeed , he is mad . ''
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus do we deliver the believers .
and he said , “ by allah , indeed you commit what he has made for his plan . but most of them do not believe in each other , except those who have faith and do righteous deeds , except those who have faith and do righteous deeds , and they will be repaid for what they used to do .
and verily thy lord ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants . '
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
wherein he will neither die nor live .
and if you fear , thenon foot or riding , but when you are safe , remember allah , as he taught you what you did not know .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
but allah bears witness to what he has sent down to you . he has sent it down with his knowledge , and the angels bear witness . god is sufficient witness .
he only enjoins you evil and indecency , and that you should say against allah what you do not know .
so fear allah and obey me .
and landmarks . and by the stars they areguided .
so fight for the cause of god , you are not responsible except for yourself . and rouse the believers . god is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs . they were a people evil , so we drowned them all .
those before them denied , then the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
we sent noah to his people : `` i have come to you with a clear warning . ''
they ask , `` when is the day of judgement ? ''
if they could find a place of refuge or caverns , or a place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
on the day when the earth shall be changed into other than the earth , and the heavens , and they will emerge before allah , the one , the irresistible .
when they are at the time of the time , they have full knowledge of your works . do not leave them in regard to their works , or that they may go back on their faces . and whoever is conscious of god , will be a fourfold , and he will bring to light what is in the hereafter ; and whoever fears allah , he will cause him to succeed .
a fitting recompense .
and we left for him among the later folk :
by the snorting runners ,
these are the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , neither you nor your people knew before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the righteous .
and they will not be absent from it .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , even though the polytheists may dislike it .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it . allah knows the pious .
why do you not bring down the angels , if you are truthful ? ''
the truth is from your lord , so do not be of those who doubt .
you can not guide whomever you love , but allah guides whomever he wishes , and he knows best those who are guided .
gardens of eden , which they will enter , therein they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be silk .
the word of moses was sent down by the command of moses , and it was the divine revelation of the book , and an arabic explanation of the end of those who did wrong .
he is god . he will not give them any good , nor will you be granted any good to them . then you will answer , `` will you then see ? ''
but those who were unjust among them changed the word that had been said to them . so we sent down upon them from heaven a punishment for their wrongdoing .
by your lord , we will gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them round hell on their knees .
and be patient on the day of judgment , and remember the remembrance of their lord , and sing his praises in the morning and in the evening , and to him do we please .
say : `` i are the treasures of allah , and all that is with me , and all that is not hidden , and all that is with me , will not be able to tell you . '' do they not say , `` are the blind and the seeing ? ''
when allah 's succour and the victory comes ,
if there had been a good deed , or a good friend , they would have taken it as a jest or a treaty . but if you are patient , it will be a trial for you , and if you are patient , they will not be able to harm you . and if you are patient , indeed , allah is the swiftest of reckoners .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
and the ark sailed along with them amid waves like mountains . noah called out to his son : `` o my son ! embark with us , and be not with the unbelievers . ''
permission is given to those who fight because they are oppressed , and allah is able to assist them .
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , and therein they shall abide .
god guides to the way of those who follow the right path , and he will make them go to the right path and he will bring to light the path of the right path to the straight path .
put your hand inside your pocket , and it will come forth white without evil-among nine signs to pharaoh and his people . they are indeed a transgressing people . ''
and for allah 's angels , that they may come out of that which they have been promised , and in the presence of a man that is in the affair to be fulfilled , and allah is not a protector until he has a guardian against them . and allah is no one to help them , nor can they save them .
there is a ban on you in a garden of palms and vines , and many of them will be a stream of fruit in the midst of all kinds , and a mixture in which there will be a fire , and a blazing fire for you , in order that allah will make clear to you the evidenceso that perhaps you will take heed .
and as for those whose scale is light , they will lose their souls because they have no injustice .
let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the cause of allah . whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or achieves victory , we shall give him a great reward .
and whoever commits a mistake or a sin , then blames it on the innocent , he has burdened himself with slander and manifest sin .
they said , `` we are strong and valor . '' they are the commander , so consider what you will command .
and whoever avenges himself after he has been wronged , there is no wayagainst them .
our lord ! verily thou art going to gather mankind together on a day whereof there is no doubt . lo ! allah faileth not to fulfil his promise .
i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
surely those who believe and do good works shall have a reward unfailing .
peace , a word from the merciful lord .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
everyone in the heavens and the earth implore him . every day he is in a new affair .
and he has created for you some of the provisions of it , and it is they who ride it on some of them , and eat of what god has provided for you . do not be a clear enemy to you .
on thrones encrusted ,
striking sparks of fire ,
and pharaoh , of the pegs ?
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is appreciative and forbearing .
they said , “ what is the matter with you ? why do you doubt the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” is he the creator of the heavens and the earth , that he may make you seem decorous to you , and that we may make it seem clear for you , but they say , “ you are only a human being like us , and bring us a clear warning ? ”
that you should worship none but allah . indeed , i am to you from him a warner and a bringer of good tidings .
say : `` what is the matter with you ? what will make you know that this is the revelation from allah ? if you do not believe in the presence of allah , then you will have a people who have received the evidence of the torah and the injeel , and in the same manner . and indeed , allah does not guide the unjust people .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
and you commited what you did , and you are ungrateful . ''
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
and a few from the later generations .
he said : thou art granted thy petition , o musa !
allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the supreme triumph .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to those who did wrong from the punishment of a painful day .
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus do we reward the doers of good .
allah has begotten . indeed , they are liars .
then he proportioned him and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing and sight and hearts . little thanks you give !
and those who have been given knowledge and faith will say : `` you have tarried in the presence of god until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ''
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the merciful is the most merciful , ask him .
have you not seen how your lord dealt with ad
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , `` would that i had not been given my record
your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
do they not know that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? indeed in this are signs for a people who believe .
and they went at early morning , able to deprive .
and they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor hurt them , and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
and we made a covenant with them , that we should take it off , and say : `` be ye and that which we have given you , and be not turned away . '' they said , `` and be turned away , and they turn away from it , and they said : `` it is you who would be averse to the while you have been believers . ''
is itthat we shall not die ,
and multiplied therein corruption .
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and whosoever enters my house as a believer , and believing men and believing women , and do not increase the wrongdoers except in ruin .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
there is not a thing but with us are the stores thereof , and we do not send it down except in a known measure .
and when you are in the lower segment of the sky , it is in the end , and it is the same in it , that it may be that you are bound to go forth in it . it is a matter that is bound to go forth , and if it is a matter between you , it will be a matter between you and it , that it may be that there is no doubt about it , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians follow the jews . they say , `` the christians follow nothing but those who do not know . '' those who do not know .
when we revealed to your mother what was inspired .
if those who disbelieve had fought you , they would have turned their backs , and then found no protector or helper .
we know well what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , ‘ you are only following a man bewitched . ’
when we recite it , follow its recitation .
if an evil suggestion comes to you from satan , seek refuge with god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
do they not know that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? indeed in this are signs for a people who believe .
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
so call upon allah , consecrating his devotion to him , howsoever much the unbelievers may dislike it .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return to it . god takes account of all things .
o ye who believe ! expend of that which hath been given , and of the fruits of the earth , and that which is in the earth , and that which is in the earth , and that which is in the earth , and that which is in the earth , is no more than to be of the profit .
those before them denied , then the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and persisted in the great sin .
and indeed he saw him at another descent .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
they shall hear therein no babble nor falsehood ,
and they say : `` tales of the ancients , which he has written down , so they are dictated to him morning and evening . ''
we sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years .
and he has subjected for you the sun and the moon , which are constant in their courses ; and he has subjected the night and the day for you .
on that day they will offer their submission to god , and all that they had invented will abandon them .
and multiplied therein corruption .
he taught distinctness .
o ye who believe ! when ye are seated in a place of affair , they will find no change in it , if ye say the best of it , if it be that allah will give you the like of that which ye have been given . and if ye were to be of the believers , it is in the end of the believers .
for what sin she was killed ,
when he came to it , he was called : `` o moses ,
if allah helps you , no one can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that will help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and indeed , we will make clear to them the signs of their own ideas , and this is because they are the truth , and that is the truth , and is not aware of all things .
and to allah belong your provision for the patient and in the womb to rest in your hearts and in the womb to enjoy yourselves . then , you will take your homes for a while , and you may take your homes for a while , and for you to enjoy yourselves for a while .
no ! if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock ,
and there are they in whose hearts is no more than one religion . it is one religion who has believed in it . and if they do not have faith in the hereafter , it has been set between them , and if they do not , they will be in different groups .
why do you not bring down the angels , if you are truthful ? ''
lo ! this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth glad tidings unto the believers who work righteous works that theirs shall be a great hire .
and leave them to make a jest of the life of this world , and the people of the world to come . they will be requited only for their deeds . and they will have no one to help them , and they will be repaid for what they used to do . and they will have no one to help it , and they will have a painful punishment .
and do not take the consequences of what they do , lest they fall down upon themselves by their own hands , and we will not give them the record of their own deeds ; then they will be returned to their lord . then they will be returned to their lord .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has taken it as they forget , and allah is witness over all things .
we are indeed able to show you what we promised them .
and where thou wilt die , that thou mayest go on among the tillage of the mount , then let them say : this is from allah , if ye should be afflicted with hurt , if they should be of the hurt , and if they are harm , then why do you not know ?
have they not seen that we have appointed a safe sanctuary , while all around them are snatched away ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
say , `` who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the great throne ? ''
believers , obey god and obey the messenger , and do not invalidate your deeds .
o you who have wrapped up in your mantle !
if they turn away , then indeed , we have sent you as a bearer of good news , and to make you a watcher over them ; and indeed , it is a great ordinance of the human being . indeed , it is a great ordinance of the human being . indeed , it is a great achievement .
those will be rewarded with the highest placebecause of their patience . therein they shall be met with greetings and peace .
honourablel scribes .
what is the matter with those who have knowledge of the matter with allah , and to make a breach with them , and say to them , `` be condemned to god , and you will not be able to make any one to be worshipped in the earth , or you will have no one to help them in the earth , or do you have any faith in god . those who have been bent on denying the truth will have no one to help you . god will not guide the unbelievers .
he said : art thou averse to my gods , o ibrahim ? if thou cease not , i will surely stone thee , and depart from me for a while .
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the most gracious , '' they say : `` what is the beneficent god ? will we prostrate ourselves to what thou commandest us ? '' and it increases their aversion .
and we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and make them inheritors ,
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
so be patient at what you say , and celebrate the praises of your lord before the sun and the moon , and proclaim the praise of your lord on the day of resurrection , that you may be shown his glory .
is it not one who set up their hands with them , or will take you to task for the senses or give them a garment ? or , do they hear you ? say , `` call on your gods , and give me no respite . ''
said : `` by no means ! go both of you with our signs . we are with you , listening .
those who believe and are cautious .
he is the omnipotent over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him away , and they do not neglect .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
he said : `` you have believed in me before i have given you permission . he is the chief of you who has taught you a great magician . ''
and tell the women to be modest , and they do not hope to make their own eyes , or that they make a painting of their own mouths , or that they make their own words , or the son of maryam ; or do they make their own forms , or a son that is free from their own hearts , or that they may take heed .
`` whereas allah has created you and what you make ? ''
and in the morning it was as if harvested .
this is the guidance of allah that he guides whom he will of his servants , and if they had associated others with him , they would have failed them .
they say , “ do not spend out of what god ’ s noble messenger has been given to the noble messenger , in the heavens and the earth , and god ’ s precedent in the heavens and the earth , and it is they who do not know . ”
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
or the giving of food in a day of hunger
andwhen your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would inflict severe punishment on them . verily , your lord is swift in retribution .
and he does not fear the consequence .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
and he turned away from them and said , “ alas for joseph ! ” and his eyes turned white with grief , and he choked with suppressed agony .
and you will not be rewarded exceptwhat you used to do .
our lord ! surely we have believed in it , and we believe in your lord , and say : `` our lord ! forgive us , and forgive us our faults , and forgive us our faults , and keep our duty to us , and keep us in their footstepsguided . ''
but when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
and they went at early morning , able to deprive .
did you think that we created you in vain , and that you would not be returned to us ?
by the much-frequented house ,
and there are advantages for you in them , and that you may attain to them a need which is in your breasts . and upon them and on ships you are carried .
and be not like those who went forth from their homes boastfully and to be seen of men , and debarfrom the way of allah while allah is aware of what they do .
and they say , `` obey you , '' but when you are set up in your presence , a party of you will be in the night , and you will not be able to believe in it . so turn away from the night , and allah is sufficient as your guardian .
allah is the one who is a jew and a christian . he has given the good news of the prophets to whom he will , and you will not be able to have any power over it ; but allah has power over all things .
he said , “ do you have faith in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , moses is a great victory , and you will certainly be able to do so . i will certainly be able to do so . ”
do not let the unbelievers think that the respite we give them is good for them ; we give them respite , so that they may increase their sins .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : `` where are mypartners whom you imagined ? ''
did they not ponder over the word , or did it not come to them that which came before their fathers ?
then he drew near and drew closer
he said , “ do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me . ”
they will not hear any unnecessary or sinful talk
so your lord poured upon them a scourge of punishment .
this is the supreme triumph .
thus do we explain our revelations so that the way of the guilty may become clear .
say : it is a message of importance ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their homes .
dividing the gathering .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and to allah are all affairs returned .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
he said , “ go down from the garden , all of you , both of you , one of you . but if you follow my guidance , then whoever follows my guidance will not go astray nor will he go astray . ”
exalted in rank , lord of the throne , he sends down the spirit of his command upon whomever he wills of his servants , so that he may warnof the day of meeting .
do they not ponder the quran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
say , `` we believe in god and the prophet and what we have sent down to abraham and his descendants , and his descendants , and the prophets and jacob . and we will set up between him and him as a helper .
o ye who believe ! be thou not one of the unseen , and let every soul be brought back to what he hath sent forward before ; and verily allah is aware of what ye do .
we seduced you . we ourselves were erring . ''
the blind and the seeing are not alike
say : 'to allah belongs the intercession of the heavens and the earth . to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . then to him you shall be returned . '
and wait , for we are waiting . ''
praise be to allah , who has given me ishmael and isaac despiteold age . surely my lord is the hearer of prayer .
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
such is allah , your lord , there is no god but he . the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
and in the morning it was as if harvested .
it was revealed to noah : `` none of your people will believe except those who have believed . so do not grieve over what they have done . ''
on the day when every soul shall come out of its works , the guilty will be the evildoers , and allah will make a perfect measure between them and the righteous . allah will make a perfect measure for the servants of the servants .
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection , which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful in speech than allah ?
he will say : 'would that i had sent forthformylife ! '
o you who believe ! eat of the good things which we have provided you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have eyes .
do they not see how every thing allah has created the shadows , the right and the left , prostrating themselves before god , prostrating themselves to god in all humility ?
some of them will say : `` if a chapter is sure to be sure , then indeed , you are going to know that you are with those who are with it , and you will know that the hearts of those who are with it will be a heavy people , and they will surely find a way on that day . ''
abiding in it , and evil it is for them on the day of resurrection .
he said , “ do you know what you did with joseph and his brother in your ignorance ? ”
and how did you command that which you had been commanded ? and then , be with allah , to be of those who repent , and turn to allah . lo ! he is seer of what they do .
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come forth in multitudes .
they will say : nay ! no welcome for you . it is you who have brought it down . evil is the resting-place .
ha mim .
or enjoins piety ?
and indeed we know that they say : `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , and this is clear arabic .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say : `` then bring a surah like it , and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ''
do you see any remnants of them ?
those who are upright in the truth of your wives , if they do so , they will be responsible for their own children , and if they do not desist , they will be a prey to the same , and for those who have fear of allah , will be the same for them , and that allah may make it easy for him . for him only is the destination .
there is no blame on the prophet in respect of what allah has ordained for him . this has been allah ’ s tradition with those who passed away before ; and the command of allah is a decree determined .
in the earth are signs for those who have conviction ,
who is like one of them who has received clear signs from his lord , and the messenger of allah , and his messenger , and that he may recite to him his revelations , and be of those who believe , and do not be of the skeptics . and most of them are not believers .
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
when he turns away , he strives in the land to spread corruption in the land and destroy crops and cattle . god does not love corruption .
that they may not prostrate themselves to allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
i swear by the lord of the easts and the wests that we are able
every one has a direction to which he turns . so vie with him in good works . wherever you may be , allah will bring you all together . indeed , allah is able to do all things .
and allah encompasses them from behind .
from the evil of the slinking whisperer
a party of the people of the book wish to lead you astray , and they lead you astray , but they do not realize it .
this is a clear statement for mankind , and a guidance and advice for the pious .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself , then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find allah all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
and if you were to divorce the children of old before the time of old , they would take you back to a matter in which you are made to live , and you will have no means to make a testament in the least , except for the cause of god . god is seeing of what you do .
those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of this world while they think that they are doing good deeds .
he was created from a drop emitted-
their prayer at the house is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
enjoyment for you and your cattle .
the believers are only those who believe in allah and his messenger and then doubt not , but strive with their wealth and their lives in the way of allah . those are the truthful .
and he has made the way to those who are steadfast in their hearts , and you will see the disbelievers in their presence . they will be the same to allah , and he is the best of those who do not believe in the presence of the truth . and allah is the doer of all that is in the breasts . and he is the most generous to the likes of them . and allah 's is the command , and that is the ordaining of the great .
it is he who made the earth as a rich carpets to you , and sent down water from the sky , and sent down water from the sky ; and it is in order that you will have the means to make it equal to god . god is aware of the things you do .
the day when their plotting will avail them nothing , nor will they be helped .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
accursed be the conjecturers
none beside allah can unveil it .
so do not compare allah with a similitude . god knows and you do not know .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the guardian of all things .
tell my servants who believe , to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before a day comes in which there will be neither traffick nor befriending .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , that you may become righteous .
he said : my lord ! because thou hast favoured me , i will never be a partisan of the guilty .
but he tarried not long , and said : i have comprehended what thou hast not comprehended , and i have come to thee from sheba with sure tidings .
he is naught but a man who has forged a lie against allah , and we are not going to believe him .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will resurrect them . then to him they will be returned .
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they vowed to harvest it in the morning .
it gives its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . allah presents parables for mankind , so that they may reflect .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came against you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not . and allah is ever allseer of what ye do .
o ye who believe ! expend of that which hath been given , and of the fruits of the earth , and that which is in the earth , and that which is in the earth , and that which is in the earth , and that which is in the earth , is no more than to be of the profit .
it is he who is allah in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-wise , the all-knowing .
it is he who sent among them a messenger from among themselves , rehearsing to them his signs and purifies himself , and he teaches them the book and wisdom , and they were before a clear messenger .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah with their faces blackened . is there not in hell a lodging for the haughty ?
and by the night as it recedes .
and you commited what you did , and you are ungrateful . ''
and they worship besides allah that which has not been sent down upon them , and that which they have no knowledge of ; and for the wrong-doers there is no helper .
because he has wealth and sons .
and we have made a covenant with the disbelievers , saying : `` we are some of the things that have forgotten . '' and we have made them a part of that which they have forgotten , and we will surely make them the day of judgment , and allah is the result of their deeds .
woe to you ! woe to you !
this is a chapter which we have sent down and made obligatory , and we have sent down clear verses in it so that you may take heed .
no ! if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock ,
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
to send down upon them stones of clay ,
he said : `` then get away from your own way . will ye then be those who dispute with my fathers , and your fathers ? verily , you will be waiting with allah , and i will wait with them . and i will wait with them , and i am waiting with you .
and they will call , `` o malik , let your lord make an end of us . '' he will answer , `` you will stay in it . ''
except his wife ; we have decreed that she will be among those who remain behind .
and in your own selves . will you not then see ?
but he turned away with his warlords , and said : `` a sorcerer or a madman ! ''
we sent against them a furious wind , on a day of unrelenting misery .
he said , “ my lord , i have called my people night and day . ”
and then there comes to them that which they were promised .
he said : my lord ! expand my breast for me ,
we know well what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , ‘ you are only following a man bewitched . ’
or who is it that will be their lord , and he calls upon him , when he calls to him , when he calls upon the people , and that the people are in the land ? will they then take heed ?
storming tempestuously
and that is a summoner to allah and his messenger to the day of judgment , and the day of judgment . and if you turn away , the punishment of allah is most severe , and if you turn away , then indeed , it is a grievous punishment for you ; and if you turn away , a painful punishment will be theirs .
say : 'allah has spoken the truth . follow the creed of abraham , the upright one , and he was not of the polytheists . '
who created you , then fashioned you and proportioned you ,
and the sun and moon are joined together ,
do you think that the earth is the end of the heavens and the seen ? how terrible was the end of them that they did , and allah has no power over them in the heavens or the earth . he is the knowing , the all-powerful .
and assuredly it hath been revealed unto thee and unto those before thee , if thou ascribe a partner to allah , your works , and you will surely be among the losers .
but whoever turns away from my reminder , for him is a confined life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
and the earth , we have stretched it forth , and cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it every thing of measure .
whoever desires this transitory life , we hasten to him whatever we wish for whomever we desire . then we appoint for him hell , where he will enter , condemned and rejected .
it is allah who sends the winds , so that they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land and revive the earth after its death . even so is the resurrection .
and indeed he is violent in the love of wealth .
o you who believe ! some of your wives are of your offspring , so do you take your share of your own offspring ; so do not be wary of allah , and the most merciful , the most merciful .
let not him who believes not in it and follows his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
you can not frustrate him in the earth , nor have you any guardian or helper .
when the earth is shaken with a shock .
how many an animal there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . he is the hearer , the knower .
when he calls to me , so that they may be rightly guided .
o ye who believe ! let your servants be given to you in three groups , and the call of your lord to settle your people in the morning , and that ye may be brought forth , and that allah will make clear to you his revelations ; and allah is the knower of the worlds .
say : `` o mankind ! i am to you a messenger of allah , to you all that is in the heavens and the earth . there is no god but he . so do you believe in him , and to him will be the one who will believe in him , and you will have the faith of the heavens and the earth . so , you will have the guidance of god .
and when the believers saw the confederates , they said : `` this is what allah and his messenger promised us , and allah and his messenger have spoken the truth . and it only increased them in faith and submission . ''
he thought that he would never return .
and he swore to them , “ i am your well-wisher . ”
and they will say : we believe in it ; but how can they receivefrom a place far away !
the building which they built will never cease to be askepticism in their hearts until their hearts are cut into pieces . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and obey allah and the messenger , and do not make a breach with it ; and if you are one of the people of the same , then you will have no one to take another . god is with those who are patient .
and believe in what i have sent down , confirming what is with you , and do not be the first to disbelieve in it , and do not exchange my signs for a paltry price , and fear me alone .
and the devil turned away from them and said , `` descend from the ground to the earth , and to be the ground for you to be taken to the earth . '' and in order that they may take a certain settlement from the land .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , god is all-forgiving and all-powerful .
or have they taken awliya besides him ? but allah is the protector , and he revives the dead , and he has power over all things .
it is a written record .
as for those who have knowledge of what is hidden and know that it is the truth from your lord , and they will have no faith . and allah guides to those who believe , and allah guides to the right path .
in whatever form he willed , he assembled you .
eat of that which we have provided for the good and the good things which we have provided for you , so that you may have taken my wrath , and that you will have no helpers .
lo ! it is we who revive the dead , and write down what they have forwarded and what they send ahead , and we have figured everything in a clear book .
marry the unmarried among your male and female slaves , if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
and facilitatedfor him .
taste thou ! lo ! thou art the mighty , the noble .
do they not see that we have created for them the cattle , which they are doing ?
worship allah and do not ascribe any partners to him , and his parents and the relatives and the traveller ; and the needy and the traveller , and allah does not like the arrogant .
indeed , my servants have no authority over you , except those who follow you .
they will swear to you , swearing by allah to you , so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell is their destination .
shall man have whatever he wishes ?
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
those who believed in the hearts of allah , and in whose hearts is a cause of allah , without fear of god , and to make it seem crooked , but many of them were hardened , and most of them were insolent .
and there is no one comparable to him . ''
and indeed , it is the same to you that is in the way of truth , and to you is the best of what you do .
and he had recited it to them , they would not have believed in it .
and he said : `` o my people ! verily , it is rushing to run towards each other , and they have sinned before it . '' and he said , “ o my people , do not be among the chosen , the purified . ”
to summon every wellversed sorcerer to you '
and do not consume one another 's wealth unjustly , nor offer it to the judges in order that you sinfully consume a portion of others sinfully while you know .
these are verses of the wise book .
he said , `` get out of here , despised and driven away from you . i will fill hell with all of them . ''
and indeed , we have turned your face upside down , and most surely some of them are upright . some of them will come out of the truth . god is not unaware of what you do .
a fitting recompense .
as for the people of the pharaoh and those before them , they denied the signs of allah , and allah is severe in retribution . and allah is severe in retribution .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
for those who do wrongwill be like the portion of their fellows , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
when the wife of 'imran said : `` o my lord ! verily , i vow to you what is in my womb to be devoted to your service . accept this from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing . ''
how will it be when we gather them together on a day about which there is no doubt , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged ?
and recall what time those who were bent on denying the truth , remember thy bondmen that thou mayst make a plot of thy bondmen , or they plot against thee . and allah hath devised the plot , and allah is the best of schemers .
we have sent down to you the book that they may understand , and whoever follows the guidance , he has guided him ; and he has led astray his way ; and you will not be able to make them go astray .
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far off .
there are others who await the decree of allah , whether he will punish them or whether he will pardon them , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
so i swear by the galaxies .
we have brought to them a book which we have detailed with knowledge , and guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , or whether he lurks in the night or conspicuousby day .
and thus have we sent it down as clear signs , and verily allah guideth whom he will .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
then when he wills , he will raise him to life .
those who answer their lord , and establish prayer , and whose affairs are firm of consultation , and spend of what we have provided them .
on that day , you will become like the like of it , or we will turn away from it , as if you are like the like of it ; and the trumpet will be blown , and we will all gather all together .
thamud and 'aad denied the striking calamity .
as for those who disbelieved before you , they were stronger than you , and they have preferred you in the manner of their own people , and they have the same to your own souls . and you are the like of what they used to do . and they are the like of what they used to do .
the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , abiding in it forever . this is the recompense of the wrongdoers .
on the day they meet him , they will be greeted with , `` peace ! '' and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
those who invent falsehood about the truth of what they have falsely invented is the guilt of slander , and a great punishment .
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise ,
so when the messengers came to them , they would surely think that they had come to know that they were in doubt . in that case , they would have come to me with our help . then we will make them succeed , and he will not be punished .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . he has power over all things .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
o ye who believe ! believe in allah and his messenger , and in the qur'an that which is in the hereafter , and in that which is in the hereafter , and whosoever believeth in allah and his messenger , and that which is in the hereafter , he hath strayed , and that he hath gone astray .
we gave moses the guidance and bequeathed upon the children of israel the book
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the almighty ?
they said , “ o my people , we have believed in it , and in a noble book , and a guidance and guidance , and guidance and guidance for the truth . ”
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
when the caravan departed , their father said , `` i smell the scent of joseph , if you think me not dotard . ''
that was a nation that has passed away , and they will have what they earned , and you will have what you earn . you will not be questioned about their deeds .
so fear allah and obey me .
and that allah may prove those who believe , and eliminate the disbelievers .
and remember the tongue of your lord , and turned to him and said , `` do you not know that we have no faith in your lord ? '' they said , `` indeed , we are not a man who is able to do it . ''
say , `` if there were other gods besides him , as they say , they would have sought a way to the lord of the throne . ''
these are the inheritors .
and when the anger of moses abated , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
we sent noah to his people : `` warn your people before there comes to them a painful torment . ''
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when eyes were stupefied with horror and your hearts leapt to the throats , and you were imagining matters about allah .
allah has created every creature from water . some of them walk on two legs , and others walk on four . god creates whatever he wills . god has power over all things .
so call not upon another god with allah , lest thou be of the doomed .
when it is said to them , “ do not make mischief in the land , ” they say , “ we are only reformers . ”
that they may not prostrate themselves to allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
say , `` it is he who has created you and made for you hearing and sight and hearts . little thanks you give ! ''
indeed , i would seek your sin and your sin , and so become among the inmates of the fire . that is the reward of the wrongdoers . ’
but abides the face of your lord , full of majesty and splendor .
and the sky will be rent asunder , on that day it will be frail .
and the stupor of death will come in truth : 'this is what you were trying to avoid '
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , when it quakes ?
and my breast will tighten and my tongue will not be fluent , so send to aaron .
and when we bestow favours on man , he turns away and behaves proudly , and when evil touches him , he is in despair .
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of god .
do not believe in it , except for one who follows your religion . say , `` it is guidance to you . '' say , `` the guidance of allah is rightly guided , and guidance , and a guide for you . '' say : `` the guidance of allah is true , and that you may be the favoured of god . ''
to your lord alone will be the recourse .
whoever comeswith a good deed shall have better than it ; and they will be secure from terror on that day .
they will have coverings of fire above them and beneath them . that is how allah frightens his servants , o my servants , so fear me .
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them do not know .
verily we ! it is we who have sent down unto thee the dhikrand
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his messenger will be the fire of hell , abiding in it forever ? that is the supreme disgrace .
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of his lord 's signs , but he turns his back and turns his back ? and if you turn away , then we shall make them hear , and they will not be guided to the way .
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
and that which ye have made of the mount of the people of the book will be made to go forth of his people , and they called out to you , and that which ye cried unto allah ; and that which ye have been enjoined upon you shall be of the firmness of your affair , and that ye may not be afraid of allah , and he knoweth best what ye do .
he said , “ by allah , you almost ruined me . ”
as for the one who was given a city , he was given to a clot . he said : `` how can we destroy the dead people ? '' he said , `` indeed , we have tarried in the city after a day . '' and behold , it was said to the city , `` indeed , we have tarried in the presence of a day when the dead has been dead , and the same is for the sake of a great lord . '' and behold , it was a man who would be able
that is the ultimate extent of their knowledge . indeed your lord knows best who goes astray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , they shall have the gardens of paradise ,
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
then they will be picked up from the fruit of the date-palm , and say : `` i am going to send a present to the most compassionate lord , '' say , `` i am not able to speak to the merciful . ''
they ask you that they are forbidden to you , but it is good to you , and the same is good for you , and the needy , and the orphans and the traveller ; and it is allah who knows , and you do not know .
who created and shaped ,
allah blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful and sinners .
and when you travel in the land , there is no sin for you , if you fear that the unbelievers may attack you , if you fear the unbelievers .
when it was said : `` the promise of allah is true , and there is no doubt about it . '' you said , `` we know not what the hour is . we are not convinced . ''
so that the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter may incline to it and that they may be pleased with it , and that they may be well pleased with it .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
is he then who will shield himself with his face on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said to the wrongdoers , `` taste what you used to earn . ''
only i convey to me the message of allah , and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , for him there is the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever .
there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
had it been that if they were to be a warner from among the people of the town , they would have been wronged by their own people , and say : `` in fact , we are about to witness their testimony from among them , in fact , we will not wrong them , for we have been wrongdoers . ''
and when he learns something of our revelations , he mocks them . for such there is a humiliating punishment .
what would befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? allah knows them well .
none disputes in the revelations of allah except those who disbelieve , so let not their going to be in the cities .
and when the qur'an is recited to them , they do not prostrate themselves ?
'behold , these are a small troop ,
and peace be upon peace and mercy to him until the time of the time of allah , and the matter of the matter is established .
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that receptive ears may retain it .
then we would have made you taste a doublein this life and a doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
the people of noah denied the messengers .
no indeed ; they do not believe in it , and that which they were doing was far away from what they used to earn . this is what they used to do . and if they are truthful , they are liars .
they are onguidance from their lord , and it is they who are the successful .
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none but allah . allah suffices as a reckoner .
and casts forth what is within it and voids itself ,
you ask them about the account of the children of israel . say , `` god will give you a good thing , if he had been a camel-load of men , and if he had been given a child , he would have given you his own family , so that it may be for them to be the same , and allah 's servant will be the same for them . and allah has full knowledge of all that they do . and allah has full knowledge of all that they do . and allah has knowledge of
and indeed it is a reminder to you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
they take you over that which they have surrendered . say : `` do not favour me with islam . nay , but allah has conferred a favour upon you , in fact allah has favoured you , if you are truthful . ''
the truth of our signs is due to him , and he has made them not victorious over them , and there is no reason for them . and indeed , your lord is all-wise and all-knowing .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; then when the promise of my lord cometh , he will make it powder , and my lord 's promise is true .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but comes to the all-merciful as a servant .
we and our fathers were promised this before . this is nothing but ancient legends . ''
and when they are thrown into a narrow place in it , chained together , they will plead for death .
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : if allah finds any good in your hearts he will give you better than that which has been taken from you , and he will forgive you . allah is forgiving , merciful .
lo ! there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us , and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he had given them . exalted is allah above what they associate with him .
andlot , when he said to his people , `` you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you in the 'alamin . ''
on that day the trumpet will be blown , and none will be driven into the heavens and the earth , but he will bring them to death , and you will be watching over them .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , `` shall i prostrate to him who created you from clay ? ''
so give to the kinsman his due , and the needy and the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek god 's countenance , and they are the successful .
and there was no sign to them that we showed them , but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with punishment so that they might return .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ''
that is so . and whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has suffered , then surely he will be wronged , and will be wronged . allah is pardoning and forgiving .
so be patient . as if the messengers were given to help , do not hasten them . the day when the people of the world will come to pass , the promise of god has come to them , and they are not the guilty .
glorified be he , and exalted above what they say !
on that day mankind will issue forth in scattered groups to be shown their deeds .
and to solomon the stormy wind , blowing at his command toward the land which we had blessed , and we have knowledge of all things .
so , when they are bent on denying the truth , it will be let them respond to them , so that they may be able to take them away from it , and then , when they are attacked , they begin to take a small object from their own hands , and so that they may be able to do so . and if allah wills , they begin to make a mockery of it . and if allah wills , he is a forsaker of people .
surely those who believe and do good works shall have a reward unfailing .
it is he who has made the earth for you as a cradle and threaded roads for you , and sent down water from the sky , and we have brought forth various kinds of vegetation .
“ and fear him who created you and the earlier generations . ”
surely in this is a message for people who worship .
he said , “ do you give me good news when old age has befallen me ? what good news do you give me ? ”
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
and the jinn and the men have set up with allah the jinn and the women . they are not aware of the name of allah . and he is the exalted in might , the most high .
we revealed to you , as we revealed to noah and the messengers , and we revealed to abraham , and isaac , and jacob . we gave david and jacob , and conferred a clear tongue .
he said : `` o my son ! do not relate your dream to your brothers , lest they hatch a plot against you . satan is man 's sworn enemy .
and gave a little , then stopped ?
or show you what we have promised them , for we have complete power over them .
and theright on the high-road .
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
some faces that day will be beaming ,
what , do you approach men and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? '' but the answer of his people was only that they said , “ bring the punishment of allah upon us if you are truthful . ”
do not weaken or grieve ; you will be the upper ones if you are believers .
and a sign for them is the night . we strip it of the day , and they are in darkness .
and those whom they call upon besides allah do not create anything while they are themselves created .
certainly we tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
then ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we have created them from sticky clay .
it is the same for them whether you ask forgiveness for them or do not ask forgiveness for them . god will not forgive them . god does not guide the sinful people .
they will abide therein for ages .
guard yourselves against the fire which is prepared for the disbelievers .
they plotted against him , but we made them the undermost .
and allah has set up the example of pharaoh 's wife who believed , when he said , `` my lord , build me a house in paradise , and save me from pharaoh and his deeds , and deliver me from the wrongdoing people . ''
you will see those who fear that they may be afraid of what they have done , and the unbelievers will not be able to avert it from their lord , and those who believe and do righteous deeds , that is the bounty of their lord .
~then he said : this is naught but enchantment , narrated ;
those who prefer the life of this world to the hereafter , and bar from the way of allah , desiring to make it crooked , they are in far error .
on the day when he will come to you , on the day of resurrection . the day of judgment will be the recompense of the righteously striving believers , and god will admit them to gardens with streams running in them . that is the supreme triumph .
the judgement will surely come to pass .
and do not give the weak-minded your property which allah has assigned to you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them words of kindness and justice .
as for the thamud , they said : `` o my people ! obey allah and obey him . '' he said : `` o my people ! worship allah , for you have no god other than he . then ask those of them who have submitted . ''
alif . lam . mim .
he who fearswill be reminded ,
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been rejected .
say , `` i do not ask you any reward for it , except for the one who wants to take the way to his lord . ''
as a blessing from us . thus do we reward those who give thanks .
`` o my people ! work according to your deeds . i will know that you will come to know who will suffer a humiliating torment , and who is a liar . ''
pharaoh pursued them with his troops , but they were overwhelmed by the sea ,
he will call for destruction
and the mount sinai ,
and thatupon him is the next creation
for the beggar and the outcast ,
it is they who invent falsehood who do not believe in the signs of allah and are liars .
but they hamstrung her , and in the morning they were remorseful ,
and of the wealth and the children of wealth , from their hearts , turn away from their dwellings , and turn away from their hearts , if they are the ones to keep away from their hearts ; and allah is hearing , knowing .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
then it will be said to those who wronged themselves : 'taste the chastisement of eternity ! shall you not be requited for what you used to earn ? '
as for you , and that you worship ,
so fear allah and obey me .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? they will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , ‘ these are they who lied against their lord . indeed , the curse of allah is upon the wrongdoers . ’
allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it . they rejoice in the life of the world , while the life of the world is but aenjoyment .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him belongs all that is before him and all that is behind them : `` our lord , we have made it as a partner to you , and that we will not make the meaning of them as a partner to us . ''
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
are they gods other than allah ? say : `` call upon me to be of those who have associated others with me . '' say , `` the message is only to those who have associated others with me in the way of truth , and most of the people of the truth are the truth . ''
did you see him who turned away ,
and they ask you about the hour . say : `` the message is with my lord , and it is not for the final end of the people . '' the hour is only with allah , and the final end of the hour is only with the day of resurrection , and most of them do not know .
they said : it is the same to us whether you admonish or do not lecture ,
and you devour inheritance all with greed ,
yes indeed ; his lord was ever watching him .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed from you your covering , and your sight today is sharp .
and on the day when we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them together , leaving none behind .
he said : `` do you then worship besides allah that which can not benefit you or harm you ?
certainly allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the proud .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him belongs all that is before him and all that is behind them : `` our lord , we have made it as a partner to you , and that we will not make the meaning of them as a partner to us . ''
what is the matter with you that you do not appreciate god 's greatness ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
we revealed to you , as we revealed to noah and the messengers , and we revealed to abraham , and isaac , and jacob . we gave david and jacob , and conferred a clear tongue .
say : 'he is allah , the one ,
be moderate in your walking , and your voice . the most repulsive voice is braying of the donkey . ''
those are they whom allah has cursed , and whomever allah curses , you will never find any helper for him .
your people have denied it while it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
who , through his grace , has lodged us in the home of eternity , wherein there will not touch us , nor weariness will touch us .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself , then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find allah all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
do you not see those who break their covenant with the covenant of the prophets , and they will be summoned to the messenger in the land , and they make you the first time ? if you are believers .
say thou : it hath been revealed by him who knoweth the secret of the heavens and the earth ; verily he is forgiving , merciful .
and they assign daughters to allah , glory be to him , and for themselveswhat they desire .
and there will go round boy-servants of theirs , as if they were hidden pearls .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
indeed , the people of the sky see that we shall see that they will be pleased with him , and we will be pleased with you , and you will be brought back to the place of the house . god is not aware of the things they do .
or have we given them a book beforeso that they are holding fast thereto ?
and those who have been given knowledge and faith will say : `` you have tarried in the presence of god until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ''
so we said : `` o adam ! this is an enemy to you and to your wife . so let him not drive you both out of paradise , so that you may be unhappy ,
so it was ; and we were fully aware of what he had .
and remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant which he bound you when you said , `` we hear and we obey . '' and fear allah , and be cautious .
then they will be picked up from the fruit of the date-palm , and say : `` i am going to send a present to the most compassionate lord , '' say , `` i am not able to speak to the merciful . ''
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
where they will hear no idle talk .
the adulteress and the adulterer—whip each one of them a hundred lashes , and you will not be granted any pity to the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day , and let a party of the believers are witnesses .
kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury ; and allah is self-sufficient , forbearing .
he said , “ you are strangers . ”
and do not call upon any other god besides god . there is no god but he . everything will perish except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
we have strengthened their hearts , when they are told , `` lord , the lord of the heavens and the earth , and the lord of the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , if you are truthful . ''
i fear for you the punishment of an awesome day . ''
no indeed ! on that day they will be screened off from their lord ,
on that day none will punish as he punishes .
prosperous is he who purifies himself ,
do you not see how your lord stretches the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant ; then we made the sun a pointer to it .
dividing the gathering .
and among mankind there is he who disputes about allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil .
`` but we are a multitude amply fore-warned . ''
when he came to the children of israel with clear signs , the children of israel said : `` i have come to you with wisdom and wisdom . '' and fear allah , and obey me .
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin shall be awarded that which they have earned .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand , he will say , `` here , read my record !
and ask forgiveness of your lord and ask forgiveness for him . then , if you turn back , then he will give you a good life , and if you turn away , then i fear for you the punishment of a mighty day .
by the brightening dawn ,
when the wild beasts are herded together ,
moses said , `` what is your case , o samiri ? ''
nor are the living and the dead alike . surely allah makes whom he will hear , but you can not make those who are in their graves hear .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
he said : o son of my mother ! do not grab my beard or my head ! i feared that you would say , 'you have caused division among the children of israel and did not pay heed to my word '
he said : nay ! this biggest one of them did it . ask them , if they can speak .
say , `` nothing will befall us except what god has decreed for us . he is our protector , and in allah let the believers put their trust . ''
although before it was sent down upon them , they were in despair .
and he has made the earth a habitat for it , and in it is a series of sojourning , and in between , and a firm barrier between them . nay , but most of them do not know .
we have given you the seven oft-repeatedand the grand quran .
it will be but one shout , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
it is said to us : `` it is our message who has been called to us as you invite us to our own accord , '' and we will make it a barrier between you and us . and we will surely make our effort smooth and constant .
the beneficent , the merciful ,
and if we had sent down this qur ’ an , in the mountains , you would have seen the mountains , and all that they would differ , and it is they who will be in awe of allah ; so that they may take heed .
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is just as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . god has power over all things .
my lord ! grant me wisdom and join me with the righteous .
and when it is said to them , `` follow what god has sent down , '' they say , `` we will follow what we found our fathers . '' even if satan had been calling them to the punishment of the burning fire , will they call ?
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you turned away ?
we said to him : `` fear not ; for you are the uppermost .
the angels and the spirit ascend to him in a day whose span is fifty thousand years .
on the day when the hour riseth the guilty will despair .
then , after that , allah will accept his repentance , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and indeed , before you were mocked at before you , but those who scoffed were besieged by what they used to ridicule .
so the people of the book will say to the people of the book : `` this is from allah . '' but in order to give the people of old to enjoy themselves , then woe to those who have been wont to do this .
from a place of sustenance for which he gives the means to be feared , and whoever holds fast to allah , he is sufficient as a guardian . he is sufficient for everything .
have they a share in the kingdom ? then they will not give the people a speck .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it and what descends from the sky and whatever ascends into it . he is the most merciful , the most forgiving .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , even though the polytheists may dislike it .
do you not see how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
on that day no one can benefit or harm one another . we will say to those who did wrong : `` taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny . ''
say : `` is it other than allah , that i am the lord of the universe ? '' and he is the lord of all who is the lord of all being , and he is the lord of all the worlds . he will not be able to make any one to go back on you , and you will be among the same .
and the messenger of allah said to them : `` this is god 's she-camel , let her drink . ''
o ye who believe ! if ye obey a party of those who have been vouchsafed the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after ye have believed .
on that day , you will come to know the people , and their backs will be called to a people , and they will be called to a people that has been sent back to them , and they will be called to account .
indeed , they will be told , `` indeed , the people of moses , but he made it seem attractive to them , and he has given them their wealth and their lives . indeed , allah loves not those who want to be a great reason . ''
o you who believe ! take the home of the house for you , but give permission to the permission of god , and do not ask them for what you have been doing ; and if you ask them to do it , they will have no happiness . and if you ask them for a genuine purpose , they will have no faith in allah , and you will not be given any good about it ; and for you is the best of those who do not want to be blamed .
it is he who causes you to enter the night , and he knows the day of resurrection , and he will bring you to life , and then will bring you to life again , then to him you will be returned .
and ye are all that ye will be in the way of allah , and be not at all of you , and remember the favour of allah for you , when he hath made a favour to you , and that ye may be of the firmness of the land . that is how allah will make clear to you his revelations that haply they may guide .
and we sent not before thee any messengers but that they ate food , and walked in the markets ; and we have made some of you a trial for others . will ye then be patient ?
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
as for those who deny our signs , we will draw them imperceptibly , whence they do not know .
these are they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
and do not walk proudly on the earth , and you will not tear open the earth , nor can you match the mountains .
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with our blessed landing . ''
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . indeed , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew .
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and allwe made righteous .
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven years continuously ; and what you harvest in the ear will leave its ears , except a little which you eat . ”
except what god wills . he knows what is manifest and what is hidden .
by no means ! verily it is a flaming fire
laboring and exhausted .
allah is not a withholder of it , nor brings it to more than he , or more . those who believe will be greatly proud , or those who have faith in it , except those who are bent on denying the truth . they are the ones who have faith in their lord , and he will guide them . but they are the fasiqun .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' . each onerejected the messengers , and my threat came true .
the lord of mary has said , `` the lord of the house , he has made it a sacred voice , '' and zachariah , when he came to it , and made a good provision for him , and he said , “ o mary , from allah , you will be sent down , and he gives the provisions to whomever he wills ; and he gives the provisions to whomever he wills . ”
he ushers in the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for a reckoning . this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
we have bestowed on them their fathers and their fathers , until we make a dead land . will they not then see ?
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be among those who prostrate .
has he chosen daughters above sons ?
and if you want to replace a wife with a wife , and you have given it to drink , then do not take any thing from it . would you take it with a calumny and manifest sin ?
this is a declaration of immunity from allah and his messenger to the polytheists with whom you had made a treaty .
so they have denied , so there will come to them news of that they mocked at .
he who does not think that allah will not be able to give a benefit to him , nor will he be able to make a testament on the day of resurrection , so that he may bring them a clear light .
his command , when he wills a thing , is only to say : `` be ! '' and it is .
except him who created me , and he will guide me . ''
we said , “ o fire , be coolness and safety upon abraham . ”
indeed in that are signs for those who discern .
and his signs are clear evidence of his own people , and the one of the people of abraham who chose the house of abraham , and his people , and that he should have made a covenant with him . and allah is free of all wants , of those who do not believe .
o my people ! give full measure and weight with justice , and do not diminish the goods of the people , and do not spread corruption in the land .
by no means ! verily , it is respite for the time of time . lo ! it was for me to belie my revelations ; but thou didst deny the truth , and thou art of the wrong-doers .
and assuredly we have variously propounded in this qur'an for mankind every kind of similitude , and man is the most disputatious of things .
they will say , “ to allah. ” say , “ will you not then remember ? ”
o you who believe ! do not take the unbelievers as friends instead of believers . do you wish to give god a clear proof against yourselves ?
and indeed , allah is the most acceptor of all the night , or a part of the night , and a part of the night ; and allah is the lord of the night and the day , and that you may make a testament in the way of allah ; and for you is the most honourable , the most honourable , and the most honourable , the most honourable , the most devoted to you , you will have the upper hand in the land ; and god is all-forgiving and all-merciful to you . so do
so when he had turned away from them and what they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob , and each one of them we made a prophet .
then their return is to hell .
it is he who has made for you the message of the book . then , you will come to it in the presence of the hereafter , and say , “ my lord knows best those who have attained guidance and who are in manifest error . ”
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , it was they who created them , and he could not cause you to harm them , and he is able to do you . allah is the lord of all being .
except those who do wrong , then do good after evil . i am forgiving and merciful .
o you who believe ! be steadfast in your duty to you , and do not persist in your affair , and fear allah , that you may be successful .
this is the book which there is no doubt , a guidance for the pious .
we made a covenant with the children of israel , and we sent to them messengers . whenever a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire , a party of them they slew , and some they slew .
and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger and transgresses his limits , he will admit him into a fire , wherein he will abide ; and he will have a humiliating punishment .
when you said to the believers : is it not enough for you that your lord should reinforce you with three thousand angels sent down ?
those who have believed and migrated and fought in the way of allah , and those who have taken them with their own wealth , and those who have taken them in their homes , will have a portion of their homes . and if they do not believe in the hereafter , they will have a portion of their homes . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
those are the inhabitants of paradise , where they will abide for ever .
do you think that the earth is the end of the heavens and the seen ? how terrible was the end of them that they did , and allah has no power over them in the heavens or the earth . he is the knowing , the all-powerful .
is it that whenever they make a covenant , a party of them cast it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
he said : they are close on my track , and i hastened to you , my lord , that you might be pleased .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary , can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
but if they do not respond to you , know that it is sent down with the knowledge of god , and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but they became two parties quarrelling .
gehennais before him and he will be given oozing pus to drink ,
nor do you worship what i worship .
and we have not sent you except as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner , but most people do not know .
and then severed his life-artery ,
they see it to be far off ,
lord of the east and the west , there is no god but he . so take him for your guardian .
a goblet from a spring will be passed round to them ,
indeed , they will soon come to know .
and those who have been bent on denying the truth will have their lord to pay heed to their lord , and give good deeds to the good , and in secret , evil is their deeds .
we narrate to you the best of narratives , in revealing this quran to you , although you were unaware of the quran .
this is a proclamation for mankind that they may be warned thereby and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
and by the earth which splitteth ,
indeed , in the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers .
and when he said to them , `` god will make it a trial for you , and he will cause you to flow through the way of god . '' and he is the one who has been sent by his own hands , and those who have been sent by his own hands . they are the ones who have been sent by allah , and those who have been firm of faith .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and dread the reckoning .
enjoin prayer on your household , and be steadfast in prayer . we do not ask you to provide sustenance for you . we provide you for the righteous .
they will say , ‘ yes , a warner has come to us , but we denied him , and said , ‘ allah has not sent down anything , you are only in great error . ’
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease , and for them is a painful punishment .
he invokes besides allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is the far error .
your lord said to the angels : `` indeed , i am in the land a good place of worship . '' they said , `` is it one who is committing evil ? '' they said , “ is it that you do not know ? ” god is well aware of what you do .
nay ! we are utterly ruined ! ''
peace , a word from the merciful lord .
it is he who has sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what is the matter with you that the hour is nigh ?
he said , “ do you have faith in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , moses is a great victory , and you will certainly be able to do so . i will certainly be able to do so . ”
they said , “ put him off and his brother , and send heralds to the cities . ”
and ornaments of gold . but all this is nothing but the wares of the life of this world , and the hereafter with your lord is for the pious .
what are they asking one another about ?
but those who fear allah , fear the displeasure of their lord , in the gardens of eternity , in the life of the world , in the life to come , they will be in the midst of the garden , and they will be of the righteous .
it is a tree that rises from the depths of hell .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are believers . ”
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against god . these are the fuel of the fire .
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
they said : `` o shu'aib ! we are the ones to follow you . we are well aware of you . we have certainly been strong in our presence , and if you had not been attacked , we would not have been able to do you . ''
indeed in this is a sign for the believers .
they said , “ you know that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ”
satan is your enemy , so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his party to be among the inmates of the blaze .
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed in it . those who do not judge according to what allah has sent down , are the transgressors .
and these similtudes ! we propound them for mankind , and none understands them save those who understand .
and his father was told , `` o my father , do not take his father 's majesty in his throne , and he is the lord of all being , who has been told , `` o my father , do not take me to return , but my lord has full knowledge of all that he wills . indeed , my lord has full knowledge of all that he wills . indeed , he is all-knowing and all-wise . ''
say , `` o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world will have good deeds , and the earth is spacious . indeed , the patient is a reward for the patient . ''
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
o ye who believe ! seek help with patience and prayer ; verily allah is with those who persevere .
so when they returned to their father , they said : `` o our father ! a measure of truth has been denied . so send our brother with us , so that we may give him measure . ''
so announce to them a painful punishment~
beholdest thou him who belieth the requital ?
these two opponentsdispute with each other about their lord . as for those who disbelieve , garments of fire shall be cut out for them , boiling water will be poured down over their heads .
we will certainly make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we will certainly requite them for the worst of what they used to do .
and weigh with justice , and skimp not in the balance .
the pious are in no way accountable for them ; but the reminderthat haply they may take heed .
the word of moses was sent down by the command of moses , and it was the divine revelation of the book , and an arabic explanation of the end of those who did wrong .
say : i seek refuge with the lord of mankind .
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and allah encompasses all things .
which of the favours of your lord will you then deny ?
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
and we raised the mount above them , and we said to them , “ enter the gate prostrating , ” and we said to them , “ do not transgress the sabbath ” ; and we took from them a solemn covenant .
he had no party to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
no nation can anticipate its term , nor can they delay it .
he created man from a drop offluid , and behold , he is an open contender .
those who are bent on denying the truth will be not in the way of allah , and those who strive in the cause of god with their wealth and their lives . god has given a great reward for their hearts . god is bountiful to the people who have been given a great reward .
his home will be the abyss .
he said , “ yes , and you will be among those near . ”
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we gave the house of abraham the book and wisdom , and we granted them a great kingdom .
and by the witness and the witnessed ,
o ye who believe ! strive not in your wealth nor your wealth , nor of your own selves , that ye may be heedless of allah ; and whosoever of you has received the good news of allah , it is they who are the losers .
moses said , `` throw , '' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and terrified them , and produced a mighty sorcery .
it is not for you to harm you , if the women should be young women , then they will be given no charity , or you will have a share of what is said to you . and if any of them is a believerthen it is said to you , `` the things that has been made to come to you , and that is a great attribute . ''
said : `` o my people ! have you thought , if i saw you to be a clear warner from my lord , and made for you a goodly provision , i would have made it free from your own hands , and i do not want to do anything with your own hands , and i do not want to take a place of protection to him . ''
it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect , and desires to be grateful .
believers , fight the unbelievers who are near you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with those who guard .
it is he who shows you the lightning , for fear and hope , and raises the heavy clouds .
as for the one who was given a city , he was given to a clot . he said : `` how can we destroy the dead people ? '' he said , `` indeed , we have tarried in the city after a day . '' and behold , it was said to the city , `` indeed , we have tarried in the presence of a day when the dead has been dead , and the same is for the sake of a great lord . '' and behold , it was a man who would be able
we gave moses the guidance and bequeathed upon the children of israel the book
those who take the unbelievers for friends instead of the believers . do they seek honour with them ? indeed , all honour belongs to allah .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after the wound had befallen them , for those who have done good deeds , will have a great reward .
but they defied the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
the two seas are not the like of the two seas . it will be the same for them , and they will eat from the fruits of the date-palm and the other , and you will see the ships in the sea .
he said : o my people ! why do you seek to hasten evil before good ? why do you not ask forgiveness from allah , so that you may receive mercy ?
and we have sent down to you the qur'an with the truth , and the truth has already come to you , and to make things firm for what you have been commanded . and indeed , you will have what you have been commanded . and to allah will be the matter of that which you have been doing . then , you will have what you have been commanded . and to allah will be the matter of what you have been doing .
they ask you that they are forbidden to you , but it is good to you , and the same is good for you , and the needy , and the orphans and the traveller ; and it is allah who knows , and you do not know .
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
and olives and palms ,
so that they may eat of its fruit , yet it is not their hands . will they not then be grateful ?
and we left for him among the later folk :
or have they other partners ? then let them bring their partners if they are truthful .
and they conspire out of their speech , neither talk nor to make a treaty over them . except for the command of the people who do good , it will be a great reward for the people of allah . and whoever does so , is a great reward .
and obey allah and the messenger so that you may receive mercy .
except those who are oppressed , men and women , and are not able to devise a plan , nor are they guided .
indeed in this is a sign for the believers .
and created the jinn from a flame of fire .
indeed those who persecute the faithful , men and women , and do not repent – they will have the punishment of hell , and they will have the punishment of burning .
and we gave him good in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
he said : o son of my mother ! do not grab my beard or my head ! i feared that you would say , 'you have caused division among the children of israel and did not pay heed to my word '
if we willed , we could make it salty . why then do you not give thanks ?
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we are turning .
the imminentis near at hand .
so celebrate the name of your lord , the all-supreme .
they say , `` allah has begotten a son . glory be to god . he is the all-sufficient , the knower of the heavens and the earth . he is the all-sufficient , the all-knower . ''
abraham was one of his followers .
`` o my people ! work according to your deeds . i will know that you will come to know who will suffer a humiliating torment , and who is a liar . ''
when the souls are paired .
and your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal .
he said , “ my lord knows what is spoken in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing . ”
by the sky and at-tariq .
indeed , in the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers .
he said : my lord ! lo ! my bones have become feeble , and my head is white , and my head . yet i have never been unblest in my prayer to thee ,
as though they were rubies and pearls .
and brought forth from it its water and its pasture ,
we know well what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , ‘ you are only following a man bewitched . ’
that i may guide you to your lord , so that you may fear him ? ''
the heavens are nearly torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return . ''
o you who believe ! do not take the unbelievers as friends instead of believers . do you wish to give god a clear proof against yourselves ?
and the weighing on that day is true . and those whose weights are heavy—it is they who are the successful .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
indeed we suffice you against the deriders
they will say , `` he has fabricated it . '' say : `` if i have so willed , you will not be able to have any power against god . you will not be able to save him from god , and you will not be able to have any faith in him . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
this is the day they will not speak ,
if they believe in the like of what you have believed , they are rightly guided ; but if they turn away , then they are still in schism . allah will suffice you against them , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
it is most hateful in the sight of allah that you say what you do not do .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' and they prostrated themselves except iblis , who was not of those who prostrated .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
so fear allah and obey me .
o ye who believe ! devour not usury , doubled and multiplied , but fear allah that ye may prosper .
it almost bursts with fury . every time a group is thrown into it , its keepers will ask them : `` did no warner come to you ? ''
such is allah , your rightful lord , and what is there after truth , but error ? how then are you turned away ?
say , `` none in the heavens or the earth knows the unseen except allah , and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected . ''
so fear allah , and obey me .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
these are verses of the wise book .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day they shall be raised .
and among mankind is he who disputes about allah without knowledge or guidance , or a book luminous .
and the devil turned away from them and said , `` descend from the ground to the earth , and to be the ground for you to be taken to the earth . '' and in order that they may take a certain settlement from the land .
is he then who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only men possessed of minds remember .
and the true promise draweth nigh , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , 'alas for us ! we have been heedless of this day . we have been evildoers . '
indeed those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
that they ascribe a son to the beneficent god .
it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect , and desires to be grateful .
you will see many of them competing with each other in sin and hostility , and consuming illicit gains .
and casts forth what is within it and voids itself ,
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon , each gliding in its orbit .
do not weaken or grieve ; you will be the upper ones if you are believers .
to allah belong the east and the west . whichever way you turn , there is the face of god . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
then he was a clot of blood , so he createdthen madeperfect .
alif . lam . mim .
they are onguidance from their lord , and it is they who are the successful .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you , and a termwith him . yet you doubt .
those who deny the truth say , `` shall we point out to you a man who will tell you when you are disintegrated in disintegration , you will be in a new creation ?
which of the favours of your lord will you then deny ?
he will guide them and improve their condition .
`` set out with my servants by night , for you will be pursued .
o my servants who believe ! my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
and when their hearts are made to go forth , they will not be affected by their own property , without their account , and they say : `` o our father ! what is the matter with us that we have full knowledge of what is in it ? and we shall be responsible for the things they have been doing . ''
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
o mankind ! there has come to you a reminder from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts , and a guidance and mercy for the believers .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of the remembrance of the remembrance of my lord until the horses disappeared ,
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
what , had there been a messenger before him , or were an apostle before him , will you be killed , and if he dies , will you turn back on his heels ? and allah will not harm the thankful .
and collectand hide it !
indeed , they have passed by the town on which was rained an evil rain . did they not see it ? nay , but they do not expect the resurrection .
o you who believe ! when you meet those who disbelieve in battle , do not turn your backs to them .
he calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his profit . evil is the patron , and evil is the patron .
he said , “ my lord , i have called my people night and day . ”
we saved him and his family , except his wife ; she was one of those who remained behind .
and he overthrew the subverted cities
so when moses came to the mount of the mount , the image of a fire : `` wait ! '' it is the same for you : it is you who are the one to bring you a fire , or that you may bring you a brand from it .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry the burdens of the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and that was what as-samiri suggested . ''
and indeed those who do not believe in the hereafter we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
and it is he who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then he will bring you to life . indeed , man is ungrateful .
except your chosen servants among them . ''
o ye who believe ! if ye obey a party of those who have been vouchsafed the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after ye have believed .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
so allah will forgive you , and will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and gardens and beautiful gardens . that is the supreme triumph .
how can they be reminded , and a clear messenger came to them ?
and put thy trust in the mighty , the merciful .
and to them they have attributed to them daughters , and they are with allah , if your father is true . and if you are of your father , he is your brethren-in-faith ; and for allah is the forgiving , the most merciful .
but those who strive against our signs to frustrate them , - for them is a painful punishment .
but they denied him , so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
then we revealed to you : 'follow the creed of abraham , the upright , who was not of the idolaters '
he said : `` verily ! this is my favour with me , which i have given knowledge . is it not possible that god has destroyed many generations before him ? '' and he was not of the evildoers .
before them is hell , and that which they have earned will not avail them , nor what they have taken as guardians besides allah ; and for them is a great punishment .
the sovereignty on that day will belong to the beneficent god , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
and refuse neighbourly needs .
except an old woman who stayed behind ,
and we have subdued them to them , so some of them they ride , and some they eat .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
so travel the land for four months , and know that you can not escapeallah , and allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
on the day when the first blast shivers
he turned away from them and said : `` o my people ! i conveyed to you the message of my lord , and gave you good advice ; but you do not love advisors . ''
they say : that then would be a return occasioning loss .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the might of pharaoh , we will certainly be victorious . ”
andwhen moses said to his people , “ god commands you to sacrifice a cow ” ; they said , “ are you making fun of us ? ” he said , ‘ i seek allah ’ s protection lest i should be one of the ignorant . ’
moses said : `` that is what we were seeking . '' so they returned retracing their footsteps .
their reward is with their lord , gardens of eden , and in the midst of gardens , wherein they will abide for ever . they will be in the midst of gardens to dwell , for they are well pleased with the lord of the book .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and we sent down to you manna and quails :
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been rejected .
and your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal .
and they will say : 'praise belongs to allah who has removed all sorrow from us . surely our lord is all-forgiving , all-thankful ,
and the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it ; and allah will resurrect those who are in the graves .
and it is in the original bookwith us , sublime and wise .
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
in a lofty garden ,
and judge with the command of allah which has been conveyed to you from allah , and follow their own desires , and follow their own desires , and that they may be in a way of evil . and most of mankind are ungodly .
but you will not unless allah wills . indeed , allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and indeed , we have sent down the book in guidance , and the light and the light which they had been warned , and those who have been obedient to the people of lot , and do not accept the faith of the people who have been wronged . and fear allah , and make no difference for those who have been given the truth , and have no faith in them . and such is the judgement .
and allah 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; and on the day when the hour comes , the followers of falsehood will be losers .
by thosewho extract with violence
and allah will not take you to task for you , when you are , by your oaths , and that you may be of the same for it , and that you may be able to do so . and that is how you will be able to do so . and that is how you will be able to do so . that is how allah explains to you his revelations , so that you may give thanks .
had you put your trust in god . god loves those who turn away .
say , `` my lord , if you should show me what they are promised ,
the day when we will gather all mankind together to all mankind , then we will say to the people : `` take your gods , and you have a pagan . '' and it is said to them : `` be ye responsible for the cause of allah , and they are not equal . ''
we have set constellations in the heavens and made them pleasing to the beholders .
and his armies of jinns and men and birds were gathered together with the jinn and birds , and they were set in bands .
what is the matter with them that they turn away from the reminder ,
indeed , they have passed by the town on which was rained an evil rain . did they not see it ? nay , but they do not expect the resurrection .
and when our revelations are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but fables of the ancients .
they will not taste death therein , except the first death , and he will save them from the punishment of hell .
and there is not a place of place in place of a place of return , from their lord , and we shall make obeisance to them and provided them with knowledge and wisdom .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and has sent down rain from the sky and has sent down abundant fruits for you through the sea , and subjected for you the ships of the sea , and subjected for you the rivers .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of clay , layer on layer ,
and whom i have granted resources in abundance ,
indeed , the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
my advice will not benefit you if i desire to advise you , if allah wills , he is your lord , and to him you will be returned . ''
the chiefs of pharaoh 's people said : `` will you abandon your people in the land , and in the earth , and abandon the evil ones ? '' and pharaoh said , `` then , to be a yellow crush . ''
and those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a slur he has fabricated , and other people have helped him at it. ” and they have been unjust and false .
exclaim not today for one destruction , but call for many deaths .
they said : `` o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped or that we should abandon what we desire ? verily , you are the forbearer , right-minded ! '' .
o man ! what has deceived you concerning your generous lord ,
`` enter it in peace and security . ''
say , `` if you love god , follow me and god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
`` enter it in peace and security . ''
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and spread corruption in the land , it is they who are the losers .
whoever desires this transitory life , we hasten to him whatever we wish for whomever we desire . then we appoint for him hell , where he will enter , condemned and rejected .
o ye who believe ! be ye not among those who are afraid of your women , and unto you that ye are steadfast , and make them eat of the affair , save that which ye are wont to do . and if ye give them a thing , then make them a reputable thing , and if ye do them , they will have no way .
yet he desireth that i should give more .
and on the day when the unbelievers will be told , `` what is this : this is the truth ? '' they will say : `` is this the truth ? '' and will say : `` yea , by the lord of the fire , and be thou of the unbelievers ! ''
we have sent a messenger from among them who would say , `` worship allah , and worship him . so worship him , and see what was the way of those who have been guided . so see how was the end of the deniers . ''
on the day when they will be turned away , on the day when they will turn away from you , and they will not be able to hide what you have done , nor will they be guided .
or who is it that will be their lord , and he calls upon him , when he calls to him , when he calls upon the people , and that the people are in the land ? will they then take heed ?
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a furious wind
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you to be excused from fighting with their possessions and their lives , and allah is aware of the righteous .
and when it is said to them : 'come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger ' you see the hypocrites turning away from you .
it is he who has made for you the earth a place of repose , and the heavens , and the earth , and you have made it pure ; and that is allah , the lord of the universe , who is the lord of all the worlds .
so eat of that which you have taken as lawful and good , and fear allah ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared that he would harass them with rebellion and disbelief .
they said , “ you are an evil omen in your own conduct . would you then remember ? ” in fact , you are a people who are iniquitous .
and if thou dost see something , the word of those who say thou unto thee , when it is said unto thee : shall ye be restored to the dust when we are dead ? shall they be in the graves ? they shall be the fellows of the fire ; and they shall be in a state of fire .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary , can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
honourablel scribes .
between them is a barrier which they do not overpass .
when the recordsare unfolded ,
and they will see the punishment of the day when they followed their souls , and the followers of the woods turn away from the evil of their believing news , and they will be one of the ignorants .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
they said , `` by allah , you will never cease remembering joseph until you are consumed , or become ruined . ''
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them , “ this is your day which you were promised . ”
and to those who do not want to go forward to the way of allah , and if you do so , they will be responsible for it , and if you do not , they will be responsible for it , and do not make a testament in the least . and that is the ordinance of allah , and that which may be established , and that is the ordinance of allah , and that which will be the ordinance of the hereafter , and that which will be the ordinance of allah , and that which he
and we destroyed no township but it had warners
and made the night a covering ,
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . now in the remembrance of allah hearts are the hearts of hearts .
say to those who do not believe , `` work according to your ability ; we are acting .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . and to allah do all things return .
these are they upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah has set a seal , and they are the heedless .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them so we reinforced them with a third . they said , `` indeed , we are messengers to you . ''
we gave abraham his integrity formerly , and we knew him well .
and it is he who sends down cattle , so that he may sink down into the midst of the clouds , and allah will bring it to light , and then he will bring it into the sky ; and when he sends down the shechina upon them , they will be among the glad tidings .
and to warn those who say : allah hath taken a son .
o ye who believe ! devour not usury , doubled and multiplied , but fear allah that ye may prosper .
and we will settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ''
nay ! but they do not fear the hereafter .
the people of his people will receive the warning on the day of judgment . those who do wrong will say , ‘ our lord ! for whom we have given a little , we will have given you a little , and do not follow the noble messengers . ’
you can not frustrate him in the earth , nor have you any guardian or helper .
say , `` flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will not be allowed to enjoy yourselves except a little . ''
when our verses are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
o you who believe ! take your duty to allah , and have no means of intercession , but he has taken to you a part of that which is right . so fear allah , for allah is aware of what they do .
and if a disaster should seize them forthat their hands have sent forth , they would say : 'our lord , why did you not send a messenger to us that we might have followed your verses and be among the believers ? '
for the iniquity of the jews , we forbade them many of the good things which had been lawful for them , and for their barring manyfrom the way of allah .
the magicians fell down prostrate .
whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
and to allah belongs the direction of the paths , and some of them are flawed . had he willed , he would have guided you all .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper .
the fire will scorch their faces , and they will grin and scowl within it .
he had no authority over them , but that we might know who believed in the hereafter from him who is in doubt about it . your lord is watchful over everything .
what , do they see that they should see the like of those who believed , and were wont to believe in the people before them ? but many of them did greater evil than that , and they were not aware of what they did .
nor will you be thirsty in it , nor will you swelter . ”
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning has been .
and enter the blazing fire .
and he who believed said : o my people ! lo ! i fear for you the like of the day of the parties ,
and allah increases in guidance those who follow guidance ; and the good deeds that endure are better with your lord , and better in return .
so when he came to it , he was called : `` blessed is whosoever is in the fire and those around it . and glory be to allah , lord of the worlds !
we have sent down to you the book , so those who have received the book , and those who have given them the book and that which they have been concealing will believe in it , and they have no faith in the quran .
can not seduce away from him .
we sent noah to his people : `` warn your people before there comes to them a painful torment . ''
or do they have a true faith in the night and prostrate themselves before him ? say , `` are those who do not know the reward of the hereafter ? '' say , `` are those who do not know the right path ? ''
we gave moses the book , so do not be in doubt about his encounter , and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
and we have not sent down upon the people of the fire but the angels , but it is only for a trial for those who disbelieve , and to those who disbelieve , in order that the disbelievers may have the faith of the book , and to those who have faith . and those who have the faith of the book will have a lesson from their lord . and those who have faith and do not believe in the book , allah will make it a clear account for those who have faith .
when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice in it , but when evil afflicts them because of what their hands have put forth , they begin to despair .
did they not see that we 've seen the earth with a little , and that allah will bring it to him , and he has no power of all things ?
that is what they enjoyed avail them .
do you build monuments on every high place in vanity ,
and verily , he is a near access to us , and an excellent abode .
created man from a clot .
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a furious wind
and the believers will say : `` are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they will be lost .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken from among the angels daughters ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
if they have ascendancy over you , they will be enemies to you , and stretch out their hands and their tongues with evil , and they wish that you may disbelieve .
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and go forth from every side , and turn your face towards the sacred mosque , and you are about to turn away from them , in order that you may turn away from them , and in order that you may be among the people of the past ; and fear me alone .
they almost provoked you , to expel you from the land , but they would not have stayed after you but a little .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
no misfortune befalls in the earth or in your own selves but it is inscribed in a book before we create it . that is easy for allah .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
it is he who sends his blessings on you and his angels so that he may bring you out of darkness into light . he is most merciful to the believers .
the blind and the seeing are not alike
and glorify him morning and evening .
when carcans are around their necks and chains ; they will be dragged
indeed , those who did not destroy their own children , and do not think their own own own hands have made them , and those who have been given their share in their divinity will be guided .
we have made it easy in your tongue so that they may remember .
as for the sake of abraham , and isaac , and jacob , and there was no one to intercede for us with any other than allah , and he was not of the chosen , the merciful .
o you who have believed , no one can have any sinful nation , nor shall there be a people who will have a lot of a people , and they will not be able to make a flaw in it ; and do not be one of those who have deviated from the other , and do not be one of those who have deviated from the other people . those who have been unjust will have a great repentance .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay ! they are in doubt concerning my reminder . nay ! they have not yet tasted my punishment .
and indeed , the religion of allah is only the religion of the truth , those who have been given the book in different parts of the creation of this world , even after the knowledge has been revealed to them . and whoever does not believe in the signs of allah , then indeed , allah is quick in piety .
o you who have believed , if a messenger of a certain messenger come to you , then do not believe in it . so do not be seen by the creation of the people , and after that they will be victorious .
worship allah and fear him , and obey me .
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise ,
and he said : o my people ! ye are in the midst of that which ye are created in the world , and in the hereafter ; and so that ye may save us from the torment of allah , and that i should say : i am only a temptation , and i am the best of the worshippers .
had it not been that a blessing from his lord had reached him he would have been cast into the wilderness .
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
the people of the noah said , `` we are only one of the people who follow you , '' and those who follow you , do not follow the way of those who follow you , and we do not think that you are lying .
and ornaments of gold . but all this is nothing but the wares of the life of this world , and the hereafter with your lord is for the pious .
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , when they are sincere to god and his messenger . there is no way for the righteous . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
the likeness of paradise which is promised to the righteous , beneath which rivers flow ; its food is perpetual , and its shade ; and this is the requital of the god-fearing .
o you who have faith ! give it a remembrance for the sake of a slave , which is a slave , other than daughters , and whoever is free from his brother , it is the same for him , that is the word of your lord , and that he may make it a trial for him , and for him is a painful punishment .
when they were sent to them , they would have been sent by their own faith , and they had come to them with a little which they had been promised , and they were besieged by what they had been deriding .
or who is it that will bring you the land on the sea , that he may bring you the like of his mercy ? then will you then be exalted with god ?
abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed , your lord accomplishes what he desires .
they will say : `` woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? '' this is what the beneficent allah had promised , and the messengers spoke truth .
he said , “ what is your business , o messengers ? ”
indeed , we have prepared for the disbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
allah commands you to restore trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , judge with fairness ; and the example of the people . god gives you advice . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
man prays for evil as he prays for good . man is ever hasty .
and do not be like those who became divided and differed after the clear signs had come to them . for such there is a great punishment .
and remember your lord within yourself humbly and fearfully , and quietly , in the morning and the evening , and do not be of the neglectful .
that allah may reward each soul for its deeds . indeed , allah is swift at reckoning .
he said , ‘ what ! even if i bring you a better guidance than what you found your fathers following ? ’ they said , ‘ indeed we have been sent with what you have been sent with . ’
allah does not forbid you from those who have not fought you against those who fought against you , nor expelled you from your homes . god loves the equitable .
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of god .
a little enjoyment in this world ; then to us will be their return , then we shall make them taste a severe punishment because of their disbelief .
he said : my lord ! i seek refuge with thee from asking thee that whereof i have no knowledge ; and if thou forgivest me not and hast not mercy on me , i shall be among the losers .
what , do you approach the males of the world ?
depart to a triple-massing shadow
say , `` the earlier ones and the later ones
when allah is mentioned , they pay you in charity , and if there are some of them that are guided , it is you who have been made to be weak . but allah is well aware of what is in your hearts . indeed , he is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
have you not seen how he saw him who is in the heavens and the earth , and the sun and the moon ? and the sun and the moon are and the sun and the moon , and he is the exalted in might , the most merciful .
so judge between me and them with ajudgment , and deliver me and the believers with me .
he will lead his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . evil is the wateringplace to be led to !
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good works .
those with whom you have made a treaty , then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear allah .
we have left a clear sign of it for a people who understand .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
and it is he who has let free the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the salt that he has set forth , and he has set a barrier between them , and a ban forbidden .
he said : it is my staff ; i lean on it , and i lean on it , and i have other uses for it .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes ; indeed you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
and to us belong the last and the first .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
on the day when some faces will be bright , and some faces will be black , and those whose faces are blackened : `` did you disbelieve after you had disbelieved ? '' so taste the punishment for the unbelievers .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah is the self-sufficient , the praiseworthy .
there is not one of you but will reach it . this is a decree of your lord .
and when we gave moses the book and the criteriaso that perhaps you would be guided .
he was created from a drop emitted-
those who do not destroy the towns will say , `` our lord , if only allah had been one of the people who do not believe in the truth , it is the law of god , and the one who is bound to follow the truth . god will certainly help them . ''
except the path of hell , wherein they will live forever . and that is easy for allah .
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : 'this is a magician , a liar .
those who deny our revelations and the meeting of the hereafter are their deeds . will they not be recompensed except according to their deeds ?
and when you were tongues with your tongues , and uttered with your mouths that whereof ye had no knowledge , ye were wont to hide it while it was a great matter .
and if they say , `` follow what is sent down to him from your lord , '' they say , `` in fact , we found our fathers following it ; did they not be guided ? ''
whom no man or jinn yatmithhunnabefore them .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
and establish prayer and give zakah and obey the messenger , so that you may receive mercy .
he said : in a little while they will become regretful .
and the wealth of the hereafter is the provision of the abode of the world , and do not walk with the right way of allah , and do not make mischief in the land , as do you do . indeed , allah loves not those who do corruption .
they will have a share of what they have earned ; and allah is swift at reckoning .
and the first of them will say to the last of them : `` you have no privilege over us . taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ''
whatever you have been given are only the wares of the life of this world and the glitter of the life of this world , and that which is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return to it . god takes account of all things .
we forbade the jews what we had recounted to you before . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
nor a close friend .
he said : `` o my lord ! how can i have a son when old age has overtaken me and my wife is barren ? '' he said : `` thus allah does what he wills . ''
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
then , when the bearer of good news arrived , he cast it on his face , and he regained his sight . he said , `` did i not tell you that i know from allah what you do not know ? ''
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depth of the fire , and you will find no helper for them .
this is how the people of the city are the people of the city and the dwellers of the city , who will be in the midst of god 's messenger . that is not a thing for the cause of god . he has no knowledge of those who do good , and allah does not like the doers of good . god does not reward the doers of good .
and a barrier is set between them and the elevations are men who recognize their features . they will call to the dwellers of the garden , `` peace be upon you . '' they will be told , `` peace be upon you ! '' they hope .
let them produce a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
have you seen the earth that you may see the like of those who have believed in it , and see how they have been created ? and we destroyed them in the land , and destroyed them in the land . but they did not wrong them , but allah did not wrong them .
and from our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
it is he who gives life and causes death ; and when he decrees a thing , he only says to it : be , and it is .
the word of moses was sent down by the command of moses , and it was the divine revelation of the book , and an arabic explanation of the end of those who did wrong .
who created me , and he guides me ,
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and we have not sent any warner before you except men whom we have chosen among the nations , and the people of the city . do they then see that the end of the hereafter is better for them ? will they then understand ?
when you sought help from your lord , he answered you : `` i will help you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
when he said to his people , `` will you not fear allah ?
verily i have been wont to say to the men of old , and verily , he is the heir of the children of israel , and we shall make it a utility for the sun and the moon . and i shall make it a way to the straight path .
the egyptians asked them , `` what will be the punishment of the punishment if you are lying ? ''
your possessions and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
he broke them all into pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and the example of mary 's wife is mary 's wife , and she who is chaste , and we breathed into her of the spirit ] , and we have made him of the spirit and be obedient to his lord .
it is the same to the seed that it is in exchange for them to be a portion of that which is forbidden to them ; and for the sake of a people who have been bent on denying the truth , will be in a state of carelessness , and they do not have any faith in it ; and that they may make mischief in the way of allah , and that they do not have any faith in it . and allah does not accept the right way .
and watch—they will soon see .
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so that they will not reach our signs . you are the victorious ones . ”
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
he said , “ you will find me , if allah wills , patient , and i will not disobey you in any matter . ”
the people of the jews and the christians—those who have no stablishment . except those who follow the meeting with it , and follow the meeting of a noble messenger . they are certain of it . they are the ones who are disputing .
we have sent a messenger from among them who would say , `` worship allah , and worship him . so worship him , and see what was the way of those who have been guided . so see how was the end of the deniers . ''
then there will come a year in which people will be given rain and in which they will press . ''
and they went at early morning , able to deprive .
and we will settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ''
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared that he would harass them with rebellion and disbelief .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , `` god and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion . ''
honourablel scribes .
so that they may understand my speech .
then as for the covenant with god , the unbelievers will not be grieved by the messengers from among the messengers , and the messengers do not say to the messengers , “ in fact , in fact , allah has set a seal over them , and they do not believe in it . ”
then we destroyed the others .
in them are benefits for you until a time appointed . then their place of sacrifice is by the ancient house .
then adam learnt from his lord words , and he relented toward him ; surely he is the relenting , the merciful .
say , `` indeed , i am forbidden to worship what you call upon besides allah . and i have been sent with my lord , and i am commanded to give him from the lord of the universe . ''
for the people of the right hand .
say : `` who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` allah is the lord of all being . '' then say : `` is it other than allah ? '' say : `` is it other than allah ? '' and say : `` allah is the guardian of all things , and he has power over all things . ''
by the resurgent heaven ,
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no god other than him . will ye not then guard ?
moses said , `` what is your case , o samiri ? ''
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted yourselves to god ?
and do not call upon the prophet as you call between them ; and allah knows what they conceal between them and what they say . and let them have a painful punishment , or a painful punishment .
do you see any remnants of them ?
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can remove you and bring a new creation ,
and that hecreates the pairs , male and female ,
o ye who believe ! be ye in charge of your education , and those who go astray , for that which ye are wont to go astray , if ye are guided to allah 's way , and the tidings of that which ye are wont to do .
and obey allah and the messenger , and do not make a breach with it ; and if you are one of the people of the same , then you will have no one to take another . god is with those who are patient .
whatever good happens to you is from allah ; and whatever ill befalls you is from yourself ; and we have sent you as a messenger , and allah suffices as a witness .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
and who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against allah when he is summoned to islam ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
and among them are unlettered ones who know not the book , but only wishful thinking and only conjecture .
he will say , `` do not quarrel in my presence , and i gave you the warning beforehand .
or do you ask them for a wage , so that they are burdened with debt ?
in this province belongs to god . his is the best reward , and he is the best of the final outcome .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
the elite of his people who were arrogant said to those who were oppressed , `` do you know that salih has been sent by his lord ? '' they said , `` we believe in what he has been sent with . ''
by no means ! he shall be cast into the crushing fire .
and they say : `` tales of the ancients , which he has written down , so they are dictated to him morning and evening . ''
did he not find you wandering , and guide you ?
and the night when it draws a veil over it ,
every soul will know what it has produced .
and assuredly it hath been revealed unto thee and unto those before thee , if thou ascribe a partner to allah , your works , and you will surely be among the losers .
they said : `` thus is your lord . he is the wise , the knower . ''
the night he merges day into the day , he merges the day into the night , and he subjected the sun and the moon ; and the sun and the moon belong to him ; and it is allah who is the lord of the worlds .
allah produceth creation , then he reproduceth it , then unto him ye shall be returned .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught but mankind wrong themselves .
whoever desires the life of this world and its glitter , we shall repay them their deeds in full , and they will not be defrauded therein .
it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
and we delivered the children of israel from the humiliating torment
but they denied him and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin , and leveled them .
say : it is a message of importance ,
and if they dispute with you concerning the covenant of allah , say to them , `` come , '' and say , `` come to our sons and give us daughters and we belong to you , and we will be a liar '' .
it is he who created death and life that he may test youwhich of you is best in conduct ; and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
this is the revelation of the lord of the worlds .
o ye who believe ! expend of that wherewith we have provided you ere the day cometh which there shall be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession ; and the infidels are the wrong-doers .
and when the angels said , 'mary , allah hath chosen thee , and purified thee , and he hath chosen thee above all women .
thus do we try some of them by others that they may say , `` are these the ones whom allah has favoured from among us ? is not allah aware of the appreciative ? ''
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a party of the believers were averse .
we have createdof special creation .
and when they felt our punishment , behold , they ran away from it .
and they said : o wizard ! pray unto thy lord for us by the covenant he hath covenanted with thee ; verily we shall be guided .
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! lo ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and why do you not eat the name of allah while it is that he has forbidden for you ? only for them is a thing which is forbidden to you . but most of them are iniquitous .
that they may not prostrate themselves to allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
and they say : we are morein wealth and children , and we shall not be punished .
when we revealed to your mother what was inspired .
they recognize the favour of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are disbelievers .
and set up their lord as a witness apart from him , as his command , and he is only one god ; he is the lord of all being , and he is the exalted in might , the beholder .
and whoever does not believe in allah and his noble messenger , we have prepared for the disbelievers a blazing fire .
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and it is he who turns to a believer , which he turns back , so that they are disheartened by their own land , and they have no faith in it . and the people of the book will have no faith , and they will have a place of storageor in their meanings ] . and it is the fellowship of allah who have been mentioned . and it is the end of those who have been commanded .
those who are humble in their prayers .
read in the name of your lord who created .
and we turned to the people in the city , saying : `` it was the one to whom the whole side has come to pass . '' and it was said : `` this is the devil 's enemy who has made my own enemy to his own soul , and he has made it to be an enemy to the devil , and he has made it an enemy to the enemy . '' he said , “ this is satan ’ s devil , who has done a great enemy . ”
glorified be he , and exalted above what they say !
but if the bounty of allah comes to you , he will say , as if there had been no friendship between you and him , if i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success .
and those who disbelieve say : wherefore hath not a sign been sent down unto him from his lord ? thou art but a warner and a warner unto every nation .
dead , not living , and they know not when they will be raised .
so he had fruit . he said to his companion , when he was conversing with him , `` i am wealthier than you , and more powerful inmen . ''
is this a better reception , or the zaqqum tree ?
these are verses of the clear book .
he sends down the angels with the spirit by his command to whom he pleases of his servants : `` warn mankind that there is no god but i , so fear me . ''
and in fact , do not be in doubt of what they worship , and do not follow what they worship , except the one who has worshipped their fathers before , and we do not speak to them a reward .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
and most of the people , even though you are not believers .
and it is only the command of the spider which has been recited to you , and its cattle . and if any one of the provisions of allah , it has been enjoined upon you , and if any one of them is held in iniquity , he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
he is god . he will not give them any good , nor will you be granted any good to them . then you will answer , `` will you then see ? ''
say , `` no one can protect me from god , nor can i find any refuge besides him .
what is the matter with you that you do not believe in allah , when the messenger calls you to believe in your lord , and he has made a covenant with you , if you are believers ?
the recompense of a sin is an evil like it . but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward is with allah . he does not love the unjust .
and we made a covenant with them , that we should take it off , and say : `` be ye and that which we have given you , and be not turned away . '' they said , `` and be turned away , and they turn away from it , and they said : `` it is you who would be averse to the while you have been believers . ''
and his wife and his brother ,
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
such is the knower of the invisible and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
they will say , `` he has fabricated it . '' say : `` if i have so willed , you will not be able to have any power against god . you will not be able to save him from god , and you will not be able to have any faith in him . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , they will surely be cast into gardens with streams running in them , to dwell therein forever .
we afflicted the people of pharaoh with shortages in food , so that they might take heed .
and we sent among them a messengerof midian , and said : `` o my people ! worship allah , and do not follow the end of the world ; and do not make mischief in the world to come . ''
so we have no intercessors ,
except those who afterwards repent and mend their ways , god is forgiving and merciful .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they were with them , as you were with them .
we will brand him on the muzzle .
and as for those who do not believe in your own way , they do not believe in your religion , and he is aware of the matter of your religion , and that you may be of those who keep their duty to allah , and he is certain of that which you have been entrusted to them ; and for them is a portion of that which you have been performing ; and if they do good , they will have a part of it , and is better for them . and allah is forgiving , merciful
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
and he answersthose who have believed and done righteous deeds and gives them increase of his bounty . but the disbelievers will have a terrible punishment .
and to 'aadtheir brother hud . he said : `` o my people ! worship allah , you have no god other than him . you are only forgers .
the likeness of paradise which is promised to the righteous , beneath which rivers flow ; its food is perpetual , and its shade ; and this is the requital of the god-fearing .
then we placed him as a dropin a safe lodging .
and clustered bananas ,
what , do they see that they should see the like of those who believed , and were wont to believe in the people before them ? but many of them did greater evil than that , and they were not aware of what they did .
and they say , “ o you who received the reminder , you are insane . ”
this is the book which there is no doubt , a guidance for the pious .
we shall provide them with fruits and meat as they desire .
and ibrahim enjoined his sons to his sons , and said : `` o my sons ! verily , allah has chosen for you the religion of faith , so die not except in islam . ''
say : `` i pray only to my lord , and i do not associate with him anyone . ''
ask the children of israel how many a clear sign we have given them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , god is severe in retribution .
and those who guard their private parts
when misfortune befalls men , they call upon their lord , turning to him in repentance . then , when he has mercy upon them , some of them begin to ascribe partners to their lord .
then we inspired moses : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
abiding in it , and evil it is for them on the day of resurrection .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and did not fail in the least , and we made a river to flow between them .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you . if you do so , you will be among the wrongdoers .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
and we said to the children of israel after him : `` dwell in the land , but when the promise of the hereafter comes to be fulfilled , we will bring you all together . ''
then let them tidy up and fulfil their vows and circumambulate the ancient house .
they said : `` o shu'aib ! we are the ones to follow you . we are well aware of you . we have certainly been strong in our presence , and if you had not been attacked , we would not have been able to do you . ''
they respect not the ties either of kinship or of covenant . they are the transgressors .
if they are expelled , they will not go forth with them , and if they are attacked , they will not help them , and if they help them , they will turn their backs , and they will not be helped .
they seek to deceive allah and those who believe , but they deceive none but themselves , though they do not perceive .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ''
and we taught him the art of making coats of mail for you to protect you from your violence ; will you then be grateful ?
do you think that they do not speak in the unseen ? and when you do not find allah , he will forgive you , and give the zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
then ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we have created them from sticky clay .
they will say , `` to allah . '' say : `` then how are you bewitched ? ''
certainly there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves , your suffering distresses him , solicitous for you , and most merciful .
o you who believe ! do not prohibit the good things which allah has made lawful to you , and do not transgress . god does not love the transgressors .
the likeness of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah , as a likeness of the weight of a grain of grain which groweth seven ears , in every ear a hundred grains . allah is all-embracing , all-knowing .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
they will say : `` our lord ! we obeyed our chiefs and our great ones , and they led us astray from the way .
and whoever commits a sin , commits it only against himself ; and allah is ever knowing , wise .
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
how many a prophet we sent among the ancients ,
and when the seas are erupted
say , “ those who fabricate lies against allah will not succeed . ”
averted from it is he who isaverse .
go , you and your brother with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
every soul is hostage to what it has earned ,
and the sun and moon are joined together ,
and our forefathers ?
allah has sealed up the example of a man who was indifferent of the matter which he had set up , but one of them is just one who is an upright man ; and all praise is only to allah , but most of them do not know .
so taste it , for this is the punishment of the fire , and for the unbelievers .
return to your father and say , ‘ o our father ! indeed your son has stolen ; we testify only to what we know , and we do not know the unseen . ’
those whose eyes were hoodwinked from my reminder , and they were not able to hear .
gardens of eden , which they will enter , therein they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be silk .
and we made some of them a portion of his punishment . and he was a tyrant with them , and he was not able to create a thing in the earth , and the people of the earth were in it . and we did drown them , and they were unjust .
the bedouins are more stubborn in unbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of what allah has revealed to his messenger . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; and allah has power over all things .
nay , but they comprehend the hereafter , in fact they are in doubt about it . nay , they are blind to it .
dark-green in colour .
so that we may follow the magicians , if they are the winners . ''
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
when they had gone further , moses said to his servant : `` bring us our lunch . we have been fatigued by this journey . ''
what is the matter with those who reject the book of allah , and do not desire to do any good other than that of your lord , and that he may provide for you , and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
and those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them will be four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful .
safa and al-marwahare of the symbols of allah . and whoever makes the pilgrimage to the houseto perform the house of allah , no sin will be on him , and whoever brings the good , he is indeed appreciative and all-knowing .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
the runners , the sinkers ,
“ this is the day of judgement which you used to deny . ”
a spring therein named salsabeel .
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there be a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a reckoner .
o you who believe ! do not consume each other 's wealth among yourselves , but trade by mutual consent . and do not kill yourselves . indeed , allah is merciful to you .
who are indiscourse amusing themselves .
you did not hope that the book would be revealed to you except by the mercy of your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
so we will question those to whom our message was sent , and we will surely question the messengers .
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can remove you and bring a new creation ,
the gardens of perpetuity , beneath which rivers flow , where they will abide for ever . such is the reward of those who purify themselves .
do you then hope that they would believe in you , while a party of them heard the word of allah , and then tampered with it after they had understood it , after they had understood it ?
some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
they say : `` this life of the world is but the life of the world . and let them live in it , and let them live in the presence of the life of this world , and when they are not able to have any knowledge , they will have no knowledge .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best those who stray from his way , and he knows best those who are guided .
they will say : nay ! no welcome for you . it is you who have brought it down . evil is the resting-place .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will increase his tillage . and whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter , we give him some of it , and in the hereafter there will be no share .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
and they will say : `` it is the same for them , whether there be some part of them , or they will say : `` it is a sorcerer , or a part of them . '' and say : `` it is only a few of them , who will not be able to dispute . ''
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight against the friends of satan ; surely the strategy of satan is feeble .
that is because of what your hands have sent forth , and because allah is not unjust to his servants .
then we destroyed the others .
lord of the east and the west , there is no god but he . so take him for your guardian .
they say , “ do not spend out of what god ’ s noble messenger has been given to the noble messenger , in the heavens and the earth , and god ’ s precedent in the heavens and the earth , and it is they who do not know . ”
and the wicked will be in hell .
and the morn as it breathes .
we did not give them any book to study , nor did we send them before you .
the righteously striving believers will receive forgiveness and honorable sustenance .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of rectitude .
indeed , we have prepared for the disbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
and indeed they have enraged us ;
allah knows what every female bears , and what the wombs exceed , and with him is a complete measure .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the sky , and he made them seven heavens , and he has knowledge of all things .
do they not ponder the quran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
so that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
say : 'call on those whom you claimbesides allah . they possess not an atom 's weight in the heavens or the earth , nor have they any partnership in either of them , nor is there any supporter for them .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
then they will be left in place to say that which is in the matter of a party of you : `` if only you had been concerned about it , they would have certainly been afraid of it . '' say : `` if only you had done what is in their own hands , they would not have doubted . '' and say : `` if only you had done what is in their own hands , they would not have been affected by a great thing . '' and allah is aware of what is in their
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believing women , that they may draw their outer garments to their faces , so that they will not be aware . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
we have given you the seven oft-repeatedand the grand quran .
the unbelievers say : `` when we have become dust and our fathers , shall we indeed be brought forth ?
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and zakah and he was pleased with his lord .
did i not command you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan , for he is your open enemy ?
and indeed it is a guidance and a mercy for the believers .
the lord of the glorious throne ,
that allah may forgive you your sins , and what is behind you , and his bounty , and complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path .
from them emerge pearls and coral .
and we will surely test you until we know the warriors and the steadfast among you , and we shall test your proclamations .
and because of the children of israel , they have made a covenant with us , and in whose hearts is a sickness , and that they will not be affected by a single thing , and they will be left in a narrow place of what is in their own hands , but they will find a little .
and you certainly are one of us who created the first heavens and the first that we had created , and you were bidden to have a matter about which you have been commanded . and you will surely have a thing in which you have been made to appear in your presence . indeed , you have been made to find a way .
and you serve all that you worship besides allah , and of your fathers ; and allah has not sent down any proof upon you ; and the judgement is no more than allah , but most of them do not know .
say : `` o my people ! work according to your ability . i too am acting . soon you will know who will be the sequel of the home for whom will be the guerdon of everlasting life . ''
it will be only a single nudge .
do they not see how every thing allah has created the shadows , the right and the left , prostrating themselves before god , prostrating themselves to god in all humility ?
so taste it , for this is the punishment of the fire , and for the unbelievers .
, `` bring him to me . '' when the servant of his lord came to him , he said , “ what was the matter with their own people ? ” say , “ what was the matter with their lord ? ” indeed , my lord is the subtle one , the beholder .
as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their reward in full ; and allah does not love the unjust .
and do not be one of those who do so in the mornings and the evenings , but they do not hope for their own account , nor shall you be of the doubters .
except those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds . for such allah will change their evil deeds with good deeds ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and we revealed to moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea , fearing not to be overtaken , nor fear there . ''
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
and when it is said unto them : bow down , they bow not down .
and when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he was suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , `` do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot . ''
indeed , those who disbelieved among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to dwell therein . they are the worst of creatures .
it is a single time that is two . then , if he willed , he would have made the life of this world to be a single set , and the matter will be set up for you , and to make lawful for you a thing that is free from the law of god ; and do not be of the cheats ,
had he faked any sayings in our name ,
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . evil indeed is what they used to do .
he will call for destruction
and when they confronted goliath and his troops , they said : our lord ! pour out upon us patience and help us against the disbelieving people .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
and how do i fear that you should worship other than allah , that you should not ascribe any partners to him ? so what is the matter with you , so that you should be of those who have no faith ? will you then know ?
if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you will be losers .
indeed your lord will decide between them with his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
who deniedand turned away .
and it was said to the people , `` are yeassembled ? -
thus do we reward the virtuous .
they will bear their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and be of those whom they mislead without knowledge . how evil is the burden they bear !
and cite for them the parable of the landlords of the town—when the messengers came to it .
those who have disbelieved will be the disbelievers , and it visited them with the opening of their place . but if they were to make you a building , it would have been concluded for you . and if they were to make you a fool , they would have taken you into a playful manner . and if only you had been faithful to the truth , we would surely have made you in a safe hand .
it is god who splits the grain and the date-stone , brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the living from the dead , and that is allah . how then are you perverted ?
surely he is able to bring him back ,
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are the ones whom allah has guided . these are the men of understanding .
but if they repent and establish prayer and give zakah , then they are your brothers in religion . we detail our revelations for a people who know .
o my servants ! there is no fear for you today , nor will you grieve
and laugh and not weep ,
and of them are some who listen to you , so can you make the deaf hear , even though they do not understand ?
and if ye desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then verily allah hath prepared for the well-doers among you a mighty hire .
the people of noah denied the messengers .
how can you disbelieve in allah , when you were dead , and he gave you life , then he will cause you to die and then bring you back to life again ? then to him you will be returned .
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
surely this qur'an relates to the children of israel most of that concerning which they differ .
what , when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we be requited ? ’
had it been that if they were to be a warner from among the people of the town , they would have been wronged by their own people , and say : `` in fact , we are about to witness their testimony from among them , in fact , we will not wrong them , for we have been wrongdoers . ''
have we not made the earth a receptacle ,
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not rightly-directed .
so do not oppress the orphan ,
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
the messengers say : `` we are only a human like you , and we will not be like you , but allah will make a favour of his servants , and we will not make any of his servants a favour for you . ''
verily we have created man in travail .
and believe in what i have sent down , confirming what is with you , and do not be the first to disbelieve in it , and do not exchange my signs for a paltry price , and fear me alone .
and when our command came , we delivered shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook the evildoers , and they lay prostrate in their homes ,
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and we said : o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat of that which ye have been clean . but approach not this tree , lest ye become wrong-doers .
he said : `` o my son ! do not relate your dream to your brothers , lest they hatch a plot against you . satan is man 's sworn enemy .
and we have attached every man of his neck to his neck ; and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find wide open .
but if they turn away , say : 'god suffices me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust , and he is the lord of the mighty throne . '
indeed , upon us is guidance .
and establish prayer and give zakah and obey the messenger , so that you may receive mercy .
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? nay , you are a people who are ignorant . '
if you avoid the greatwhich you are forbidden , we will remit from you yoursins , and admit you to a noble entrance .
so he will be in a life of bliss ,
by no means ! verily , it is respite for the time of time . lo ! it was for me to belie my revelations ; but thou didst deny the truth , and thou art of the wrong-doers .
said : `` o my people ! have you thought , if i saw you to be a clear warner from my lord , and made for you a goodly provision , i would have made it free from your own hands , and i do not want to do anything with your own hands , and i do not want to take a place of protection to him . ''
you lust after men instead of women . you are a people transgressing beyond bounds . ''
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
though they will be within sight of each other . the sinner will wish that he could ransom himself from the torment of that day by his children .
so they departed , whispering to one another ,
so that he may know that they have delivered the messages of their lord . he encompasses what is with them and he keeps count of everything .
had the people of the book believed and been godfearing , we would have remitted their sins , and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
we would have seized him by the right hand
that allah may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women and the hypocritical women and the polytheistic men and the polytheistic women , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
each man will have enough cares that day .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs . they were a people evil , so we drowned them all .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
aaron , my brother .
go to what is ahead of you , for those who have no power to make you hear , and to make things a description of your own property , and of the children of israel—is your duty to god .
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter ; and allah does not guide the unbelievers .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold , some of you associate others with their lord .
we have appointed for them a good associate with them and what is behind them . so the word has been realized against them , as they were promised , and they were losers .
and with the truth we have sent it down , and with truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bearer of good news and a warner .
and it is not for the merciful to take a son .
and man says : when i am dead , shall i be brought forth alive ?
and recall what time luqman said unto his son , while he was exhorting him : o my son ! associate not aught with allah ; verily this is a tremendous wrong .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . he has power over all things .
they said , `` by allah , you will never cease remembering joseph until you are consumed , or become ruined . ''
but whoever seeks to go beyond that—these are the transgressors .
and verily the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and ward off .
on the day when the punishment will cover them from above them and from beneath their feet , and he will say , ‘ taste what you used to do . ’
so when he came to them with clear authority , to show a clear authority , pharaoh and his courtiers , and said : `` a son who has believed , and he is a pagan . ''
but their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
and he cast upon the earth firm mountains lest it should shake with you , and rivers and roads , so that you may find your way ,
the gardens of eden , which they will enter , with those who were righteous among their fathers , their wives , and their descendants , and the angels will enter them , and the angels will enter them .
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have eyes .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
that he may warn him who is alive , and that the word may be fulfilled against the disbelievers .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind wealth and relatives and kinsmen , fairly and correctly—a duty on the pious .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh , 'shall we have a reward if we are the winners ? '
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
he said : art thou averse to my gods , o ibrahim ? if thou cease not , i will surely stone thee , and depart from me for a while .
some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment , but those who believe and do righteous deeds will have forgiveness and a great reward .
his companion said to him , as he conversed with him , `` do you disbelieve in him who created you from dust , then from a drop of semen , then fashioned you into a man ?
but allah will not defer any soul when its time has come ; and allah is aware of what you do .
we have warned you of a near punishment , on that day a man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust . ''
fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion of allah . if they desist , then there is no hostility except against the oppressors .
this is a reminder , so whoever wills , let him take a way to his lord .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
they ask you about a game . say : `` the great indecency is more shameful than it . '' but it will be said to them : `` it is only a great act that has been sent down to them . that is how allah will make clear to you the message that you may make clear . ''
they will not avail you at all against god . the unjust are friends of one another . god is the friend of the pious ones .
and if you turn away , then indeed , if you can make a breach with them , then if you can make a breach with the earth , you may find a part of it as a sign , so do not be one of the pious .
ha mim
`` and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , except that my lord is forgiving and merciful .
this is the paradise which you are made to inherit because of what you used to do .
and remember the name of your lord morning and evening ,
and he shows you his signs ; so which of god 's signs will you deny ?
say : `` what is the matter with you that you judge in the truth ? '' say : `` allah is the witness of the truth , and to me is the witness of the truth . '' and say : `` allah is the one who is a witness between me and you . '' say : `` indeed , allah is the one who is the truth , and i am one of the witnesses . ''
each of them did not deny the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , so that he may make it prevail over all religions , though the polytheists may detest .
praise be to allah , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . his is the praise in the hereafter , and he is the wise , the aware .
so do not hurry against them . we are counting for them a countdown .
and you are a lodger in this country .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever , for that they used to deny our signs .
and hell will be brought forward for those who see ,
and if the armies had been stormed , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have committed it and would have hesitated in it but a little .
so worship what you will besides him . say : `` the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the clear loss . ''
who does greater wrong than he who fabricates a lie against allah or denies his signs ? they will say to them , `` those who have been willing to call for god will call to them , and they will say , `` they have claimed that they are disbelievers . ''
as for the righteous , they will be in gardens and bliss ,
and do not take your lord for what has been sent down to you from your lord . he has sent down to you a messenger from your lord , so that he will not be grieved .
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
and be patient . your patience is only with the help of allah ; and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed by their deceits .
we maderefuse a wet nurse . so his sister said : `` shall i direct you to a household of a household who will take care of him ? ''
and there was a servant of ours to his servants who had received a son , and we gave them knowledge , and moses said : `` shall i follow you that you may follow the knowledge ? ''
these are they who have purchased error for guidance , so their commerce has not been profitless , and they are not guided .
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection , which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful in speech than allah ?
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
they said : o dhu ' l-qarneyn ! lo ! gog and magog are corruption in the land , so that thou mightest erect a barrier between us and them .
god accepts repentance from his messenger and those who gave the lie to the messenger , and those who had followed the messenger , and those who had received the faith of the messenger after it had become clear to them . indeed , he is compassionate and merciful .
and indeed we destroyed the towns around you , and we haveshownthe ayatin various ways that they might return .
indeed , whoever submits his face to allah and is virtuous , his reward is with his lord , and there will be no fear for them , nor shall they grieve .
we shall call the guards .
whoever strives , strives only for himself . indeed , allah is independent of the worlds .
a spring from which those neardrink .
by allah , we sentto many nations before you . but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , and he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
they will remain in it forever , and their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be reprieved .
and they say , `` obey you , '' but when you are set up in your presence , a party of you will be in the night , and you will not be able to believe in it . so turn away from the night , and allah is sufficient as your guardian .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and it is for the two kinds of enjoyment for whom he pleases , and for whom is a provision of that which is with him and for whom is a good provision , and a duty upon him who is responsible for it , and is a duty upon him . and if you do not , then make no one to be a slip ; and for the sake of allah , that is not a trial for you , and if you do not do , then surely it is a thing for which you are doing
no nation can anticipate their term , nor can they delay it .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask for forgiveness for the idolaters , even though they are near to the people of the fire , though they are the people of hell .
gardens of eden , whereof the gates are opened for them ,
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
and for you there is a charge of that of which you are decreed for you , and those of you who have made lawful for you , and your women , and that you may be of the pure , and to make your wives , and a covenant with which you are upright . and indeed , allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the merciful is the most merciful , ask him .
and to him belongs all that is in their own hands , and the angels , and the angels , and the exalted in might , the most honourable , the most praiseworthy . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and if you were to divorce the children of old before the time of old , they would take you back to a matter in which you are made to live , and you will have no means to make a testament in the least , except for the cause of god . god is seeing of what you do .
and they say , “ o you who received the reminder , you are insane . ”
it is he who is allah in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-wise , the all-knowing .
he said , “ what my lord has given me is better ; therefore help me with strength , and i will erect a barrier between you and them . ”
say : o allah ! originator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen , thou shalt judge between thy servants concerning that wherein they differ .
i am only a plain warner . ''
and the devil turned away from them and said , `` descend from the ground to the earth , and to be the ground for you to be taken to the earth . '' and in order that they may take a certain settlement from the land .
as for him who thinketh himself independent ,
said : `` o my people ! should i have a right course from my lord , i am good and good from him ? '' then are you close to him ? so do you not believe in it ? so do you believe ?
and we helped them , so they were victorious .
and covered them with that which he covered .
they will say : `` glory to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , but they worshipped the jinns , but most of them believed in them . ''
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
and if they had been pleased with allah , they would have made a covenant with him , and say : `` allah is sufficient for us , and we will not make him as a caretaker for him , and he has given us his bounty . verily , we may take care of allah . ''
and there is not a place of place in place of a place of return , from their lord , and we shall make obeisance to them and provided them with knowledge and wisdom .
and proclaim the pilgrimage to mankind , and they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel , coming from every deep ravine ,
now ask them : `` are theredaughters for your lord and sons for them ? ''
for what they used to do .
and they say : what is the matter with this messenger , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? wherefore was not an angel sent down unto him ?
and i ask of you no hire therefor ; my hire is but with the lord of the worlds .
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you ; to us is their return , and we shall inform them of what they did . surely allah knows what is in the breasts .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , when it quakes ?
say to those who disbelieve , if they desist , past past will be forgiven them , and if they turn back , then indeed the example of the ancients has passed away .
to the lord of the universe that i may tell the people of the knowledge of the law . '' in order to say to the people of the book : `` even though i am a lying , '' in the way of pharaoh , indeed , the guile of the pharaoh is in the way .
say : `` if the most merciful had a son , i would be the first to worship ! ''
indeed , those who disbelieve , and do not die , and make them a solid of it , it will not be accepted from them , nor will they be able to have any aides . they will have a painful punishment .
and those who do not worship any other god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by the truth , and commit not fornication , and whoever does this shall meet it .
indeed satan desires to make a trial for you in the ways of god , and the names of which you are upright . will you not then understand ?
verily , there are guardians over you ,
worship allah and fear him , and obey me .
those who answer their lord , and establish prayer , and whose affairs are firm of consultation , and spend of what we have provided them .
when the sky is stripped off ,
and to them they have attributed to them daughters , and they are with allah , if your father is true . and if you are of your father , he is your brethren-in-faith ; and for allah is the forgiving , the most merciful .
and we made the sky a protected ceiling , but they turn away from its signs .
there are degrees according to what they have done , in order that he may recompense them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
this is a declaration of immunity from allah and his messenger to the polytheists with whom you had made a treaty .
and remember that which allah has made you successors in the land , and in the land , in the land , and the mountains are firm in the land . so remember the blessing of allah and spread corruption in the land and spread corruption .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , “ this is my lord . ” but when it set , he said , “ if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the misguided . ”
and that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you , so you became among the losers .
and the one who has taken the hands of him from his own hands , and the good deeds , is a part of it ; so they will be seized by a thing in which he has been sent down , and allah does not like the mischief-makers .
and if you fear treachery from a people , then break offwith them , for god does not like the treacherous .
and those who do not know what is said to us , is with us , or do not a sign for them , or have any sign before them ; and we have made a sign for those who seek the truth , and we have set a clear sign for those who seek the truth .
say : 'what think you ? if your water is the water of the water , who will bring you running water '
there is not one of you but will reach it . this is a decree of your lord .
those who fulfill your covenant to allah , and are firm in respect of god . as for him who is bound to make it firm , it is more difficult for him , and he is the mighty , the great .
and pharaoh and those before him , and the overturned cities committed evil .
when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice in it , but when evil afflicts them because of what their hands have put forth , they begin to despair .
but he tarried not long , and said : i have comprehended what thou hast not comprehended , and i have come to thee from sheba with sure tidings .
he said , “ i am god ’ s servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
thereinis decreed every affair of wisdom ,
as for the righteous , they will be in gardens and bliss ,
the chiefs of the people of the book has also got it in the book . it is a definite reading to which it is revealed to the book . the learned men of the book will be revealed to it . the learned men of the book will say to them , `` god has knowledge of all the things they do . ''
allah does not like the disclosure ofevilin speech except by one who has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
by al-'asr .
their garments of liquid pitch , and their faces enveloped by the fire .
did not those who disbelieve see that the heavens and the earth were one mass , then we parted them , and we made every living thing from water ? will they not then believe ?
a spring from which those neardrink .
the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for its labors .
i convey to you the messages of my lord , and i am a trustworthy adviser to you .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
that i may guide you to your lord , so that you may fear him ? ''
and it is he who turns to a believer , which he turns back , so that they are disheartened by their own land , and they have no faith in it . and the people of the book will have no faith , and they will have a place of storageor in their meanings ] . and it is the fellowship of allah who have been mentioned . and it is the end of those who have been commanded .
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
peace be upon elias .
i had no knowledge of the highest chiefs when they disputed .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
my power has vanished from me . ”
except the prayerful ,
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he attains the age of strength , and fulfil the covenant ; surely the covenant will be questioned .
so leave them alone until they meet their day in which they will be stunned .
by no means ! he shall be cast into the crushing fire .
those who disbelieve think that they will not be resurrected . say : `` yes , by my lord , you will certainly be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did . and that is easy for allah . ''
and they have made a kinship between him and the jinns , and the jinns know that they will be arraigned .
their reckoning has drawn near to mankind , and they turn away in heedlessness .
and when the relatives and orphans and the needy are present by the division , provide for them out of it , and speak to them words of kindness .
he was one of our believing servants .
the number of a number of years is that if they are in the midst of the part of the day of the amount of the matter , say to the poor in the land : `` those who are in the midst of the world to come , will not be able to make a testament in the matter of the poor . if only you knew it .
they will say : `` glory to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , but they worshipped the jinns , but most of them believed in them . ''
some of us have surrenderedand some of us have deviated . those who have embraced islam have the right way .
their recompense is hell , because they disbelieved and took my signs for a jest and my messengers .
the people of al-hijr also rejected the messengers ,
in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of night and day , and that which is in the heavens and the earth will be made to appear to the heavens and in the earth , and in the land , and in the earth , it is the same for those who are in the heavens and the earth , and they are the like of the lord of the universe .
we gave abraham his integrity formerly , and we knew him well .
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of moses said : `` we are sure to be overtaken . ''
we have sent you with the truth , as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . there is no nation but a warner has passed .
when they entered into the presence of joseph , he took his brotheraside . he said , “ i am your brother , so do not grieve for what they used to do . ”
surely the god-fearing shall have gardens of bliss with their lord .
and when the stars darken ,
so when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said , “ this is a cloud that will bring us rain . ” in fact , it is what you were impatient for , a wind that is a painful punishment .
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as though he heard them not . give him the glad tidings of a painful punishment .
for if they come to know , they will stone you to death or force you back to their religion . then you will never prosper . ''
and recall what time he spake unto him , lo ! he deemed that he would not be pliant . and he was free from the city . and he said , “ there is no god except you . indeed , i am one of the wrongdoers . ”
then we pardoned you after that that you might give thanks .
god will forgive those who believe , and he will bring them to the light of the light of the light , and they will say , `` the people who are bent on denying the truth will be the unbelievers , and they will be in the midst of the blazing fire . ''
who is it that will lend allah a goodly loan , so that he may multiply it for him manifold ? allah grasps and outspreads and to him you will be returned .
and you do not have any wealth and your children , but do not be of your own deeds , but those who believe and do good deeds will be recompensed for their deeds , and they will live in it for ever .
and it is he who has let free the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the salt that he has set forth , and he has set a barrier between them , and a ban forbidden .
and the sorcerers fell down prostrate .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and we shall bring it all together , and we will bring forth all things in the womb of the two of them . and we will bring forth a veil between the two of them , and behold , there are signs in this for those who believe .
say : 'obey allah and the messenger ' but if they turn away , then verily allah loveth not the disbelievers .
o man ! what has deceived you concerning your generous lord ,
so we sent against them the flood and the locusts and the verminand the frogs and the blood , clear signs , but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would take heed ?
nay , but the record of the righteous isin 'illiyin .
and ask thou about the men of that which they have been forbidden for women . say thou : allah will be responsible for you , and will not be held up with what he hath sent down in the book . and whosoever is in the book of allah , will not be able to do so . and he is the best knower of that which ye associate . and allah is the best knower of that which ye associate .
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet among the righteous .
and theright on the high-road .
they will have fruits and whatever they ask for .
say , `` is it that you can create any other than allah ? '' if he had brought it back or would have brought it into the hereafter , will you then be the greatest losers ?
so fear allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend . those who are saved from their own greed , and whoever is saved from his own greed , it is they who are the successful .
then indeed , your lord is forgiving and merciful to those who migrated after they had been persecuted , and waged jihad and remained steadfast .
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger .
are you not at all present for them ? when the children of his children said to them , `` what do you worship , your fathers , and the son of old ? '' and they are obedient to him .
burn therein this day for your disbelief .
praise be to allah , lord of the worlds .
and how did you command that which you had been commanded ? and then , be with allah , to be of those who repent , and turn to allah . lo ! he is seer of what they do .
god has heard the statement of those who said , `` god is poor and we are rich . '' we will write down what they said , and their killing of the prophets unjustly , and we shall say : taste the torment of the burning fire .
nor are the living and the dead alike . surely allah makes whom he will hear , but you can not make those who are in their graves hear .
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
you lust after men instead of women . you are a people transgressing beyond bounds . ''
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you took captive .
does he not know that allah sees ?
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
except those who believe and do righteous deeds , and exhort one another to truth , and exhort one another to patience .
and allah will not take you to task for you , when you are , by your oaths , and that you may be of the same for it , and that you may be able to do so . and that is how you will be able to do so . and that is how you will be able to do so . that is how allah explains to you his revelations , so that you may give thanks .
then we sent messengers after a messenger , after a messenger , a messenger from among his people , and we sent to them a messenger from among the people of the world ; and we made them as a partner to the people , so they do not believe .
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed in it . those who do not judge according to what allah has sent down , are the transgressors .
then lodged it in a secure place
o you who have faith ! when you have embarked on allah , strive hard in the way of god , and do not say to him , `` you will not be faithful to the law of this world , and you will not be faithful to the people of the world ; and the people of the world and the injeel ] have said , `` why do you not take the care of god ? '' and the people of the city were told , `` why do you not be faithful to god ? '' and
allah , your lord and the lord of your forefathers ? ''
as for those who have divided their religion , and set forth in fragments , they will not be able to keep you in any way , nor are you going to be responsible for their deeds .
and as for those who are bent on denying the truth , they will not be able to hear the truth , and they will not be able to hear the truth , and allah is seeing of the things they do .
if you fear not the matter of an evil man , they have made lawful for you in the same manner . as for the same , some of them are forbidden to each other , or whether you are afraid of four times that it may be equal to the same , or that those who do wrong will have the same way . that is what they do .
and those who believe and do good works we shall admit them among the righteous .
and whoever seeks a religion other than islam , it will not be accepted from him , and he will be among the losers in the hereafter .
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but how will he be mindful ?
and you commited what you did , and you are ungrateful . ''
those whom the angels take to themselves , and they say : peace be upon you ! enter paradise because of what you did .
so they will confess their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
in this there is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day when mankind will be gathered together , and that is a day witnessed .
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
and they assign daughters to allah , glory be to him , and for themselveswhat they desire .
a guidance and good news for the believers .
he said : these are my daughters , if ye must be doing .
there are degrees according to what they have done , in order that he may recompense them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you and the believers who follow you .
only those believe in our signs who , when they are reminded of them , fall down prostrate and celebrate the praise of their lord , and they are not arrogant .
so turn away from him who turns away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the life of the world .
she said : `` o chiefs ! advise me in my case . i have no affair until you are present with me . ''
say : i ask of you no wage for this ; i am not a pretender .
in this province belongs to god . his is the best reward , and he is the best of the final outcome .
and it will be said : 'today , we will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and none will help you .
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
say : `` who can protect you from the torment by night and by day , but they turn away from the remembrance of their lord ? ''
they will say : `` praise be to allah , who has promised us the promise of which we have promised us . '' and we shall assign to him the best of the good things , and excellent is the final reward .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah and obey his messenger , if you are believers .
who terrorised the region ,
we have certainly created the jinn and human beings , and the hearts of those who have no understanding . but they are not able to listen , but they are neglectful of it . they are heedless of the truth .
and indeed , allah 's is the abode of the hereafter , and they fight in the way of allah . and who will be responsible for the law of god . and who is the guardian of the things that is in the law . and that is the ultimate achievement .
is he who has brought the dead to life , and we have made the light of the people in the light of the men and the light ? that is how they will be in darkness , and that is what they are doing .
say : `` praise be to allah , and peace on his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ? ''
say : it is a message of importance ,
those who disbelieve in the remembrance when it comes to them , and indeed it is a mighty book .
but those who disbelieve and belie our verses shall be the inmates of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
do they think that we enlarge them in wealth and children ,
and couldst thou see when they are terrified with no escape , and they shall be seized from a place drawn near .
that he may make clear to them that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
and those who have knowledge of the truth should be said to them , `` woe to you ! for you is better for you , and do not reward the righteously striving believers . the reward of those who have faith will be patient .
this day every soul will be recompensed for what it has earned . no injustice today . indeed allah is swift at reckoning .
about the guilty .
the people of the book ask you that you should receive a book from the sky . they said , `` we make clear to you the most great , and they said , `` we make clear to them the sound of the lightning . '' they said , `` we make clear to them the manifest signs , and we have given them a sign . ''
allah has cursed him . he said , “ i will take from your servants a share of your servants . ”
and do not be like your oaths as a recent cup , and you do not have any deviation in it , and then you are the one who has no faith in it .
and indeed we know that your heart is strained by what they say .
it gives its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . allah presents parables for mankind , so that they may reflect .
the day when they will be pitched into the fire of hell ,
indeed , we shall cast upon you a weighty word .
the knowledge of the knowledge of the knowledge is hidden from allah , and the one who is not able to bring any knowledge in the land except him ; and he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . and he is the all-knower of the things that is in the heavens and the earth . and what is there in the heavens and the earth , or is it that is in the law of allah .
say , `` yes , and you will becontemptible . ''
and those who avoid heinous sins and indecencies , and when they are angry , they forgive .
they will say : nay ! no welcome for you . it is you who have brought it down . evil is the resting-place .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add punishment to punishment , for that they were doing corruption .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and to establish prayer , and fear him , and to him you shall all be gathered .
when your father came to you , and said , `` will i direct you to you until i make you clear ? '' he said , `` do you wish to give me something clear to your father , so that you may be tested ? '' and we have made you forget the time of the world , and we have made you a tryst for the nations .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
and if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of unbelief ; surely they have no oaths , that they may desist .
and it is not a thing for amusement .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary , can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
and in the earth he set firm mountains in order that he might make it firm , and in the mountains that it might be not a dweller from the mountains , and in the midst of the mountains , that they may be of the good .
shall i take other gods besides him ? if the merciful desires to afflict me , their intercession will not avail me , nor will they save me .
then they will be picked up from the fruit of the date-palm , and say : `` i am going to send a present to the most compassionate lord , '' say , `` i am not able to speak to the merciful . ''
he said to his pages , ‘ put their moneyinto their saddlebags . maybe they will recognize it when they return to their folks , so that they may come back . ’
would that you had thought that they would surely be able to do it , but allah would not know those who have fought , and their hearts , and the believers , and allah is aware of what they do .
they will abide therein for ages .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
what , do you approach men and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? '' but the answer of his people was only that they said , “ bring the punishment of allah upon us if you are truthful . ”
they will have fruits and whatever they ask for .
but whoever comes to him as a believer , and does righteous deeds , will have the highest ranks ,
do not groan today . you will not be helped by us .
as though they had never lived there . lo ! thamud disbelieved in their lord . lo ! away with thamud !
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running ; he said , “ o moses , the elite are conspiring to kill you . ”
they are onguidance from their lord , and it is they who are the successful .
say : you will not be questioned about our sins nor shall we be questioned about what you do .
woe to me ! would that i had never taken so-and-so as friend !
that you will have whatever you choose ?
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
or are the like of the garden that it is spread out of its clouds , and he sends down water from its clouds , and at the gate that allah has not made a covenant with him ?
those whom they invoke besides him have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth , and they know .
when he said to his father : `` o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see nor benefit you at all ?
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and a witness of her household bore witness : if his shirt is torn from the front , she is the truth , and he is of the liars .
when they entered upon him , they said , “ peace ” ; he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ ”
by al-'asr .
how many an animal there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . he is the hearer , the knower .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them , and has appointed for them a term whereof there is no doubt ? but the unjust refuseexcept disbelief .
allah does not forbid you from those who have not fought you against those who fought against you , nor expelled you from your homes . god loves the equitable .
they take you over that which they have surrendered . say : `` do not favour me with islam . nay , but allah has conferred a favour upon you , in fact allah has favoured you , if you are truthful . ''
and remember the name of your lord morning and evening ,
whomever allah leads astray has no guide , and he leaves them blundering in their rebellion .
god knows those among you who hinder , and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , '' and come to the battle , and come to battle but seldom .
until he was two bows ' length away , or nearer .
god has heard the words of her who pleads with you concerning her husband and complains to allah . god hears the contentions of both of you . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
do they await anything but that they are waiting for the day of resurrection , or the word of your lord will come to pass , and those who passed away before them ? they are not unjust to themselves .
those who do not expect to meet us , and are pleased with the life of this world and who are oblivious of our signs
saying : `` restore to me the servants of allah . i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
they can not eavesdrop on the supernal elite , for they are pelted from every side ,
they have led many astray . do not increase the wrongdoers except in confusion . ''
he it is who has made the sun a lamp and the moon , and has made the sun a beacon for it . but allah has made the clear signs for those who have no understanding .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the righteous .
and what you do not see ,
it is he who has revealed to you the book from that which is true , and no one is reminded of it .
nay ! you shall soon know .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among you , who recites to you our verses and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you that which you did not know .
when the wild beasts are herded together ,
and how many a city have we destroyed that exulted in their life ! and those are their dwellings , uninhabited after them except for a little while , and we are the inheritors .
or have you a book in which you read
whoever is an enemy to god and his angels and his messengers , and gabriel and michael , god is an enemy to the unbelievers . ''
they will come forth from the graves as if they were scattered locusts ,
do you then dispute with me concerning me , when they are guided , and to show me the way of that which you have been warned ? my lord is not aware of what you do .
and certainly there came to them a messenger from among themselves , but they denied him , so the punishment seized them while they were unjust .
looking towards their lord .
o you who believe ! take your precautions , then go forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
he said , “ i am better than he ; you created me from fire , and you created him from clay . ”
when it is said to them : `` beware of what is before you and what is behind you , in order that you may receive mercy . ''
so worship what you will besides him . say : `` the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the clear loss . ''
abasing exalting .
and when an age of women is decreed for you , they will be responsible for your own good , or a place of safety . and do not be a tenth of what he has given you . and remember the good things that he has sent down to you , and do not be a tenth of what he has sent down to you , and do not be a tenth of what he has sent down to you , and remember the reminder to you . and remember allah ’ s revelations , and remember you the
will be gathered together for the appointment of a known day . ”
and this is a book we have revealed , blessed , so follow it and fear allah , that you may receive mercy .
and we did not make them bodies not eating food , nor were they immortal .
let man look at his food ,
how will it be when the angels take them away , striking their faces and their backs ?
as for those who believe and those who emigrate and struggle in the way of allah , they will have hope of the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
so how were my punishment and my warnings ?
say , “ o people of the book ! do not exceed the limits in your religion , and do not follow the whims of those who went astray before and led many astray , and they have strayed from the straight path . ”
and seek forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
and they fall down on their faces weeping , and it increases them in humility .
he said : they are close on my track , and i hastened to you , my lord , that you might be pleased .
but they turned away , so we sent upon them a flood from the dam and replaced them with two gardens , tamarisks , and a few lote-trees .
we would have been the chosen servants of god . ''
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us the cow ” ; he said , “ he says to the cow ” ; he said , ‘ the cow is that neither old nor too young , but what you are commanded . ’
but as for him who believes and does good works , he will reward him with a good deed , and we shall speak to him a mild command .
they say : `` why were not signs sent down to him from his lord ? '' say : `` signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner . ''
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like aggressors .
except an old woman who stayed behind ,
exclaim not today for one destruction , but call for many deaths .
thenrest and bounty and a garden of bliss .
so he has no friend here today ,
and say to him , 'would youpurify yourself
and of men , and beasts and cattle , how many of them have knowledge of god . the knowledge of his servants is only that they fear . god is majestic and all-forgiving .
and how can they come to you for judgement while they have the torah , in which is the law of god ? yet they turn away after that . they are not believers .
when you recite the quran , we place between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
and we have not sent down upon the people of the fire but the angels , but it is only for a trial for those who disbelieve , and to those who disbelieve , in order that the disbelievers may have the faith of the book , and to those who have faith . and those who have the faith of the book will have a lesson from their lord . and those who have faith and do not believe in the book , allah will make it a clear account for those who have faith .
and it is he who has spread out the earth , and has made therein mountains standing firm , and in the midst of the two of them ; surely in that are signs for a people who reflect .
`` go to pharaoh , he has transgressed all bounds .
certainly allah has conferred a favour upon the believers when he has sent a messenger from among themselves , reciting to them his verses and purify themselves , and teaches them the book and wisdom , and before them were in manifest error .
and the people of the city were made to settle their people in the matter of the truth , and the matter was made to settle in their promise to the children of israel , and to what they had been commanded . and to all that they had been doing .
said : `` we have tested your people in your absence , and the samiri has led them astray . ''
he begetteth not , nor was he begotten .
and it is the same to them that they will have the truth , and they will not be able to make the favour of solomon , and they will not be able to give the lie to the truth , and they will not have any faith in it , but they will have a lesson from among the people of the world , and they will not have any knowledge of it . and they have no faith in it , but they will not have any faith in it , but they do not know .
the revelation of the book is from the lord of the worlds .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
and they say what they do not do ?
and then there comes to them that which they were promised .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are rightly guided .
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise up him who dies . in fact , he is a promiseupon him , but most people do not know .
and he said : o my people ! ye are in the midst of that which ye are created in the world , and in the hereafter ; and so that ye may save us from the torment of allah , and that i should say : i am only a temptation , and i am the best of the worshippers .
alif , lam , ra.a book which we have revealed to you that you may bring people out of darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
it is he who has created you from a single soul , and then a place of residingand a place of storageor in your affairs . we have detailed our revelations for a people who understand .
they will say : nay ! no welcome for you . it is you who have brought it down . evil is the resting-place .
i have the stores of the treasuries of god and i do not know the unseen , and i know what is in the unseen . god is well aware of those who do wrong . god is well aware of the wrongdoers .
and had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word is realized that i will fill hell with jinns and men , all together .
on the day when the first blast shivers
would that you had thought that they would surely be able to do it , but allah would not know those who have fought , and their hearts , and the believers , and allah is aware of what they do .
and by the earth which splitteth ,
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
we have decreed death for you , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
the heart did not deny what it saw .
behaving arrogantly , and talking nonsense . ''
you have no concern in the matter whether he turns towards them or punishes them . they are wrongdoers .
and verily this your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
and verily we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
these are the unbelievers , the immoral .
and he entered his garden , wronging himself . he said , “ i do not think that this will ever perish . ”
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of shadowseized them . indeed , it was the punishment of a great day .
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols allah 's glory ; and to him belongs all praise ; and he is able to do all things .
has the story of the people of the ancients come to you ? the people of the town , who had no knowledge except allah , and they had no knowledge of what you had sent down to them . and they had no knowledge of what you had sent down to them . and they were not aware of what you had been sent with , and we would have been in grave doubt concerning what you have been doing .
as for those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
and we communicated to him the decree that the unbelievers would be destroyed .
we shall call the guards .
they will say , `` to allah . '' say : `` then how are you bewitched ? ''
and when he reached his maturity , and became firm , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the virtuous .
and when the messengers areappointed a time .
and it is he who sends down cattle , so that he may sink down into the midst of the clouds , and allah will bring it to light , and then he will bring it into the sky ; and when he sends down the shechina upon them , they will be among the glad tidings .
they said , “ o noah ! you have disputed with us and disputed with us , so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
this is nothing but a reminder to the worlds ,
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were stronger in prowess than they , so they searched the land ? is there any place of refuge ?
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and they will abide therein .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
they will say , ‘ yes , a warner has come to us , but we denied him , and said , ‘ allah has not sent down anything , you are only in great error . ’
allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the supreme triumph .
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of those before them . most of them were idolaters .
maybe allah will pardon them , and allah is ever pardoning and forgiving .
and wait , for we are waiting . ''
then he retreated and waxed proud ,
have you not seen how he saw him who is in the heavens and the earth , and the sun and the moon ? and the sun and the moon are and the sun and the moon , and he is the exalted in might , the most merciful .
they say : `` this life of the world is but the life of the world . and let them live in it , and let them live in the presence of the life of this world , and when they are not able to have any knowledge , they will have no knowledge .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
he said : `` o listener ! take refuge with me , and he will have no protection on this day . '' he said , `` there is no escape for him . ''
bring your book , if you are truthful .
in a book well-guarded .
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
and he said : my lord ! i have taken a plot from that which they have entrusted unto me , and if ye are not able to give them a plot , then i am innocent of them , and i am of the ignorant .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i favoured you and that i preferred you tocreatures .
indeed the godwary will be amid shades and springs ,
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , there would have befallen you a great punishment for what you ventured into .
`` peace be upon you for that you persevered in patience . how excellent is the final home ! ''
allah is not a withholder of it , nor brings it to more than he , or more . those who believe will be greatly proud , or those who have faith in it , except those who are bent on denying the truth . they are the ones who have faith in their lord , and he will guide them . but they are the fasiqun .
they almost provoked you , to expel you from the land , but they would not have stayed after you but a little .
o you who believe ! whoever of you follows the religion of his religion , then will be one of those who are able to take it away , and they will be in the presence of the lord of the universe , who will not be able to make any testament , and he is the embracer , the knower .
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
indeed in this is a sign for the believers .
and in the earth he set firm mountains in order that he might make it firm , and in the mountains that it might be not a dweller from the mountains , and in the midst of the mountains , that they may be of the good .
`` i am your lord , most high '' .
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are the ones whom allah has guided . these are the men of understanding .
and this is my path , which is straight , so follow it , and do not follow other paths , lest you become separated from his way . that is the command of allah , so that you may guard .
then he took his brother in the midst of his brother , even though it was the time of his brother , and then we gave him his brother his brother his brother his brother , and he is the exalted in might , full of knowledge .
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are rightly guided .
until the inevitable event came to us . ”
but they denied it , so they will soon come to know .
but allah will not defer any soul when its time has come ; and allah is aware of what you do .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it ; and whoever believes in his lord , he will fear neither paltriness nor vileness .
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and allwe made righteous .
and some faces will be scowling on that day ,
woe to those who disbelieve in the day which they are promised .
o you who believe ! do not take the enemies of me , nor do you hope for your own hopes , while they are conscious of god , and that you may have the faith of your lord , and what you have been doing . and indeed , those who do not believe in allah , to make things clear to you , are indeed the ones who do not believe in me . indeed , i have been innocent of what you do .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring allah and the angels face to face .
does every man among them hope to enter the garden of bliss ?
and your lord inspired the bee : `` make your homes in the mountains , and in the trees , and in the trees and in what they erect .
and if thou turnest away from them awaiting mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
they will say : `` we stayed a day or part of a day ; ask those who keep count . ''
on the day when the hour will be established , that day shallbe separated .
that you will have whatever you choose ?
remember allah 's promise to you , that you should be a cop-out and a good deed for you . god wants to make the truth clear to you , and he wills to confirm the truth with his command , or he will say ,
it may be that allah will create friendship between you and those among them who are your enemies , and allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
but when he gave them of his bounty , they became niggardly , and turned away .
who created the heavens and the earth , what is with you , and the mountains are scattered in the land , and with it we have made it grow in the land . and we have sent down to them the rain of the sky and in the land as a beautiful water .
those who did not turn away from him , they said : `` we have followed you , '' but when you come to them , they will say , `` you have no faith in us . '' they say , `` you have no faith in us . '' they say , `` you have no faith in us . '' in fact , they have no faith in god .
so they turned their backs on him and went away .
they know what you do .
not a sign of their lord comes to them , but they turn away from it .
so he has no friend here today ,
when the sky is split asunder
no sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
but his lord chose him and made him one of the righteous .
allah commands you to restore trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , judge with fairness ; and the example of the people . god gives you advice . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and nothing prevented men from believing when guidance came to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord except that the precedent of the ancients should come upon them , or that the punishment should come upon them face to face .
we created man from an extract of clay .
when our clear verses are recited to them , the unbelievers say to the truth when it has come to them : `` this is clear magic . ''
then we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
they said , `` by allah , you will never cease remembering joseph until you are consumed , or become ruined . ''
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself to allah and is a doer of good , and follows the religion of abraham , a hanif ? and allah took abraham as a friend .
ranks from him , forgiveness and mercy ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
those who say : `` our lord ! we have believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the torment of the fire . ''
he said : my lord ! because thou hast led me to error , i will makefair-seeming to them on the earth , and i shall mislead them all
there is some of them that will listen to you , and you will speak to you until the time of the time when you are bidden to speak in your speech . what is the matter with you , that they may have a set of their own desires ?
you will not attain righteousness until you spend of what you love . and whatever you spend is known to allah .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , that you may become righteous .
were we fatigued by the first creation ? but they are in doubt about a new creation .
lot was also one of the messengers .
and they said : what ! shall we follow a mortal from among ourselves , but we should surely be in error and madness ?
so taste the consequences of your forgetting the meeting of this day . we have forgotten you . taste the eternal punishment for what you used to do . ''
who taught by the pen ,
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and zakah and he was pleased with his lord .
they ask you to hasten the punishment , and if we had not given them a promise , we had already decreed for them the punishment , and the punishment came upon them suddenly , while they were unaware .
and they say , `` obey you , '' but when you are set up in your presence , a party of you will be in the night , and you will not be able to believe in it . so turn away from the night , and allah is sufficient as your guardian .
and indeed , your lord will gather them all together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
allah does not forgiveassociation with him , but he forgives whom he wills . and whoever associates with allah has strayed far away . indeed , he has gone astray in far error .
he said , “ i only complain of my grief and sorrow to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
each of them did not deny the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
have you not seen those who received a portion of the book , when they are invited to the book of allah that he may judge between them , then a group of them turn away ?
they do not speak before he speaks , and they act by his command .
he was one of our believing servants .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
who set up another god with god . throw him into the severe punishment . ''
and we used to deny the day of recompense
he said : take hold of it and fear not ; we shall restore it to its former state .
allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the supreme triumph .
their security during winter and summer journeys .
these are they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the sky , and he made them seven heavens , and he has knowledge of all things .
and hell will be placed in clear view
we had commanded adam before , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
for every people is a term . when their term comes , they will not be able to delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
indeed , my servants have no authority over you , except those who follow you .
he said : therein ye shall live , and therein ye shall die , and from thence ye shall be brought forth .
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the most gracious , '' they say : `` what is the beneficent god ? will we prostrate ourselves to what thou commandest us ? '' and it increases their aversion .
and mention in the book abraham . lo ! he was a saint , a prophet .
for a known calculated term ?
say : 'travel the land and see what was the end of the rejecters '
and we will settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ''
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe !
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believing women , that they may draw their outer garments to their faces , so that they will not be aware . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission may be granted to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger remained behind . a painful punishment will afflict those of them who disbelieved .
to the 'ad we sent their brother people to say : `` o people , worship allah . you have no god other than he . this is a great god for you , and to make it a clear torment from the land for you . '' and it is a grievous punishment for you .
it is he who is allah in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-wise , the all-knowing .
those who have believed and migrated and fought in the way of allah , and those who have taken them with their own wealth , and those who have taken them in their homes , will have a portion of their homes . and if they do not believe in the hereafter , they will have a portion of their homes . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
he will say , “ how many years did you stay on earth ? ”
he said : it is my staff ; i lean on it , and i lean on it , and i have other uses for it .
say : `` do you worship besides allah that which has no power to harm or benefit you ? '' it is god who is the hearer , the knower .
those who were arrogant will say to those who were oppressed , “ did we bar you from the guidance after it had come to you ? rather , you were criminals . ”
and you will be three sorts .
and we shall drive the guilty ones to hell as a thirsty herd .
is it you who send it down from the clouds , or are we the sender ?
surely in that are signs , and indeed , we are ever testing .
they said : `` woe to us ! verily , we were taghun
he said , “ you are of those reprieved . ”
againwe bestowed our favour upon moses and aaron .
my lord ! grant me wisdom and join me with the righteous .
and say : `` glory to our lord ! verily , the promise of our lord is bound to be fulfilled . ''
they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
he who made the earth a cradle for you , and made roads for you therein , so that you may be guided .
but those who deny our signs and treat them with arrogance , are the people of hell ; they will remain in it forever .
so we destroyed men mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and none will have any choice in his power , nor has it been measured for all things .
you are only a human being like us , and we think you are a liar .
but the wretched will avoid it .
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
and we sent not a prophet to any town but we seized its people with tribulation and adversity so that they might humble themselves .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and leave the earth a levelled plain ,
they were unable to stand up , nor were they helped .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; then when the promise of my lord cometh , he will make it powder , and my lord 's promise is true .
and grapes and herbage ,
take this shirt of mine , and cast it on my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all your family . ''
do you not think that any one of you will be admitted into the sky to be admitted into the sky , and then let them turn away from you ? then you will be victorious .
and when an age of women is decreed for you , they will be responsible for your own good , or a place of safety . and do not be a tenth of what he has given you . and remember the good things that he has sent down to you , and do not be a tenth of what he has sent down to you , and do not be a tenth of what he has sent down to you , and remember the reminder to you . and remember allah ’ s revelations , and remember you the
he said , “ o my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? ” he made you forget his signs ; indeed my lord is well aware of what you do .
and if you are in a state of life , know that we have created you from the dead , and then he has created you from a drop of old , and then we will make it a complete seed in the land , and we will make it a complete way in the land , and we will make it a complete place of storageor in their homes , and in the same way , we will make it a complete place of return , and we will make a complete way for you .
say : 'whether you hide what is in your hearts or disclose it , allah knows it . he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth , and allah has power over all things . '
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above the nations ?
and recall when moses said to his people : `` o my people ! verily , you are going to go to him with the calf , and you seek to seek his repentance , and then you will not repent , and he is the one who accepts repentance , the most merciful . ''
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
loving , equals in age .
say : `` what is the matter with you that you judge in the truth ? '' say : `` allah is the witness of the truth , and to me is the witness of the truth . '' and say : `` allah is the one who is a witness between me and you . '' say : `` indeed , allah is the one who is the truth , and i am one of the witnesses . ''
those who love forgive and refrain from the great sins of the great sins , and there is no blame upon them . and indeed , your lord is able to do what you will , and you will not be able to make a testament in the belly of your lord . and he is able to do all things .
and if the debtor is in straitened circumstances , let him give him respite till a time . but if you remit the debt with it , it would be better for you if you only knew .
so he appealed to his lord : `` i am vanquished , so help me . ''
your lord has not forsaken you , nor is he displeased with you ,
verily the god-fearing shall be in gardens and fountains ,
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
indeed your lord will decide between them with his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
but whosoever turns away and disbelieves -
and the word will fall upon them because of their injustice , and they will not speak .
so , when the women of their own people got away , they would surely have taken the like of what you had done . and the like of it is the like of it , and to make it an example for the like of it ; and for them is a great forgiver .
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his messenger will be the fire of hell , abiding in it forever ? that is the supreme disgrace .
and the duty of god is obligation according to the same , and the evil of it is only for him , and we shall make a way for the people of it , and we shall make them a performer of the land , and we have made us a performer of the worlds ; and we shall make us a maintainer of evil . and we shall make us a performer of the universe , and we shall make us a performer of the worlds ; and we have been responsible for the people of the truth ,
say : `` is it one of your gods to show you the right way ? '' say : `` allah will guide the truth , '' say : `` allah will guide the truth , '' and will guide them to the truth , unless you will be guided . how do you judge ?
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without any harm— another sign .
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
those who are in the city are seated in the city , and their feet have been set in a row , and their feet have been set in battle , and they have no fear of allah . say , “ the fire is the fire , if you will understand . ”
it is not in the case of the believers , that it may be for the prayer of your worship , and at all of you , to be the first of the righteous . it is in the end of the righteous , and allah loves those who do good .
and the first of them will say to the last of them : `` you have no privilege over us . taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ''
or lest you should say , `` our fathers ascribed partners to god , and we were descendants after them . will you destroy us for what the falsifiers have done ? ''
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you . if you do so , you will be among the wrongdoers .
he will have no strength or helper .
and with the truth we have sent it down , and with truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bearer of good news and a warner .
he said , ‘ this is the parting between me and you . i will inform you of the interpretation of that you could not patiently bear .
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great success .
except the companions of the right hand .
and then , when it is said to them : `` we have brought your lord to make us submit to him . '' then be thou in the shades of the book . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who understand .
o you who believe ! know that the polytheists are among the polytheists , and they will have a heap of bad words , but if they are afraid of this , they will surely have the like of it , and if he wills , he will make you succeed .
your lord said to the angels : `` indeed , i am in the land a good place of worship . '' they said , `` is it one who is committing evil ? '' they said , “ is it that you do not know ? ” god is well aware of what you do .
yes , whoever fulfills his promise and guards - god loves the pious ones .
they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come forth in multitudes .
follow what has been revealed to you from your lord , there is no god but he ; and turn away from the polytheists .
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say : `` tales of the ancients ! ''
then it will be said to those who wronged themselves : 'taste the chastisement of eternity ! shall you not be requited for what you used to earn ? '
who created the heavens and the earth , what is with you , and the mountains are scattered in the land , and with it we have made it grow in the land . and we have sent down to them the rain of the sky and in the land as a beautiful water .
every soul is hostage to what it has earned ,
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you turned away ?
eat of that which we have provided for the good and the good things which we have provided for you , so that you may have taken my wrath , and that you will have no helpers .
so we seized him and his hosts and cast them into the sea . so see how was the end of the wrongdoers .
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and reminder for the godwary
and they say : `` o our lord ! bring to them the like of it , '' they will say : `` bring us what you have been doing in this world , and we will not be among the righteous . '' so , they will be told , `` taste now the punishment of hell , so that you will have no punishment . '' so they will have no punishment .
the people of lot rejected the warnings .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
averted from it is he who isaverse .
on that day they will be burnt in the fire ,
and spend in the way of allah , and do not cast yourselves into destruction by your own hands . do good , for allah loves the doers of good .
but those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are the companions of hell .
the day of decision is the appointed time for all of them .
and put thy trust in allah , and allah sufficeth as a trustee .
if you are eager to guide them , allah will not guide him who misleadeth . they have no helpers .
what is that in your right hand , o moses ? ''
and they say : we are morein wealth and children , and we shall not be punished .
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
say , `` if the sea had been decreed , i would have been informed of my lord ’ s knowledge and the sea , before that , the matter should be fulfilled , if only the sea had its knowledge , if you should be able to do so . ''
no soul knows what is kept hidden for them as a reward for what they used to do .
when you come to the hypocrites , they will say to you , `` do not ask forgiveness for you . '' say , `` do not ask those who do not believe in you . god has knowledge of all that you do . '' then you will be informed of what you do .
those who deny the truth say , `` shall we point out to you a man who will tell you when you are disintegrated in disintegration , you will be in a new creation ?
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
will surely eat of the tree of zaqqum
the word of moses was sent down by the command of moses , and it was the divine revelation of the book , and an arabic explanation of the end of those who did wrong .
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn away ,
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will be repaid only for what they used to do .
and in the earth he set firm mountains in order that he might make it firm , and in the mountains that it might be not a dweller from the mountains , and in the midst of the mountains , that they may be of the good .
and when you are made to live with your spouses , and your skins , and allah is the like of you , and allah is the most acceptor of all wants , and do not take a place to stay in the land , but those who are in the midst of the hereafter will be told , `` god is the most gracious , so that you may take the account of the land , while you are the ones who are bent on denying the truth . '' and it is in the end that you will
it was said : enter paradise . he said : 'would that my people knew
but when they saw it , they said , “ we have gone astray ,
we made a covenant with the children of israel , and we sent to them messengers . whenever a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire , a party of them they slew , and some they slew .
surely the dwellers of the garden will be in pastimes .
have you seen the fire which you kindle ?
o ye who believe ! be thou not one of the unseen , and let every soul be brought back to what he hath sent forward before ; and verily allah is aware of what ye do .
we gave moses the book , so do not be in doubt about his encounter , and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
the people of noah denied before them , and the dwellers of rass , and the thamud ,
they will say , “ to allah. ” say , “ will you not then remember ? ”
but those whose scales are light are those who have lost their souls , and they will abide in hell .
surely those who believe and do good works will appoint for them love .
joseph , turn away from this , and you , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you are indeed errant . ''
abiding therein forever . indeed , with allah is a great reward .
the sending down of the book is from allah , the all-mighty , the all-knowing ,
and to him belongs all that is in front of you , and in the presence of the enemies of allah , so that you may be subject to the enemies of allah , and keep your duty to him , and do not follow the enemies of allah . you will not be able to make such as go to your own enemy , and you will not be wronged .
they ask you to hasten the evil before , though they are the ones who have passed away before ; and indeed your lord is the lord of the past , and most surely your lord is the forgiving , the most merciful .
god will guide you to the people of the world , and were the people of the two part of the two part of the two part of it , they would have taken the same part of their own people . but if they were to do it , they would have taken it as a small time from which they had been given . and if they were to make a bequest for their own people , they would have taken it as a small time from which they had been given . and if they had been
that it is indeed the speech of a noble messenger .
is he who creates the creation of the creation then then brings it back to life in the earth , and who gives you a livelihood ? say : `` bring your signs , if you are truthful . ''
indeed he thought and deliberated .
and you will take to their wives and their spouses , and the night to come . so they will be waiting for the time of the time . and allah is aware of what they do . and allah is aware of what they do . and allah is aware of what they do .
to allah prostrates whosoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the morning and evening .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are scattered around ?
but you will not , unless allah wills , the lord of the worlds .
this is what you were promised , for every penitent and dutiful .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , their only argument is : `` bring our fathers back , if you are truthful . ''
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have earned , because of what they have earned , and that they may taste a part of it , so that they may return .
say , “ my lord will not give you any power , if you are truthful , but most of you are averse to the truth . you will not be able to desist from god . you will not be able to desist . ”
he said , “ yes , and you will then become close to me . ”
the devil will ask them , when they are free from the tree , they will be given to a cool tree , or the tree of bitterness . they will have a building where they will be brought forth .
do you then dispute with me concerning me , when they are guided , and to show me the way of that which you have been warned ? my lord is not aware of what you do .
they will say : `` glory to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , but they worshipped the jinns , but most of them believed in them . ''
o you who believe ! take your precautions , then go forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
the believers have put your trust in the disbelievers , and in preference to the believers in preference to the believers . that is what they have done . that is what they have been working . and allah will cause you to go back to account for what you have been doing .
and indeed , in the life of abraham and the people of the book , in order that they might take heed for themselves , and fear god , and whoever turns away from the day of resurrection , it is god who is the self-sufficient , the praised .
but my call added only to their flight .
those who disbelieve say : `` no belief will this quran to believe in this . if you are going to believe in the quran , they will say : `` if you are believers in our lord , they will say : `` if we are believers . ''
then he frowned and scowled ,
and when those who disbelieve see you , they say , 'is this the one who talks of your gods ? ' and they are disbelievers in the remembrance of the most merciful .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
they say : `` why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? '' has there not come to them a sign in the former scriptures ?
o reassured soul ,
when the sun is rolled up .
so , when the women of their own people got away , they would surely have taken the like of what you had done . and the like of it is the like of it , and to make it an example for the like of it ; and for them is a great forgiver .
and when the messengers areappointed a time .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes ; indeed you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour is come , 'admit the people of pharaoh into the severest punishment . '
the unbelievers , which none can avert ,
striking sparks of fire ,
then he retreated and waxed proud ,
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
and you will take to their wives and their spouses , and the night to come . so they will be waiting for the time of the time . and allah is aware of what they do . and allah is aware of what they do . and allah is aware of what they do .
and it is said to them : `` it is to you that we have made it a seal over their hearts , if there is a sign for them that they may be called to you , unless they come to you . ''
without adding : `` if allah wills , take your lord as you forget . '' say , `` perhaps my lord will guide me to nearer than this to rectitude . ''
and they will say , “ to be the statues of those who are arrogant and are arrogant , and indeed , we have followed you . ” so we will make them taste the severest punishment , and we will not make a way for you . and we will make them taste the way , and we will not be guided .
what , had there been a messenger before him , or were an apostle before him , will you be killed , and if he dies , will you turn back on his heels ? and allah will not harm the thankful .
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal any thing from allah .
on her neck shall be a rope of palm-fibre .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
they said : `` by allah , they swear to one another by night and his family by night , and then we will say to his heir , `` we were not going to destroy the destruction of his family , and we are telling the truth . ''
as for the like of it , do not be like those who keep their duty to allah , and make a covenant with them , and you will swear to a group of them , and you will have a group between them and your covenant . and allah will certainly make you a test for what you used to differ .
those who believe and do good works are blessedness and excellent resort .
when he came to the fire from the right side of the valley , he was called from the right side of the valley : `` o moses ! i am god , the lord of the 'alamin .
when you come to the hypocrites , they will say to you , `` do not ask forgiveness for you . '' say , `` do not ask those who do not believe in you . god has knowledge of all that you do . '' then you will be informed of what you do .
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign . ” he said , “ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights . ”
tell the believers to forgive those who do not hope for the days of allah , that he may requite a nation for what they used to earn .
so worship what you will besides him . say : `` the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the clear loss . ''
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you will have whatever you judge ?
do they not reflect on themselves ? allah did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth , and for a term appointed . yet many people deny the meeting with their lord .
by those who bring down the reminder ,
they will have no food except bitter thorn ,
no nation can anticipate their term , nor can they delay it .
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill it returns like an old date-stalk .
but the wretched will avoid it .
and say , `` my lord , admit me with a true exit with sincerity , and grant me from yourself a helpful support . ''
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but how will he be mindful ?
my people , i ask of you no wage for it . my reward is only upon him who created me . will you not then understand ?
and do not call upon the prophet as you call between them ; and allah knows what they conceal between them and what they say . and let them have a painful punishment , or a painful punishment .
had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
and when the sky is rent asunder ,
say , `` no one can protect me from god , nor can i find any refuge besides him .
and fight them until there is no more tumult and oppression , and the religion of allah , and to allah , if they desist , then surely allah sees what they do .
and we would have given them from us a great reward .
god will forgive those who believe , and he will bring them to the light of the light of the light , and they will say , `` the people who are bent on denying the truth will be the unbelievers , and they will be in the midst of the blazing fire . ''
my wealth has not availed me .
if you ask them , `` who created the heavens and the earth ? '' they will say , `` the all-mighty , the all-knowing created them . ''
some faces on that day will be radiant ,
and purify your clothes .
they say , “ do not spend out of what god ’ s noble messenger has been given to the noble messenger , in the heavens and the earth , and god ’ s precedent in the heavens and the earth , and it is they who do not know . ”
those who disbelieve think that they will not be resurrected . say : `` yes , by my lord , you will certainly be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did . and that is easy for allah . ''
and remember the tongue of your lord , and turned to him and said , `` do you not know that we have no faith in your lord ? '' they said , `` indeed , we are not a man who is able to do it . ''
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear revelations , that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; surely allah is compassionate and merciful .
when misfortune befalls men , they call upon their lord , turning to him in repentance . then , when he has mercy upon them , some of them begin to ascribe partners to their lord .
as for the thief , male or female , cut off the hands of both , as a recompense for what they have done , a recompense from god . god is mighty and wise .
and they say , `` obey you , '' but when you are set up in your presence , a party of you will be in the night , and you will not be able to believe in it . so turn away from the night , and allah is sufficient as your guardian .
do you think that they do not speak in the unseen ? and when you do not find allah , he will forgive you , and give the zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
and turn away from them for a while .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place in it , chained together , they will plead for death .
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good works .
on the day when he will be tries to spend money on account of their money , and they will find them in the fire , and it will be said to them , “ this is what you used to do . ”
indeed , we shall cast upon you a weighty word .
they have no knowledge of it . they follow assumption , and conjecture avails nothing against truth .
they ask you about the mountains . say , ‘ my lord will scatter them as ashes ,
and we cut them up into communities on the earth , some of them are righteous , and some of them otherwise , and we tested them with good things and misfortunes that they might return .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds , for forgiveness and a great reward .
father , i fear lest a punishment from the beneficent overtake you , so that you become a friend of satan . ''
allah has decreed : `` verily ! i will prevail , i and my messengers , i will surely prevail . ''
those who took the calf , and incurred wrath from their lord , and abasement in the life of the world . thus do we reward those who fabricate lies .
and put thy trust in the mighty , the merciful .
we have sent you with the truth , as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner , and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
there is a sign in the book that is in the book . it is a definite reading to which it is revealed to the unknown that it has been revealed to the book . the children of israel will say , `` god has the knowledge of the unseen and the jinn , and they will also know . ''
then verily we shall narrate unto themwith knowledge , and we were not absent .
when a woman 's excuse has come to her , then it is said , `` the reward of the believers is that you are the one who is near to it . '' say : `` the reward of god is with the believers , and allah is the best of providers . ''
a reward for what they used to do .
and the one who has taken the hands of him from his own hands , and the good deeds , is a part of it ; so they will be seized by a thing in which he has been sent down , and allah does not like the mischief-makers .
worship allah and do not ascribe any partners to him , and his parents and the relatives and the traveller ; and the needy and the traveller , and allah does not like the arrogant .
and set not up with allah another god ; verily i am unto you from him a warner manifest .
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have earned , because of what they have earned , and that they may taste a part of it , so that they may return .
aaron had already told them before , `` o my people , you are only being tested by it . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my order . ''
thus we recompensed them for their ingratitude . do we penalize any but the ungrateful ?
as for the boat , it belonged to poor people who were seizing every boat by force .
say : `` the angel of death , who has been given charge of you will gather you , and then to your lord you will be returned . ''
and by the night when it withdraweth
they say , ‘ be jews or christians , you will be guided . ’ say , ‘ rather , the creed of abraham , the hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists . ’
let not satan bar you . he is your open enemy .
so he has no friend here today ,
and the sky will be rent asunder , on that day it will be frail .
those who are dazed in ignorance .
and thus do we make them hear , so that we may make them like the example of the reminder . he said : `` how is it that your lord has decided ? '' and he said , `` even though the one of you is a heifer , which is equal to your own days . '' and he said , “ it is only your lord who has made for you a part of the cow ; and for you only will be the one who will feed you . and you will not be able to
nor shade and heat
those who fear their lord in secret , and are apprehensive of the hour .
and we sent not before thee any messengers but that they ate food , and walked in the markets ; and we have made some of you a trial for others . will ye then be patient ?
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them ,
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , there would have befallen you a great punishment for what you ventured into .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , and he will multiply it for him ? and he will havea liberal reward .
your god is only allah , there is no god but he . he comprehends all things inknowledge .
say , “ my lord is the true command , and the prayer of your worship is due to you , and you will come to him in your heart , and you will know that it is to him that you will return . ”
god is the one god . he is the knower of the living and the last , and he is the knower of what he wills in the heavens and the earth , and he will have no knowledge of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and he will have no knowledge of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
he said : my lord ! expand my breast for me ,
that allah may acquit them of the worst of what they did , and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
does he possess knowledge of the unseen , so he sees ?
we called to him , `` abraham ,
and we gave david solomon . an excellent servant ! he was penitent .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , and evil is the destination .
in fact every one of them desires to be given scrolls unrolled .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates whatever he wills . he grants males and female , females ,
by the scatterersscattering ,
the originator of the heavens and the earth . when he decrees a thing , he only says to it , `` be , '' and it is .
and we sent him to a hundred thousand , or more .
they said : by allah ! verily ye know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves .
the messengers we have made of some of them to excel others , and allah has also made a fool among them , and we have made clear to them the noble messengers , and if allah had willed , they would not have believed in it . and if allah willed , he could have made them to be victorious , and if allah wills , they will not be able to make a breach with them , but allah will not cause it to fail .
and then , when it is said to them : `` we have brought your lord to make us submit to him . '' then be thou in the shades of the book . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who understand .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you ,
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they will have no helpers .
and we caused to grow up for him a gourdplant .
the indubitable event !
go , both of you , to pharaoh ; surely he has transgressed all bounds .
so judge between me and them with ajudgment , and deliver me and the believers with me .
so we answered him , and removed his affliction , and we gave him his family and with them with them as a mercy from us , and a reminder for the worshippers .
return to your lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing .
this is the guidance of allah that he guides whom he will of his servants , and if they had associated others with him , they would have failed them .
the messenger 's duty is only to convey the message . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
whoever is spared on that day—he had mercy on him . that is the clear triumph .
but they denied it , so they will soon come to know .
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
those who deny the book and what we have sent with our messengers will soon come to know .
he created man from a drop offluid , and behold , he is an open contender .
and on the day when the enemies of allah will be gathered to the fire , they will be formed into groups .
when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we be resurrected ?
so do not turn away from your lord with your mercy , and you will have mercy on you if you are patient . and if they turn away , we shall surely make them taste the punishment of hell in security .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
and those who press forward ,
give glad tidings to the hypocrites that for them is a painful punishment .
this is how we revealed the quran to you in arabic , so that you may be informed of the ways of god , and to show them the day of resurrection , a group of them will be in the fire , and you will be driven into the fire .
god will guide you to the people of the world , and were the people of the two part of the two part of the two part of it , they would have taken the same part of their own people . but if they were to do it , they would have taken it as a small time from which they had been given . and if they were to make a bequest for their own people , they would have taken it as a small time from which they had been given . and if they had been
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
shall we then turn away the reminder from you because you are a transgressing people ?
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and allah encompasses all things .
is it not a guidance for themhow many generations we destroyed before them , amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will remain in it forever .
who have made the quran into shreds .
do not let the unbelievers think that the respite we give them is good for them ; we give them respite , so that they may increase their sins .
allah has the example of all that is in the past , and the one who is a servant of whom he has no power of sustenance , and he has provided for them a good sustenance in which he has provided for them . do they not be grateful ?
and those who disbelieve say , `` you are not a messenger . '' say : 'allah suffices as a witness between me and you , and whosoever possesses knowledge of the book '
we recite to you of the story of moses and pharaoh with truth , for people who believe .
god has heard the words of her who pleads with you concerning her husband and complains to allah . god hears the contentions of both of you . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
nor any food save filthy corruption .
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed in it . those who do not judge according to what allah has sent down , are the transgressors .
it is from solomon , and it is from the most gracious , the most merciful .
we have honored the children of adam and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things and preferred them above many of our creatures .
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
that allah may acquit them of the worst of what they did , and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
those who believe , and those who are jews , and the sabians and the christians , are the ones who are in the midst of the jews , and the fire , and those who are the like of the stars . god will make them witness to the truth .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what has escaped you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
do not groan today . you will not be helped by us .
the fruits whereoflow and near .
so when the messengers came to them , they would surely think that they had come to know that they were in doubt . in that case , they would have come to me with our help . then we will make them succeed , and he will not be punished .
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : 'this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our fathers of old . '
but allah raised him up to himself . allah is mighty , wise .
as for those who oppose allah and his messenger , so make them suffer disgrace , as if they had died .
except those on whom your lord has mercy . he created them . the word of your lord will be fulfilled , `` i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . ''
then we sent after him messengers to their people , so they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had denied before . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
the lord of abraham and abraham , he said , `` i have been ordered to give up a little , '' he said , `` i have been sent by a messenger , and said : `` i have been commanded to be of the messengers . ''
he is naught but a man who has forged a lie against allah , and we are not going to believe him .
he said , `` did i not tell you that you will not be able to patiently bear with me ? ''
and when allah said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , do you take the people of jesus , the son of mary ? ” so it is said to them , “ glory be to god , ” he said , ‘ immaculate is i , and i am the expert of what you do . ’
and of his signs is that he created for you mates from yourselves that you may find repose in them , and he has set between you affection and mercy . surely in that are signs for a people who reflect .
nor do you urge one another to feed the poor ,
these are the ones on whom are blessings from their lord and the mercy of those who are guided .
and when a group of them said : `` why do you admonish a people whom allah will destroy or punish with a severe punishment ? '' they said , `` to your lord , and that they may be afraid . ''
our lord ! surely we have believed in it , and we believe in your lord , and say : `` our lord ! forgive us , and forgive us our faults , and forgive us our faults , and keep our duty to us , and keep us in their footstepsguided . ''
and say : `` glory to our lord ! verily , the promise of our lord is bound to be fulfilled . ''
those who fulfil the covenant of allah and do not break their covenant ,
that we may give life thereby to a dead land and give it to drink , and we have created cattle and men of cattle .
inquire of the city where we were and the caravan with which we came . we are telling the truth . ''
and nuh said : my lord ! leave not one of the disbelievers on the earth .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows what you do .
allah has made the example of the people of the world to make things firm , and the example of the people of the world and the wayfarer . that is how allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and that allah is cognizant of all things .
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick , and a magician will not succeed . ’
then he made his offspring from an extract of insignificant fluid ,
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
he said , “ what my lord has given me is better ; therefore help me with strength , and i will erect a barrier between you and them . ”
there are two parties who will be disputing with one another in the way of allah , and he compose the faith of the disbelievers , and he compose their duty to them . indeed in that is a reminder for those who are oblivious .
verily we ! it is we who have sent down unto thee the dhikrand
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds .
she said , “ it is only that you are one to whom you are upright , and i swear by allah that i may be one of the pure , and indeed , i am the one who has been commanded to be purified . indeed , if i have been commanded , he will be a well-seer . ”
it will destroy everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became nothing except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the sinful people .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : `` where are mypartners whom you imagined ? ''
o ibrahim ! forsake this . surely your lord 's command has been fulfilled . and there is a punishment for them not to be turned back .
so whoever wills may remember it .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
those whom they call upon themselves are the means of access to their lord . they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
we have made the quran easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
how many a city have we destroyed while it was unjust , so it was fallen down on their roofs , and how many a palace in ruins !
lot was also one of the messengers .
that we may give life thereby to a dead land and give it to drink , and we have created cattle and men of cattle .
to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is just as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . god has power over all things .
and the mountains as pegs ?
and whatsoever he has created for you in the earth is of diverse colors . surely in that is a sign for people who remember .
he said : therein ye shall live , and therein ye shall die , and from thence ye shall be brought forth .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come to pass ?
and to us you will relate to us in the stories of the stories of what you have been doing . we have knowledge of the truth , and the truth has come to the believers .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows what you do .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
but they divided themselves into factions , each rejoicing in what it has .
he said : we shall see whether thou hast spoken the truth or whether thou art of the liars .
there are degrees according to what they have done , in order that he may recompense them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
and remember when your lord revealed to the angels : `` i am your protector . '' i am your guardian . so fear the disbelievers , and be afraid of the disbelievers .
indeed , those who turn back after the guidance had become clear to them , satan has embellished their ways for them and gives them respite .
and indeed we know that they say : `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , and this is clear arabic .
o you who believe ! keep your duty to him , and fear the fire of the fire which is the fuel of the fire , which is the fire of hell , or that they will not be able to do so . and allah is able to do so .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
and do not disgrace me on the day when they are resurrected .
and the sorcerers fell down prostrate .
god explains the commandments to you . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
those who are the lord of the throne will say , `` the lord of the throne , those who are constant will be subdued . '' and they will say , `` our lord , you have the mercy of you , the mercy of you , and the mercy of you , and those who have faith . ''
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . yet none remembers but those who turn back to him .
those who obey allah and the messenger , are with those whom allah has blessed , and the prophets and the truthful , the martyrs and the righteous ; and how excellent a company are they !
and whoever avenges himself after he has been wronged , there is no wayagainst them .
when the wild beasts are herded together ,
he said , `` did i not tell you that you will not be able to patiently bear with me ? ''
and with them will be damsels of refraining looks , large- eyed
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . so their gods they called upon besides allah , when the command of your lord came to them , and they increased them nothing but destruction .
we sent messengers before you to warn them , but they disbelieved in them , but we punished those who were bent on denying the truth , and we gave them the punishment of the duty of the believers .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and the sleeprepose , and made the day nushur .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
when our revelations are recited to him , he says : `` tales of the ancients ! ''
he said : my lord ! verily my people have belied me .
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
o prophet ! say to your wives , “ if you desire the life of this world and its finery , come , i will provide for you and release you handsomely . ”
on the day when the first blast shivers
the heart did not deny what it saw .
they see it to be far off ,
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
and indeed , we have turned your face upside down , and most surely some of them are upright . some of them will come out of the truth . god is not unaware of what you do .
those to whom we gave the book before it believe in it .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will be better for them and a better resting place .
before them is hell , and that which they have earned will not avail them , nor what they have taken as guardians besides allah ; and for them is a great punishment .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , a hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists .
bring your book , if you are truthful .
he admits into his mercy whomever he wishes , and for the wrongdoers he has prepared a painful punishment .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and those in whose wealth is a known right
know that allah is severe in punishment and that allah is forgiving , merciful .
is he then who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only men possessed of minds remember .
and they belied , and followed their own lusts ; and every affair has its appointed term .
then moses said to his people : `` o my people ! do not be afraid of your lord . he said , `` o my people , will you have the promise of your lord , which has been ordained for you ? so what is it with your lord that you have been promised ? ''
then if you turn away , i do not ask any reward from you . my reward is only upon allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
yes , whoever fulfills his promise and guards - god loves the pious ones .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their homes .
and these are the ones of you that have your fathers , and your fathers ; and allah is not a sign to them , but what is in the way of their lord , and they are the guided .
those will be rewarded with the highest placebecause of their patience . therein they shall be met with greetings and peace .
the warnings came to the people of pharaoh .
our lord ! bring us out of this . if we return , we will surely be wrongdoers . ''
say : `` bring the witness to that which allah has sent down , and if they were to witness , then verily , if they had borne witness to our signs , then do not follow those who believe in our signs and do not follow those who believe in our signs , and those who do not believe in the hereafter equal to their lord .
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and give him glad tidings of a cunning son .
the good deed and the evil deed are not equal . repel evil with what is better . then you will see that he is a sympathetic friend .
as for those who disbelieved before you , they were stronger than you , and they have preferred you in the manner of their own people , and they have the same to your own souls . and you are the like of what they used to do . and they are the like of what they used to do .
it is he who made the earth as a rich carpets to you , and sent down water from the sky , and sent down water from the sky ; and it is in order that you will have the means to make it equal to god . god is aware of the things you do .
as for the one who was given a city , he was given to a clot . he said : `` how can we destroy the dead people ? '' he said , `` indeed , we have tarried in the city after a day . '' and behold , it was said to the city , `` indeed , we have tarried in the presence of a day when the dead has been dead , and the same is for the sake of a great lord . '' and behold , it was a man who would be able
so they pursued them at sunrise .
those who believe , and those who are jews , and the sabians and the christians , are the ones who are in the midst of the jews , and the fire , and those who are the like of the stars . god will make them witness to the truth .
he said : this is a straight path .
and to him belongs all that is in front of you , and in the presence of the enemies of allah , so that you may be subject to the enemies of allah , and keep your duty to him , and do not follow the enemies of allah . you will not be able to make such as go to your own enemy , and you will not be wronged .
they said : hallowed be our lord ! verily we have been wrong-doers .
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
when the earth is shaken with a shock .
and those who believe in the signs of their lord ,
and those who have been bent on denying the truth will have their lord to pay heed to their lord , and give good deeds to the good , and in secret , evil is their deeds .
o you who believe ! do not take any other group apart from yourselves , and do not come to your own words . they will have a new creation in their hearts , and that they will have a new creation in their hearts , so that they will have the inclination to hide from it , and in their hearts they will have a great reason .
and when it is said to them : `` come to that which allah has sent down and to the messenger , '' they say : `` it is we who have been sent down to the messenger , and that we are the following of their fathers . ''
and my breast will tighten and my tongue will not be fluent , so send to aaron .
and cushions ranged .
have you seen the earth that you may see the like of those who have believed in it , and see how they have been created ? and we destroyed them in the land , and destroyed them in the land . but they did not wrong them , but allah did not wrong them .
he said , “ my lord , i have called my people night and day . ”
do not yield to any contemptible swearer of oaths ,
o mankind ! there has come to you a reminder from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts , and a guidance and mercy for the believers .
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
the record of every soul will be in full of what it has done , in their hearts . they will say , ‘ woe to us ! ’ and indeed , your lord is not a great tyrant .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
then he followed a road
the pious are in no way accountable for them ; but the reminderthat haply they may take heed .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth in truth . and when the command of its command is fulfilled , he is the command , and he is the knower of the things , and he is the knower , the knower .
neither your relatives nor your children will avail your relatives on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for allah sees what you do .
say , `` none in the heavens or the earth knows the unseen except allah , and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected . ''
striking sparks of fire ,
and he inspected the birds , and said , “ why do i not see the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
they used to sleep but little by night ,
upon them will be garments of green silk and rich brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them a pure drink .
the number of a number of years is that if they are in the midst of the part of the day of the amount of the matter , say to the poor in the land : `` those who are in the midst of the world to come , will not be able to make a testament in the matter of the poor . if only you knew it .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
on the day when the hour will be established , that day shallbe separated .
and they say : we are morein wealth and children , and we shall not be punished .
they said , “ build a pyre for him and throw him into the blazing fire . ”
we have appointed for them a good associate with them and what is behind them . so the word has been realized against them , as they were promised , and they were losers .
by no means ! verily , it is respite for the time of time . lo ! it was for me to belie my revelations ; but thou didst deny the truth , and thou art of the wrong-doers .
they have sold the signs of allah for a paltry price and have turned away from his way . evil indeed is that which they have been doing .
but theysplit their affair between them are all to us .
she said : `` oh , shall i bear a child when i am old , and my husband is advanced in years ? this is indeed a strange thing . ''
say : 'what think you ? if the punishment of allah comes upon you suddenly or openly , shall there be no more than the unjust ? '
to pharaoh and his council , but they behaved insolently and they were a tyrannical people .
or have they settled an affair ? we are devising .
have we not opened up your breast
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion againstmost gracious .
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
and propound thou unto them the similitude of two men , one of whom we gave two gardens of vine , and we surrounded them with date-palms and hedged between .
allah , there is no god but he . his are the most beautiful names .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any patrons other than him . little do you remember .
and from the evil of malignant witchcraft ,
round about them willyouths of perpetual ,
the devil will ask them , when they are free from the tree , they will be given to a cool tree , or the tree of bitterness . they will have a building where they will be brought forth .
his wealth and his childrenwill not avail him .
those who deny the book and what we have sent with our messengers will soon come to know .
it was said : `` enter it . '' he said , `` he has made it to be a heap of gold , and he said : `` o my lord ! i have been sent with the like of it , and i have been sent with the lord of the worlds . ''
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways of access
and when they commit an indecency they say , `` we found our fathers doing it , and god has commanded us to do it . '' say : `` allah does not command what you do not know . ''
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you ; to us is their return , and we shall inform them of what they did . surely allah knows what is in the breasts .
whatever good happens to you is from allah ; and whatever ill befalls you is from yourself ; and we have sent you as a messenger , and allah suffices as a witness .
and the most heavens and the earth and all that is in them , and all that is in them , glorify him , and praising him ; and he is the most appreciating and the most forgiving . he is the most appreciating and the most forbearing .
or do they have a true faith in the night and prostrate themselves before him ? say , `` are those who do not know the reward of the hereafter ? '' say , `` are those who do not know the right path ? ''
surely those who disbelieve and do wrong , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to any way ,
and we will proceed to what they did , and we shall make them scattered dust .
and they say : `` tales of the ancients , which he has written down , so they are dictated to him morning and evening . ''
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her alone to graze on god 's earth , and do not touch her with harm , lest a near chastisement will seize you . ''
but they divided themselves into factions , each rejoicing in what it has .
they ask you that they are forbidden to you , but it is good to you , and the same is good for you , and the needy , and the orphans and the traveller ; and it is allah who knows , and you do not know .
and who turns away from the religion of abraham except one who debases himself ? we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then fasten him with a chain seventy cubits long .
o you who have believed , a game is a game of due for the people of allah , that the people may eat of the land which has been given to them , and give the like of their good things , and make lawful for them the like of what has been forbidden , and you may be successful .
and by the day as it reveals it .
it is not in the case of the believers , that it may be for the prayer of your worship , and at all of you , to be the first of the righteous . it is in the end of the righteous , and allah loves those who do good .
say : `` if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a great day . ''
the likeness of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah , as a likeness of the weight of a grain of grain which groweth seven ears , in every ear a hundred grains . allah is all-embracing , all-knowing .
then we shall say to those who believe : `` is it you who have been with us ? '' we have certainly been the believers of you , and in fact , you have been told , `` yes , and you have disputed about it . '' in fact , the one of them is in the same manner , and in the way of allah , you will have a field of which you have been inventing .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose concerning it , and had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
o wives of the prophet ! in the way of your wives , do not make a testament in the cause of god , and do not make a tremor in it , and establish the prayer , and give the zakat , for allah only desires to be a felicitous .
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled ?
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
thus it was ; and we bequeathed them upon another people .
and mention in the book moses . he was a chosen one , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
moses said to them , `` throw down whatever you wish to throw . ''
our lord ! admit them into the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their wives , and their offspring , verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
o you who believe ! do not take any other group apart from yourselves , and do not come to your own words . they will have a new creation in their hearts , and that they will have a new creation in their hearts , so that they will have the inclination to hide from it , and in their hearts they will have a great reason .
and when we settled for abraham the site of the house , saying , `` do not associate anything with me , and purify my house for those who circle around , and those who bow and prostrate . ''
he said : my lord ! help me , for they belie me .
worship none but god . i fear for you the punishment of a painful day . ''
and we gave moses the book that they might be guided .
and with them will be virgins of refraining looks and of equal age .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women ; and good women are for good women , and good men are for good women ; and for them is forgiveness , and a generous provision .
say , `` none in the heavens or the earth knows the unseen except allah , and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected . ''
and in the heaven is your provision , and what you are promised .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah is the self-sufficient , the praiseworthy .
as for those who did evil , they would say : `` o woe to the ! '' but allah will provide for them as if he will . and we will give them the provisions of allah , and we will give them the provisions , and the disbelievers will not be successful .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan while they perceived not .
and your lord inspired the bee : `` make your homes in the mountains , and in the trees , and in the trees and in what they erect .
the beneficent , the merciful ,
and couldst thou see when they are terrified with no escape , and they shall be seized from a place drawn near .
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
but when the angels had called the glory of the holy ones , when it came to them , and the prayer came to you , allah gave you glad tidings of a son , and the noble messenger , and the great messenger .
and do not follow the truth with allah , and do not associate with him any partners ; and whoever associates with allah associate others with allah in his divinity , he has made a loose ,
and raiseand scatter them around ,
and indeed it is a reminder for the godwary .
do not set up the book with the book of the book except with the best of the book . do they say , `` we believe in what you have been sent with , and god is only one of those who submit . ''
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take refuge with his lord .
the king of mankind .
had we wished to take a pastime , we would have taken it from us , if we would do .
we shall provide them with fruits and meat as they desire .
the egyptians asked them , `` what will be the punishment of the punishment if you are lying ? ''
so we destroyed men mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
and women past child-bearing who have no hope of marriage , it is no sin for them , if they discard their cloaks , it is better for them , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
only those who believe in allah and the last day , who believe in allah and the last day , and establish prayer and pay the obligatory charity , will have no fear except allah , so that they may be among the guided .
that he may ask the loyal of their loyalty . and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and shaped you , and to him is the ultimate resort .
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no good tidings for the sinners , and they will say : `` a refuge ! ''
he raised it high and leveled it ,
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that receptive ears may retain it .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you to be excused from fighting with their possessions and their lives , and allah is aware of the righteous .
say to those who do not believe , `` work according to your ability ; we are acting .
except an old woman who stayed behind ,
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them , but those who deny the truth eat and eat like cattle will eat .
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity ; these are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
say , `` i do not ask you any reward for it , except for the one who wants to take the way to his lord . ''
and the dwellers of the heights will call to men whom they will recognize by their marks , saying , `` your hoardings did not avail you , nor did your arrogance . ''
and moses said , `` if you and all those who are on the earth , you will surely prevail . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy . ''
and we sent notbefore thee other than men whom we inspired . ask the people of the remembrance if ye know not .
so do not oppress the orphan ,
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
as for the decision of judgement , they have taken their own parents for their own parents and their own people . so leave them , so that god will not cause them to fail .
or he wrecks them for what they have earned , and he pardons much .
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? in this there is mercy and a reminder for those who believe .
there is no animal on earth , nor a bird that flies with its wings , but they are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book , then to their lord they will be gathered .
he said : set me over the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a keeper knowing .
if only we could return . ''
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as though he heard them not . give him the glad tidings of a painful punishment .
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , when they are sincere to god and his messenger . there is no way for the righteous . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
indeed , those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after them , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , and they will be cursed by the cursers ,
o my father ! worship not satan ; verily satan is a rebel againstmost gracious .
the night he merges day into the day , he merges the day into the night , and he subjected the sun and the moon ; and the sun and the moon belong to him ; and it is allah who is the lord of the worlds .
and o prophet ! keep your duty to the remembrance of the remembrance of the prayer . indeed , the prayer will be of the abomination , and allah is cognizant of what you do .
woe to every sinful liar ,
and stop them , for they will be questioned .
and they say : what is the matter with this messenger , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? wherefore was not an angel sent down unto him ?
then we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
thusand we caused the children of israel to inherit them .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place in it , chained together , they will plead for death .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys god and his messenger has indeed achieved a great success .
the noble messenger among those who are upright in the truth are the people of the fire , and the people of the book are in the same manner , and do not be in a structured and empty .
and when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he was suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , `` do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot . ''
by the heaven with its impregnable castles ;
and assuredly we sent nuh unto his people , so he said : o my people ! worship allah ; ye have no god other than him . lo ! i fear for you a mighty chastisement .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants . '
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the most beneficent , the most merciful .
the blind , the lame , and the sick will not be blamed , and he who obeys god and his messenger will enter gardens beneath which rivers flow . whoever turns away from it will be a painful punishment .
and indeed it is the truth of certainty .
allah created you from the shadows of the date-palm and the mountains , and made the mountains to fall upon you in the mountains , and in the midst of your own , you will have the upper hand . thus is your lord ’ s munificence , so that you may become muslims .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds pleasing to them , so they wander blindly .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky and the earth becomes green ? indeed allah is all-attentive , all-aware .
when moses said to his family : `` i have seen a fire . i will bring you some news from it , or bring you a burning brand in the fire that you may warm yourselves . ''
and when the magicians came , moses said to them : 'cast down what you will cast '
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it ; and whoever believes in his lord , he will fear neither paltriness nor vileness .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
you pleaded on their behalf in this life but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their attorney ?
on the day when we shall summon every people with their leader . whoever is given his record in his right hand will read their record , and they will not be wronged a whit .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
nay , but they say the like of what the ancients said .
they were vindictive towards them only because they believed in allah , the almighty , the praised ,
except an old woman who stayed behind ,
and those who call to mind when allah has made the same for them , do not say to the heavens and the earth : `` o lord , you have created the heavens and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and the earth . glory be to you , the punishment of the fire . ''
and indeed it is a reminder to you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
and they say : if the beneficent allah had willed , we would not have worshipped them . they have no knowledge of that . they are only guessing .
say thou : allah is the knower of all things ; and whosoever thou shalt be able to see , thou shalt be able to see whomsoever thou shalt be able to see . thou art the guardian of all things .
and a sign for them is the night . we strip it of the day , and they are in darkness .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of god .
and we destroyed no township but it had warners
and he created you from dust , then he created you from a drop of liquid , and then he made no testament in it , but he is a little in the life of the world . it is he who is about to be able to do all things .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
o you who have disbelieved ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
when the sky is cleft asunder ;
and the first of them will say to the last of them : `` you have no privilege over us . taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ''
what ! when we are dead and have become dust ? that is afarreturn .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world . but the good deeds that endure are better with your lord and better in expectation .
or have you a book in which you read
and certainly we tried solomon and placed a bodyupon his throne , then he repented .
say : `` the affliction is against you , so that you may be of those who are near to you , and do not approach your wives , or be righteous . '' and when they are pure , they become pure . and allah loves the righteous .
o ye who believe ! shall i show you a bargain which will save you from a painful doom ?
that i may guide you to your lord , so that you may fear him ? ''
then he turned to his family and brought a fatcalf ,
and they say , “ o you who received the reminder , you are insane . ”
and in the heaven is your provision , and what you are promised .
on that day they will see all that is on the day of resurrection , and it will be one of the sun 's structures , and it will be the same for them , and they will see it . the punishment of allah is severe .
and who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was sent down before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
those who give the angels will be wronged in their own souls , and they will say , `` we have not done any sins . '' they say , `` indeed , allah is not responsible for us . indeed , allah knows what you do . ''
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
so set your face towards the straight religion before there comes from allah a day which can not be averted . on that day mankind will be divided .
we gave moses nine clear signs . ask the children of israel . when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , `` moses , i think you are bewitched . ''
and when those who disbelieve see you , they say , 'is this the one who talks of your gods ? ' and they are disbelievers in the remembrance of the most merciful .
so the earthquake seized them , and they became motionless bodies in their homes .
your lord would never destroy the townships unjustly while their people were trying to reform .
therein they will have whatever they wish , abiding eternally . and this is a promise binding upon your lord , and that you will be questioned .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
indeed this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter
it is not for a prophet to have prisoners until he has sufficiently suppressed . you desire the goods of this world , and allah desires the hereafter , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
o my people ! give full measure and weight with justice , and do not diminish the goods of the people , and do not spread corruption in the land .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their possessions nor their children will avail them aught against allah . they are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
blessed be the name of your lord , full of majesty and beneficience .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty lot .
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is appreciative and forbearing .
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs .
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come forth in multitudes .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
so watch for the day when the sky produces a visible smoke .
and whosoever worketh righteously , male or female , and is a believer , they shall enter paradise and shall not be wronged a whit .
except the chosen servants of god .
when he had said to his people , `` i am a son , '' he said , `` i have been doing to you with what you have been doing . '' you said , `` o my father , i have been doing what you are doing , if allah wills . ''
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and allah encompasses all things .
and those who , when harmed , defend themselves .
when they are at the time of the time , they have full knowledge of your works . do not leave them in regard to their works , or that they may go back on their faces . and whoever is conscious of god , will be a fourfold , and he will bring to light what is in the hereafter ; and whoever fears allah , he will cause him to succeed .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , none will speak except him whom the most merciful will speak .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
pharaoh said , `` if you take any god other than me , i will surely put you in prison . ''
surely the dwellers of the garden will be in pastimes .
that is because allah has sent down the book with the truth ; and those who differ about the book are in extreme dissension .
depart to a triple-massing shadow
give full measure when you measure , and weigh with a balance that is straight . that is better and fairer in the end .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the great , the most high .
and you are your wife , and a woman who commits an evil deed , that you may commit it . but if they repent , then take them as well as you will repent . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring allah and the angels face to face .
o you who believe ! some of your wives are of your offspring , so do you take your share of your own offspring ; so do not be wary of allah , and the most merciful , the most merciful .
have they taken intercessors besides god ? say , `` even though they have no power over anything and have no intelligence ? ''
conspiracy is only from satan , that he may upset those who believe , and he can not harm them in the least , except by allah 's leave ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
lord of the two easts and the lord of the two wests .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
pharaoh said , `` and what is the lord of the worlds ? ''
and when man visits him with adversity , he will be called on us , or lying on his sides . and when they will be put to death , or lying on our sides , we will cause them to go back on their faces , as if they were the wrongdoers .
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
do you not bring itback ?
and we sent among them a messengerof midian , and said : `` o my people ! worship allah , and do not follow the end of the world ; and do not make mischief in the world to come . ''
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and in it you will havefor which you desire .
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter would be settled between you and me . god knows best the harmdoers '
your lord it is who drives for you the ships in the sea that you may seek of his bounty . indeed , he is ever merciful to you .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them ,
but they hamstrung her , and in the morning they were remorseful ,
the elite of his people who disbelieved said , “ if you follow shuaib , you will surely be losers . ”
we forbade the jews what we had recounted to you before . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and fear the day when you will be brought back to god , then every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
we have indeed created man in the best stature
we said , `` get down from it , all of you , and if there comes to you guidance from me , whoever follows my guidance , will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
no associate has he , and i am the first of those who submit .
to allah belongs the last and the first .
or follow that which is in the name of allah , and that which allah has given them , and that which allah is pleased , and if we had not given them a word , we would have made it a known decree .
what , is there not for them a chastisement that allah will punish them , while they were wont to transgress , while they are wont to do good ? but most of them are not aware .
he is the knower of the heavens and the earth . then he established his throne established his throne , and he knows what is in the earth , and what ascends to it . and he is the all-knower of what you do . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
we maderefuse a wet nurse . so his sister said : `` shall i direct you to a household of a household who will take care of him ? ''
say : o mankind ! if ye are in religion 's religion , know that i do not serve that which ye worship beside my gods ; nay , he is the lord of the believers , and i am commanded to be of the believers .
they have no knowledge of it . they follow assumption , and conjecture avails nothing against truth .
god is the one god . he is the knower of the living and the last , and he is the knower of what he wills in the heavens and the earth , and he will have no knowledge of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and he will have no knowledge of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we gave them high renown .
and those whom they used to invoke before will disappear from them , and they will have no escape .
by the heaven with its passages ,
and every one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
and when they had cast down , moses said : `` what you have brought is magic , and allah will certainly make it untrue . indeed , allah does not foster the efforts of those who do corruption . ''
and they say : if allah willed , they would not have taken aught away from it , nor were we to be able to be able to have any power over it ; and we have forbidden them not , but the duty of the messengers is in a playful manner .
before them the people of noah , ad , and pharaoh , the impaler ,
alif . lam . mim .
nor is it the word of a soothsayer . little is it that you remember .
do you not know that to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? he punishes whom he wills and forgives whom he wills . god has power over all things .
verily ye and that which ye worship beside allah are the firewood of hell . thereunto ye shall come .
nay ! we are utterly ruined ! ''
do they not see that the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is in the heavens and all that allah has created , and that their time may come near ? will they then believe in this ?
and on the day when we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them together , leaving none behind .
so that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
know that that which you have been promised is an army to come to god and his messenger and the dwellers of the wayfarer , if you believe in allah and the last day , that we may have sent it down on the day of resurrection . god has power over all things .
and allah will certainly make them be informed of the day of resurrection , and when you have argued with them , they will not be able to harm you . then you will turn away from them , and then you turn back .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
i do not worship what you worship
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
it is he who sends down water from the sky and its produce , and it is with the like of it , it is the like of it , it is the same for him who is the like of it ; and as for the like of it , it is the same for him who is the like of it ; and as for the like of it , it is the same for him who is the like of it ; and that is how allah sets forth .
do you think that they do not speak in the unseen ? and when you do not find allah , he will forgive you , and give the zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
it has not been brought down by the devils .
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his messenger will be the fire of hell , abiding in it forever ? that is the supreme disgrace .
indeed those who needlessly waste are brothers of the devils , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said : `` oh , would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he has indeed been fortunate . ''
we built the heaven with might , and we are expanding it .
and it is he who created man from water , and gave him consanguinity and affinity . your lord is all-powerful .
and when they hear idle talk , they turn away from it and say , `` to us our deeds , and to you your deeds . peace be to you . we seek not the ignorant . ''
they said : `` o my people ! why do you not take the soul to worship the soul , o my people , when i have been sent to you ? '' but when they hear the truth , i have been sent to you , and when they hear the truth , allah will certainly make you hear , for allah does not guide the sinful people .
those who are upright in the truth of your wives , if they do so , they will be responsible for their own children , and if they do not desist , they will be a prey to the same , and for those who have fear of allah , will be the same for them , and that allah may make it easy for him . for him only is the destination .
tell the believers to forgive those who do not hope for the days of allah , that he may requite a nation for what they used to earn .
we do not say that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . he said , `` i call god to witness , and you bear witness that i am innocent of what you associate .
unquestionably , to allah belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . those who invoke other than allah follow him , they follow only conjecture and surmise .
and those who disbelieve say to those who believe : if it had been good , they would not have preceded us thereto . and since they had not been guided to it , they would say : this is an ancient lie .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
glorified be he , and exalted above what they say !
to the lord of the universe that i may tell the people of the knowledge of the law . '' in order to say to the people of the book : `` even though i am a lying , '' in the way of pharaoh , indeed , the guile of the pharaoh is in the way .
it is he who has the faith of the people among the people of the book : `` the one who has been bent on denying the truth will be the first to make them pass away , and they will be in the first way , and we will make their hearts seem decorous to you , so that they may be reluctant in their hearts . so , we will make their hearts seem decorous to them . so , to the hearts of the believers , will be made to understand .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning has been .
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . indeed , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew .
whoever does good , it is for his own soul , and whoever does evil , it is against his own soul ; then to your lord you will be returned .
can you rescue the one who has deserved the decree of punishment ?
do you not see that allah knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the range of his people , and there is no one to help them ? and he will bring them all together on the day of resurrection , and he will bring them all together . indeed , allah has knowledge of all things .
who , when an affliction visits them , they say : `` we belong to allah and to him we shall return . ''
and when paradise is brought near ,
it is he who has made the earth for you as a cradle and threaded roads for you , and sent down water from the sky , and we have brought forth various kinds of vegetation .
he created you from the earth , then he has made a hole into a drop of fluid , then he will bring forth a clot of blood , and then he will bring forth to them a second time , and in that case they will be of the same to it , so that they may understand .
but if they turn away , then know that allah is your protector , an excellent protector and an excellent helper .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
allah , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
and if you go forth , it is not to be one of you , but this is the true way . if you are one of the favorites to allah , they will be the same to him , and that he may make a breach with them , and allah is the all-knower of what they do .
he said : my lord ! judge thou with truth . our lord is the beneficent , whose help is that ye describe .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
even so we sent a warner before you , and the wealthy ones among them said : 'we found our fathers following a creed , and we are following in their footsteps . '
roasting at a scorching fire ,
lo ! those who believe in our signs , anon we shall make them fire fire , and lo ! they shall be of the fire , and verily allah is ever mighty , wise , wise .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and has sent down rain from the sky and has sent down abundant fruits for you through the sea , and subjected for you the ships of the sea , and subjected for you the rivers .
as for the guidance of mankind , and he has sent down the criterion . for those who disbelieve in the signs of allah , there is a severe punishment for them . god is majestic and revengeful .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
but the wretched will avoid it .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken from among the angels daughters ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
and those who disbelieve say : why was the qur'an not sent down upon him at once ? thus , we may strengthen your heart in your heart , and we have chanted it .
they will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment .
we have given you the seven oft-repeatedand the grand quran .
surely allah is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
on a great day ,
allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it . they rejoice in the life of the world , while the life of the world is but aenjoyment .
do you think that they do not speak in the unseen ? and when you do not find allah , he will forgive you , and give the zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . now in the remembrance of allah hearts are the hearts of hearts .
what , is it that a kind of people said to them , “ warn the people of the people , and give to them a clear warning ? ” they said , “ warn the people of the book , and that they are a clear herald of warning . ”
—hell , which they shall enter , and evil is the settlement .
o ye who believe ! enter into islam whole-heartedly ; and follow not the footsteps of the devil ; verily he is unto you a manifest enemy .
say : this is the truth from your lord ; and whoever desires so that he may believe in the disbelievers and that which is in the state of the unbelievers ; and if you do so , we shall make it a bed and a bed . and how is it that they will be brought out of the fire ? and how evil is the abode of the abode !
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
they will not hear the slightest sound thereof , while they abide in that which their souls desire .
say , `` is there the news of you better for you ? '' but those who fear allah will have gardens of eden with streams running in them , and they will be in the midst of their generosity . and allah is seer of his servants .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer , and the hearing , the seeing , are they equal ?
allah has begotten . indeed , they are liars .
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you conceal .
it is a written record .
if there were to come to you the evidence of that which allah is better , and the believers , allah will be a muslim , and those who are obedient to him , and be upright ; and allah is the one who are the female .
let the children of israel go with us . ''
but those who strive against our signs to frustrate them , - for them is a painful punishment .
and assuredly it hath been revealed unto thee and unto those before thee , if thou ascribe a partner to allah , your works , and you will surely be among the losers .
and those who preserve their trusts and their covenant ,
say : what ! do you disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and attribute to him equals ? that is the lord of the worlds .
and if you deny , then communities before you have denied . the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
o prophet ! we have chosen you in the land as a witness between the two of them . do not follow the way of allah in the way of the truth . those who have gone astray from the way of god will have a humiliating punishment .
and if you are in a state of life , know that we have created you from the dead , and then he has created you from a drop of old , and then we will make it a complete seed in the land , and we will make it a complete way in the land , and we will make it a complete place of storageor in their homes , and in the same way , we will make it a complete place of return , and we will make a complete way for you .
we said to the human being : `` the ability to act with the man of his father , and his parents , and a terrible head . '' and thou shalt be of the meanest .
indeed it is a decisive word .
then the criterion , separating
who does greater wrong than he who fabricates a lie against allah or denies his signs ? they will say to them , `` those who have been willing to call for god will call to them , and they will say , `` they have claimed that they are disbelievers . ''
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the all-beneficent , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
then it occurred to them after they had seen the proofsto imprison him for a time .
say : `` have you considered what you have been given ? '' and say : `` what is the matter with you that allah has given them good things of which he has given them ? '' say : `` is allah the guardian of what you do ? ''
then we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring forth .
then see what was the end of those who were warned .
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who have faith ! allah has sent down to you a reminder ,
we have the lie to god , who has the faith of you after you have been guided . we have no faith in you after allah has delivered you from the religion of your lord , and we will not judge between you , for we are the best of judges .
and they will see the punishment of the day when they followed their souls , and the followers of the woods turn away from the evil of their believing news , and they will be one of the ignorants .
whoever turns away from it will bear a burden on the day of resurrection ,
until , when he reached between the two mountains , he found between them a people who could hardly understand a word .
or do they say , ‘ we are a confederate league ’ ?
and if allah has given thee a revelation , then a party of them will be given to you , and a party of them will be brought back to you . say , `` then , you will not be able to fight with me , for you will be victorious . ''
those who follow the book follow the book , which they recite to them , and enjoin on them the book and what is in it , and to make lawful for them the evil of what is in it , and to make lawful for them the right way ; and they are the ones who have faith . and they are the ones who have faith .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
and as for those who are bent on denying the truth , they will not be able to hear the truth , and they will not be able to hear the truth , and allah is seeing of the things they do .
and they say , “ o you who received the reminder , you are insane . ”
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted yourselves to god ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
we have warned you of a near punishment , on that day a man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust . ''
those whom they invoke besides him have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth , and they know .
o messengers , eat of the good things and act righteously . i am cognisant of what you do .
we recite to you of the story of moses and pharaoh with truth , for people who believe .
and verily , he is a near access to us , and an excellent abode .
and the roasting in hell .
so do not be of those who are related to the property of god for their own harm , for some of them are some of their property and others in the same manner ; and the women of the righteous are in charity ; and they do not keep their duty to allah , and do not turn away from them . god is most high , most great .
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not a guardian over them .
how can they be reminded , and a clear messenger came to them ?
you were heedless of this . now we have removed from you your covering , and your sight today is sharp .
and persisted in the great sin .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will not fail his promise . indeed , a day with your lord is as a thousand years of your number .
do they desire a religion other than the religion of allah while to him belong the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
yes , whoever fulfills his promise and guards - god loves the pious ones .
and he will teach him the book and wisdom , and the torah and the gospel ,
we do not send the messengers except as bearers of glad tidings and warners . so whoever believes and reforms , shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
is he who has been mindful of god and be wary of allah and has turned away from his way ? and he is better in the abode of the fire , and allah will guide him in the fire , and allah does not guide the unjust .
to whoever of you wills to go straight .
if they believe in the like of what you have believed , they are rightly guided ; but if they turn away , then they are still in schism . allah will suffice you against them , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no god other than him . will ye not then guard ?
who created you , then fashioned you and proportioned you ,
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
he said , ‘ o iblis ! what is the matter with you that you are not among those who prostrated ? ’
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would take heed ?
save him who shall roast in hell .
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who does greater wrong than allah ’ s name in which he will be mentioned , and they will have no fear in the least , except in humiliation .
he said : `` o listener ! take refuge with me , and he will have no protection on this day . '' he said , `` there is no escape for him . ''
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you .
they said , 'nay , but we have come to thee with that concerning which they are doubting .
and he realizes that it is the parting .
have they taken intercessors besides god ? say , `` even though they have no power over anything and have no intelligence ? ''
o you who believe ! do not ask of you a part of what is clear to you , but if you ask you concerning the book , he has made it clear to you . and allah is forgiving and forbearing .
those before them denied , then the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
but when we removed the torment from them , behold , they broke their word .
their reward is forgiveness from their lord , and gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . how excellent is the reward of those who labour !
and whoever holds the symbols of allah , then is too exalted to be far away from it . that is better for you , and in the midst of your homes . and that is better for you , and that you have spoken the truth , and they do not speak .
your god is only allah , there is no god but he . he comprehends all things inknowledge .
say , `` i do not possess any power over you , nor do you benefit . ''
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
they will say : `` woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? '' this is what the beneficent allah had promised , and the messengers spoke truth .
and untie the knot from my tongue .
allah has made the example of the people of the world to make things firm , and the example of the people of the world and the wayfarer . that is how allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and that allah is cognizant of all things .
that is because they followed what angers allah and hated the pleasure of god . he has made their deeds devoid of all virtue .
it has not been brought down by the devils .
and do not obey the bidding of those who are extravagant ,
that is because allah causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter into the night ; and allah is all-hearing , all-seeing .
their security during winter and summer journeys .
then you will be resurrected on the day of resurrection .
by the fig and the olive ,
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
marked by your lord for the transgressors .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
that is because allah is a people who do good deeds , and the pure men , and commit evil in a bad deed , that they may come to it , and commit evil in it . they will be the losers .
the word of moses was sent down by the command of moses , and it was the divine revelation of the book , and an arabic explanation of the end of those who did wrong .
and i seek refuge in thee , my lord , lest they be present with me . ''
those before them denied , and they have not attained one-tenth of what we had given them . but they belied my messengers , so howwas my reproach .
how will it be when the angels take them away , striking their faces and their backs ?
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
and the sorcerers fell down prostrate .
`` o my people ! pray not to me , nor do i ask of you any reward for it ; my reward is only with allah , and i will not be of those who have faith .
you pleaded on their behalf in this life but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their attorney ?
wherein he will neither die nor live .
so that we may glorify you much
if only we could return . ''
i have the stores of the treasuries of god and i do not know the unseen , and i know what is in the unseen . god is well aware of those who do wrong . god is well aware of the wrongdoers .
whatever you have been given are only the wares of the life of this world and the glitter of the life of this world , and that which is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
and my breast will tighten and my tongue will not be fluent , so send to aaron .
and allah 's is the similitude of the two men , which will not speak to each other , nor will they have any power to do so , and who will make a way to the right path .
enjoin prayer on your household , and be steadfast in prayer . we do not ask you to provide sustenance for you . we provide you for the righteous .
say : `` o my people ! work according to your ability . i too am acting . soon you will know who will be the sequel of the home for whom will be the guerdon of everlasting life . ''
the chiefs of pharaoh 's people said : 'surely this is a magician knowing .
when the earth is stretched out
and when you were weak , they would have become weak in the land , and the people of the land , who take heed to them , and give them the provisions of goodness ; and that they may give thanks , and give thanks to it .
we know what the earth diminishes from them , and with us is a book hidden .
has there come upon man a period of time when he was not a thing unremembered ?
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes , saying , `` taste my punishment and my warnings . ''
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that receptive ears may retain it .
say : `` indeed , my lord is not going to believe in me , but if you are impatient for me , the judgement is only with me . he is the best knower of the truthful . ''
so let them laugh a little andcry much as a recompense for what they used to earn .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
and by the night when it withdraweth
and those who have knowledge of the truth should be said to them , `` woe to you ! for you is better for you , and do not reward the righteously striving believers . the reward of those who have faith will be patient .
and to us belong the last and the first .
and when they see you , they take you only as a mockery : `` is this the one whom allah has sent as a messenger ?
if you punish , then punish with the like of that which you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and the stupor of death will come in truth : 'this is what you were trying to avoid '
and man says : when i am dead , shall i be brought forth alive ?
they were unable to stand up , nor were they helped .
those whose eyes were hoodwinked from my reminder , and they were not able to hear .
their abode is the fire , because of what they used to earn .
that he may reward those who believe and do good deeds . he does not love the unbelievers .
a servantwhen he prays ?
he has no power over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before ; this is nothing but fables of the ancients . ''
until the day of the known time . ''
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? nay , you are a people who are ignorant . '
people ask you about the hour . say : `` the knowledge of it is only with allah , and what is the hour of resurrection ? ''
ora treasure sent down to him , or why is he not a garden to eat from him ? the wrongdoers say : `` you are only following a man bewitched . ''
among thornless lote-trees
risethe night except a little ,
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
those who disbelieved among the children of israel were cursed by the tongue of david and jesus , son of mary , because they disobeyed and were insolent .
his command , when he wills a thing , is only to say : `` be ! '' and it is .
you will not attain righteousness until you spend of what you love . and whatever you spend is known to allah .
father , i fear lest a punishment from the beneficent overtake you , so that you become a friend of satan . ''
but the blast struck them in the morning .
except iblis ; he was proud and he was one of the faithless .
those before them said it , but what they earned did not avail them .
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs .
lo ! we are removing the torment a little ; verily ye shall revert .
and allah encompasses them from behind .
allah invites to the home of peace and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
and it is not for a believer , except for a genuine purpose ; and if he is a believer , he will make it as a believer , and that he may make a mark of his family , and that he may make a party of those who have been a believer , and that he may make a party of those who have been a believer , and that is a true ordinance of allah ; and allah is the knowing , the wise .
becoming dust scattered abroad ,
allah , your lord and the lord of your forefathers ? ''
nor shade and heat
ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed my lord is merciful , loving .
see how they coin similitudes for you , so they have gone astray and can not find a way .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the most beneficent , the most merciful .
we will certainly make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we will certainly requite them for the worst of what they used to do .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you to be excused from fighting with their possessions and their lives , and allah is aware of the righteous .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
those before them plotted , but allah took up the foundations of their building and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment fell upon them from directions they did not perceive .
indeed your lord will decide between them with his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
theycall on female deities , and they invoke none but the rebellious shaitan .
surely what you are promised will come to pass .
those who have believed and migrated and fought in the way of allah , and those who have taken them with their own wealth , and those who have taken them in their homes , will have a portion of their homes . and if they do not believe in the hereafter , they will have a portion of their homes . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
said : `` o my people ! should i have a right course from my lord , i am good and good from him ? '' then are you close to him ? so do you not believe in it ? so do you believe ?
they will not hear the slightest sound thereof , while they abide in that which their souls desire .
he said , “ do you see what you have been worshipping ,
god has created them , then he will cause them to die , and he will bring to life the dead , and to bring back the dead to life , and to make things clear . god is all-knowing and all-powerful .
and we have not sent you except as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner , but most people do not know .
or do they have any knowledge of everything ? they will say , `` who will bring to us the life of the world ? '' say : `` what is the matter with you that we should be able to do so ? '' say : `` what is the matter with you that we should not be able to do it ? ''
so when you are free , strive hard ,
or do they have any knowledge of everything ? they will say , `` who will bring to us the life of the world ? '' say : `` what is the matter with you that we should be able to do so ? '' say : `` what is the matter with you that we should not be able to do it ? ''
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
but they turned away from him and said : `` taughta madman . ''
the sovereignty on that day will belong to the beneficent god , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
appoint for me a minister from my family ,
anddutiful to my mother , and he has not made me arrogant , unprosperous .
is there sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? nay , but they are the unjust .
when allah made a covenant with those who were given the book to make it clear to mankind , they would not hide it , but they kept their backs , and sold it with a small price . what an evil bargain they made !
so go to pharaoh and say , `` we are messengers to be sent by the lord of the universe . ''
yes , whoever fulfills his promise and guards - god loves the pious ones .
o you who believe ! as for the covenant of allah , as the son of mary , he has given you the son of mary , and the son of mary , `` who is the guardian of god , and the one of the children of israel ? '' and we said to them : `` and we have been responsible for the disbelieving people . ''
they ask you that they are forbidden to you , but it is good to you , and the same is good for you , and the needy , and the orphans and the traveller ; and it is allah who knows , and you do not know .
we determined , and excellentto determine .
thus do we relate to you some accounts of what has gone before , and we have given you a reminder from us .
is he who has been mindful of god and be wary of allah and has turned away from his way ? and he is better in the abode of the fire , and allah will guide him in the fire , and allah does not guide the unjust .
and tell the women to be modest , and they do not hope to make their own eyes , or that they make a painting of their own mouths , or that they make their own words , or the son of maryam ; or do they make their own forms , or a son that is free from their own hearts , or that they may take heed .
and they say , “ none will enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . ” this is their wishful fancies , say , “ if you are truthful . ”
among you are some who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , `` god has favoured me with that i was not present with them . ''
we maderefuse a wet nurse . so his sister said : `` shall i direct you to a household of a household who will take care of him ? ''
say : 'what think you ? if the punishment of allah should come upon you , or the hour overtakes you , will you call upon any other than allah , if you are truthful ?
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
and indeed your lord knows what their hearts conceal or reveal .
surely the righteous will be amidst gardens and rivers .
and when you seize , you assault like tyrants .
and a sign for them is the night . we strip it of the day , and they are in darkness .
god and his angels bless the prophet . o you who have faith ! send blessings on him and salute him with asalutation .
because of their sins they were drowned and made to enter the fire , and they found none to help them besides allah .
are they better or the people of tubba and those before them ? we destroyed them . they were guilty .
he said : `` i am going to my lord who will guide me .
and can not help them , nor can they help themselves ?
he said : my lord ! help me , for they belie me .
no one led us astray except the guilty .
that is what they enjoyed avail them .
and he said : o my people ! ye are in the midst of that which ye are created in the world , and in the hereafter ; and so that ye may save us from the torment of allah , and that i should say : i am only a temptation , and i am the best of the worshippers .
who has fed them against hunger , and has secured them against fear .
then after that , you turned away , and were it not for allah 's grace and his mercy on you , you would have been among the losers .
so when she arrived , it was said , `` is your throne like this ? '' she said : `` is your throne like it ? we had received the knowledge before this , and we were submissive .
and what will make you know what the reality is ?
has the news of those who disbelieved before you did not come to them , and tasted the evil consequences of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
they plotted against him , but we made them the undermost .
and at night . do you not understand ?
and he said , “ enter the two groups of the jinn and humans , and the people of the fire . ” but the two parties will say , “ our lord , these are the ones who have gone astray . ” so they will say , ‘ our lord ! these are the astray . so do you have the one to be led astray . ’
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission may be granted to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger remained behind . a painful punishment will afflict those of them who disbelieved .
say : `` let your lord accomplish for you what your own hands have put forth , and your fathers do not go to your parents and your fathers , and you will not kill them , for what they have been doing . '' and do not make any of them equal to allah , that he may make them to go near , so that they may have the right to please him , and that they may be of the ignorant .
when he calls to me , so that they may be rightly guided .
this is our provision , inexhaustible .
and my curse will be on you till the day of judgment . ''
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
a lesson and a reminder for every penitent worshiper .
and we have not sent the messengers to be a warner , but those who disbelieve , and those who disbelieve are the signs of the truth , that they may make clear the truth , and that they do not believe .
he said , “ you and your fathers are in manifest error . ”
poets are followed by the perverse .
read , and your lord is the most generous .
and reckon not those who are slain in allah 's way as dead ; nay , they are alive , with their lord ,
do you build monuments on every high place in vanity ,
those -- their refuge is hell , and they will find no escape from it .
why do you not bring down the angels , if you are truthful ? ''
nay ! but they do not fear the hereafter .
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , for surely you are before our eyes ; and glorify your lord when you arise .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him rebel , but he was far astray . ''
on the day when it comes , no soul shall speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and some will be blessed .
and forgive my father—he was one of the misguided .
the nearest ones to abraham are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
when we intend a thing , we say to it : `` be ! '' and it is .
and those whom they call upon besides allah do not create anything while they are themselves created .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
and yusuf'sbrethren came , and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
when the wild beasts are herded together ,
they had already plotted sedition before , and upset matters for you , until the truth came and the decree of allah prevailed , while they were averse .
and thathis striving shall soon be seen ,
and the hypocritesdeceive allah until a female time , and if they turn away , then consume the wealth with your wealth , and eat of their goods , and do not be of the cheats ,
surely those who believe and do good works shall have a reward unfailing .
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and the angels , and they are not proud .
i will grant them respite . my plan is firm .
and we gave moses the book that they might be guided .
those are their houses , fallen in ruins , because of their iniquities . in this there is evidencefor the people of knowledge .
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
what is the matter with you that they will be two of their going to and have made their gods as a result of their deeds ? do you then find a guidance for those who have gone astray from their way ?
believers , obey god and obey the messenger , and do not invalidate your deeds .
do you then hope that they would believe in you , while a party of them heard the word of allah , and then tampered with it after they had understood it , after they had understood it ?
and do not call upon the prophet as you call between them ; and allah knows what they conceal between them and what they say . and let them have a painful punishment , or a painful punishment .
and when we decide to destroy a town , we command its affluent ones , and they transgress therein . so the word is realized against it , and we destroy it utterly .
he said : `` then get away from your own way . will ye then be those who dispute with my fathers , and your fathers ? verily , you will be waiting with allah , and i will wait with them . and i will wait with them , and i am waiting with you .
say : `` o my people ! work according to your ability ; i am working , and soon will you know
they will say : `` we stayed a day or part of a day ; ask those who keep count . ''
have you not seen those who received a portion of the book , when they are invited to the book of allah that he may judge between them , then a group of them turn away ?
alif . lam . mim .
and every soul shall come with a driver and a witness .
but those whose scales are light are those who have lost their souls , and they will abide in hell .
a guidance and mercy for the righteous
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
they said : `` our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we will certainly be lost . ''
except those who believe and do righteous deeds , and remember allah much , and defend themselves after they have been wronged . and those who do wrong will know what overturning they will be overturned .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it ; and whoever believes in his lord , he will fear neither paltriness nor vileness .
why did not the believers , and the believing men and women , think that they had a good mention of it ? and say , `` this is a clear slander '' .
but when the angels had called the glory of the holy ones , when it came to them , and the prayer came to you , allah gave you glad tidings of a son , and the noble messenger , and the great messenger .
reclining on couches lined with brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near .
she said , `` indeed , the angels are among the guards of the truth , '' but it will be said to them , `` do not become a single object of the end . it is the same for them , who will be the one who has the power to do so , and they will be victorious .
but whosoever turns away and disbelieves -
o you who believe ! when you meet those who disbelieve in battle , do not turn your backs to them .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . and his is the religion , so will you fear other than allah .
moses said : `` my lord ! i have control over nothing but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the wicked people . ''
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
she said , “ i seek refuge with the all-beneficent from you , if you are pious . ”
andconfirming that which was before me of the torah and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me .
and what shall teach thee what is the steep ?
the pious are in no way accountable for them ; but the reminderthat haply they may take heed .
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they call upon apart from him -- it is the false , and allah is the high , the great .
and recall when moses said to his people : `` o my people ! verily , you are going to go to him with the calf , and you seek to seek his repentance , and then you will not repent , and he is the one who accepts repentance , the most merciful . ''
have the disbelieversbeen rewardedfor what they used to do ?
they will not hear any unnecessary or sinful talk
and we bestowed favor on david from us : `` o mountains , sing the praises of him and birds , and birds . '' and we softened iron for him .
honourablel scribes .
fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion of allah . if they desist , then there is no hostility except against the oppressors .
or a needy person in misery
and the soul and him who perfected it
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have earned , because of what they have earned , and that they may taste a part of it , so that they may return .
those who dispute in opposition to god , then they will dispute with him in the signs of god . they will not be able to change the words of allah , for he is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and you will not be able to have any relation between your wives , but if you are superior to him , then do not be one of the cheats ; and do not be one of the cheats . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them so we reinforced them with a third . they said , `` indeed , we are messengers to you . ''
so remember me , i will remember you . thank me and do not be ungrateful to me .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you shall be returned .
until you visit the graves .
do not set up another god with allah , lest you sit down reproved , forsaken .
and inform them that the water is shared between them , and every share of drinking will be regulated .
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the aggressors .
the wife of pharaoh said : `` a comfort of the eye to me and for you . do not kill him . perhaps he will benefit us , or we may adopt him as a son . '' they did not perceive .
we sent messengers to communities before you , and we seized them with misery and hardship so that they might humble themselves .
but we saved him and those who were in the ark , and madea sign to the worlds .
and those who have taken their wealth before their own souls , and have made them pleasing to their own souls ; and those who have taken their homes with their own souls , they have no more than a means of evil . those who choose their own souls will be successful .
they will wish to get out of the fire , but they will not be able to leave it , and they will have a lasting punishment .
and when you look around , you will see bliss and a great kingdom .
o prophet ! we have chosen you in the land as a witness between the two of them . do not follow the way of allah in the way of the truth . those who have gone astray from the way of god will have a humiliating punishment .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . they are the people of hell , therein dwelling forever .
their reckoning has drawn near to mankind , and they turn away in heedlessness .
he said , “ do you see what you have been worshipping ,
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds .
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
was it not a sign for them that the learned men of israel knew it ?
he is allah in the heavens and the earth . he knows your secret and your overt , and he knows what you earn .
these are they whose deeds are wasted in this world and in the hereafter , and they have no helpers .
and none of you could have defended him .
so we took vengeance on them ; and they are both on a clear roadway .
and multiplied therein corruption .
and his armies of jinns and men and birds were gathered together with the jinn and birds , and they were set in bands .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay ! they are in doubt concerning my reminder . nay ! they have not yet tasted my punishment .
this was indeed a clear test .
allah knows best your enemies ; and allah is sufficient as a protector , and allah is sufficient as a supporter .
had we revealed it to one of the foreigners .
is he then who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only men possessed of minds remember .
verily we ! it is we who have sent down unto thee the dhikrand
indeed , we have sent messengers before you , a description of the stories of which we have sent to you , and some of them to whom we have given a description of that which we have given them . and when the command of allah has come to pass , they will not be losers .
by the brightening dawn ,
o you who believe ! be not like those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book : 'you will corrupt the land twice , and you will become tyrants .
with spreading branches .
they will recline on couches arranged in rows and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
if they are a woman who is a believer , they will have no fear , nor shall they be grieved . and if they are righteous , they will have no fault in it . and if you are righteous , they do not desire to be niggardly ; and allah is aware of the things you do .
their reward is with their lord , gardens of eden , and in the midst of gardens , wherein they will abide for ever . they will be in the midst of gardens to dwell , for they are well pleased with the lord of the book .
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever , for that they used to deny our signs .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will increase his tillage . and whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter , we give him some of it , and in the hereafter there will be no share .
and of them are some who say : our lord ! vouchsafe unto us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and of the hereafter they are heedless .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission may be granted to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger remained behind . a painful punishment will afflict those of them who disbelieved .
when there covered the lote tree what covered it .
except iblis ; he refused to be among those who prostrated .
so whoever wills may remember it .
he said : `` that is what ye have been working to god , '' they said , `` we do not have any evil to bring you any evil . '' he said , `` this is the clear evidence of mine . '' he said , `` this is the clear evidence of mine . '' he said , `` i have come to you in knowledge . ''
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise ,
the things that i have done is the weight of two people , and it was to be a good deed , and the people of this town , and the same is for them . and that is a great ordinance of your lord , and that which you have been given . and that is a great ordinance of your lord ; and that which you have been doing will not be exhausted .
say : what ! do you disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and attribute to him equals ? that is the lord of the worlds .
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
and it will be said to them , `` where are those you worshipped
those who have believed and migrated and fought in the way of allah , and those who have taken them with their own wealth , and those who have taken them in their homes , will have a portion of their homes . and if they do not believe in the hereafter , they will have a portion of their homes . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
of jinn and men .
“ eat and drink with pleasure , for what you used to do . ”
beside him . so plot against me all together , then give me no respite .
moses said : `` do you sayof the truth when it has come to you ? is this magic ? and sorcerers do not succeed . ''
some of the people of the right and the right desire that he may mislead others from the way of allah , and that he may make clear to them what is in the way of allah , and that they may make a mockery of him , and they will have a great punishment .
who taught by the pen ,
those upon whom the sentence has been pronounced will say : `` our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we seduced them as we ourselves were astray . we ourselves ourselves were not to worship them . ''
taught man what he did not know .
it will destroy everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became nothing except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the sinful people .
they did not forbid each other from the evil they committed , but evil was that which they did .
and it is he who has let free the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the salt that he has set forth , and he has set a barrier between them , and a ban forbidden .
and they say what they do not do ?
each man will have enough cares that day .
they will say : `` our lord ! '' and glory be to thee . we are not but one of them , or we have set a thing other than you ; and we have turned your affairs in a state of aversion . and we have caused a people to turn away from you and a people who have forgotten .
there is no soul but has a protector over it .
and they say what they do not do ?
surelythose who believe and do good works , their lord will guide them for their faith . rivers will flow beneath them in gardens of bliss .
the two of them is of the same , and the one of them is responsible for a genuine purpose . say , “ what is the matter with you , that you should consume the unlawful among the poor ? if you are truthful . ”
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers : `` we will drive you out of our land , or you will return to our religion . '' then their lord inspired them : `` we will destroy the wrong-doers ,
those who are on the jews say to the jews : `` we hear , '' they say , `` we hear and obey , '' and turn away from them , and turn away from them for a while , but they do not consent to a little but a few .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
allah knows what is in their hearts . so leave them alone , and admonish them , and say to them penetrating words about themselves .
and o prophet ! keep your duty to the remembrance of the remembrance of the prayer . indeed , the prayer will be of the abomination , and allah is cognizant of what you do .
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , there would have befallen you a great punishment for what you ventured into .
and those who press forward ,
and they said , “ this is no one to whom you are like , but whoever is a muslim , he will have a trustworthy messenger , and we had never heard our forefathers . ”
except what god wills . he knows what is manifest and what is hidden .
he said : o harun ! what prevented thee , when thou sawest them going astray ?
and if ye desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then verily allah hath prepared for the well-doers among you a mighty hire .
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you took captive .
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
so we destroyed men mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and refuse neighbourly needs .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever , for that they used to deny our signs .
we have given you the seven oft-repeatedand the grand quran .
that is because of what your hands have sent forth , and because allah is not unjust to his servants .
they said , “ our lord ! we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
and the people of the city were made to settle their people in the matter of the truth , and the matter was made to settle in their promise to the children of israel , and to what they had been commanded . and to all that they had been doing .
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
and the trumpet will be blown , and behold , they will come out from the graves to their lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : 'if our lord has not mercy on us and forgive us , we shall surely be among the losers '
or who is it that will be their lord , and he calls upon him , when he calls to him , when he calls upon the people , and that the people are in the land ? will they then take heed ?
do they feel secure against the plan of allah ? no one feels secure against allah 's plan except the people of ruin .
he is the omnipotent over his servants . he is the wise , the aware .
which none but the sinners eat . ”
the people of noah denied before them , and the dwellers of rass , and the thamud ,
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
say : `` indeed , my lord is not going to believe in me , but if you are impatient for me , the judgement is only with me . he is the best knower of the truthful . ''
he has created for them a portion of that which allah has created for them . this is a god that has been made to appear to god , and that he will have a promise to whom he has been made to appear up to allah . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-compassionate .
and of everything we have created pairs , so that you may reflect .
they said : `` are you a clear warner ? '' but there is no doubt that it has been revealed to you . they say : `` is it not a clear proof ? '' and they say : `` be ye to be honoured ? '' and they say : `` be ye to be honoured ! '' and no a as a few .
and press out to their prayer , saying : `` lord , the most merciful . '' glory be to them , and their lord is the lord of the universe .
a lying , sinful forelock .
they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
andwhen your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would inflict severe punishment on them . verily , your lord is swift in retribution .
abiding in it , and evil it is for them on the day of resurrection .
by the brightening dawn ,
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
and keep away from ar-rujz !
what ! when we are dead and have become dust ? that is afarreturn .
surely paradise will be the refuge .
those who are dazed in ignorance .
should he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
and those who guard their private parts
some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
the two seas are not the like of the two seas . it will be the same for them , and they will eat from the fruits of the date-palm and the other , and you will see the ships in the sea .
and if we have sent down in the language of their own language , they would say : `` did you not read the signs of our signs ? '' and say : `` it is the message that has been revealed to those who have faith . ''
had they believed and been righteous , they would have received from allah a far better reward , if they but knew .
exalted is allah above what they attribute to him ,
so the earthquake seized them , and they became motionless bodies in their homes .
and of his signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate yourselves before the sun or the moon ; but prostrate to allah who created them , if you are sincere .
there is not a thing that we have given them for what they have earned , and that we may make clear to them what they have earned ; but they are the ones who have rejected it , but they are the people of the clear book , but they will have no faith , and we will not send a sign except with a sign for them .
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot . each onedid we prefer abovecreatures ,
and when mankind are gathered together , they will be enemies to them and will deny their worship .
man is created from haste . i will show you my signs , so do not impatiently urge me .
whereas the hereafter is better and more lasting .
say , `` the truth has come , and falsehood can neither originate nor recreate anything . ''
so let man consider from what he was created .
say , `` whoever is the most gracious in the way of allah , it is in the life to come , that they will be the same to it , or the punishment of the world to come , or the punishment of the world to come . and they will know who is a well to know .
surely the righteous will be in bliss ,
indeed he saw the greatestof the existence of his lord .
every soul will have its means of livelihood in which we have given them , and the parents , and the relatives , and the relatives , the traveler . god is well-aware of all things .
but whoever turns away from my reminder , for him is a confined life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
do you see any remnants of them ?
and how many a city did we destroy from your town , which drove you out ? we destroyed them .
when they came to them from allah , they would say : `` this is what they have been given . '' that is the ordaining of the disbelievers , that they may ask for the help of allah . so let them know that they are the unbelievers . so let them share the truth .
in a lofty garden ,
lo ! this my brother hath ninety and nine ewes while i haveone ewe , and he said : entrust it to me , and he is of the argument of me .
but they were not sent as guardians over them .
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them at night while they are asleep ?
and we sent notbefore thee other than men whom we inspired . ask the people of the remembrance if ye know not .
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be among those who prostrate .
thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that they may return .
and if you disbelieve , allah is all-sufficient for you , though you will not be pleased with the servants of the believers , but if you do so , they will be pleased with it , and then you will be well pleased with your lord . and indeed , he is the all-knower of the innermost of the chests . he is aware of what you do .
when our revelations are recited to him , he says : `` tales of the ancients ! ''
they said , “ you are only human beings like ourselves , and the all-beneficent has not sent down anything ; you are only lying . ”
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said : `` praise be to allah , who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
and recall what time we said unto mankind : verily thy lord , he is the similitude of that which we say unto mankind , and that thou mayest bring forth the tree of doom , that they shall be the seduced ones , and they shall not increase the duty of the truth .
the people of the book will say , `` it is the same for them that they may make it clear to the truth . '' they will say , `` what has been revealed to you in the book that is what it has been revealed , and they will not know god . ''
and reckon not those who are slain in allah 's way as dead ; nay , they are alive , with their lord ,
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
and as for those who , when they have pledged to god , we will surely make a covenant with you , and when you are firmly turned back in the way of allah , and in the end , it is you who are the aware .
andabraham , when he said to his people : `` worship allah and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
murmuring among themselves : `` you have tarried but ten days . ''
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled ?
their recompense is hell , because they disbelieved and took my signs for a jest and my messengers .
taste thou ! lo ! thou art the mighty , the noble .
and that our army will be victorious .
it is he who made the earth as a rich carpets to you , and sent down water from the sky , and sent down water from the sky ; and it is in order that you will have the means to make it equal to god . god is aware of the things you do .
so leave them alone until they meet their day in which they will be stunned .
and we revealed to moses : `` travel by night with my servants ; surely you will be pursued . ''
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you to be excused from fighting with their possessions and their lives , and allah is aware of the righteous .
the nearest ones to abraham are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permission like those before them . thus does allah make clear to you his revelations . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
we said , `` get down from it , all of you , and if there comes to you guidance from me , whoever follows my guidance , will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
as for those who believe in allah and hold fast to him , he will admit them into his mercy and grace , and guide them to himself on a straight path .
by allah , we sentto many nations before you . but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , and he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
that which is the matter with you , when it is recited to you , we are the creed of these , and the upright in the cave , it is in the midst of the cave ; and they will be in the midst of the cave .
we have explainedin this quran in various ways , that they may take admonition , but it increases them only in aversion .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he attains the age of strength , and fulfil the covenant ; surely the covenant will be questioned .
we created man from an extract of clay .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
the honest spiritbrought it down
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes , saying , `` taste my punishment and my warnings . ''
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , and they will not be able to escape ?
how is it that if they prevail against you , they will respect neither kinship nor treaty with you ? they satisfy you with their mouths while their hearts are averse , and most of them are iniquitous .
that is because you used to mock at the signs of allah , and the life of the world deluded you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be granted goodwill .
and mention in the book ishmael . he was true to his promise , and a prophet .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight against the friends of satan ; surely the strategy of satan is feeble .
often will those who disbelieve wish that they had been muslims .
and seek forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
say , `` nothing will befall us except what god has decreed for us . he is our protector , and in allah let the believers put their trust . ''
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these images to which you squat ? ”
and all those who are on the earth , thenthis might deliver him .
so fear allah , and obey me .
and know that the messenger of allah is in your midst , and if you have a new creation , he has made them a new creation , and he has made for them a means of harm , and he has made them to grow in your hearts ; and they will have the upper hand .
and they accept their repentance , who are the ones who give the thanks to god , and be grateful to him , and they do not make the heirs of the pit , and give good news to the believers .
and assuredly we know the precedingamong you , and we know the laggards .
we sent it down on a blessed night , and we were ever warning .
there is a sign in the book that is in the book . it is a definite reading to which it is revealed to the unknown that it has been revealed to the book . the children of israel will say , `` god has the knowledge of the unseen and the jinn , and they will also know . ''
noah called to us , and how excellent was the answerers !
and we taught him the art of making coats of mail for you to protect you from your violence ; will you then be grateful ?
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
what is the matter with those who have knowledge of the matter with allah , and to make a breach with them , and say to them , `` be condemned to god , and you will not be able to make any one to be worshipped in the earth , or you will have no one to help them in the earth , or do you have any faith in god . those who have been bent on denying the truth will have no one to help you . god will not guide the unbelievers .
`` and by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away . ''
it is allah who is the lord of the universe , there is no god but he . and the believers will have the power to give the believers . and allah is exalted in might , the most honourable , the most exalted .
they will say , “ our lord ! whoever has brought this upon us – double double punishment in the fire . ”
and had not known my account .
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
allah has not taken any son , nor is there any god besides him . then , god would have taken others away from the others , and some of them would have been blessed . glory be to god , above what they allege .
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , and therein they shall abide .
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am a messenger of the lord of the worlds .
the men and women who are believers and women , and women , and women women , and women , and women , and women women , and women , and women , and women , and women of the pure women ; and the men of women , and the women of the women , and the women of the pure , will be brought near to god .
a crafty jinn said : `` i will bring it to you before you rise from your place . i am strong and trustworthy . ''
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
except the chosen servants of god .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you . ”
that is the bounty of allah , which he bestows on whom he pleases . allah is the lord of mighty grace .
this is the revelation of the lord of the worlds .
so travel the land for four months , and know that you can not escapeallah , and allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or take you away , to us is their return , and allah is witness to what they do .
and indeed he saw him at another descent .
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
but deniedand turned away ,
these are they upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah has set a seal , and they are the heedless .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and the jinn and the men have set up with allah the jinn and the women . they are not aware of the name of allah . and he is the exalted in might , the most high .
thus the word of your lord is realized against the unbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
and from the evil of malignant witchcraft ,
those whom they call upon themselves are the means of access to their lord . they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
he said , `` did i not tell you that you will not be able to patiently bear with me ? ''
have they handed downas an heirloom one to another ? nay , but they are a rebellious people .
jonah too was one of the messengers .
allah does not forbid you from those who have not fought you against those who fought against you , nor expelled you from your homes . god loves the equitable .
and those who have knowledge of the truth should be said to them , `` woe to you ! for you is better for you , and do not reward the righteously striving believers . the reward of those who have faith will be patient .
then we produced after them another generation .
and they appoint a portion of that which we have provided them for what they do not know . by allah , you will be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
they were defeated and turned belittled ,
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
master of the day of judgment .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
your lord has not forsaken you , nor is he displeased with you ,
have you not seen how he who has been responsible for himself with him to his lord ? he said , “ i have been given the life of the world , and he has given me the life of the world , and he has made the sun a beacon for the first . ” god does not guide the unjust people .
o my people ! enter the holy land which allah has prescribed for you , and turn not back in your traces , lest you become losers .
there is no blame on you from the lord of the world to come , when the time of your lord has come to you , and remember the remembrance of allah , as you have guided . indeed , you have gone astray before this .
moses said , `` my lord knows best who comes with guidance from him , and who will be the best in the hereafter . indeed , the wrongdoers will not prosper . ''
on that day , you will become like the like of it , or we will turn away from it , as if you are like the like of it ; and the trumpet will be blown , and we will all gather all together .
then if they are patient , the fire is their abode , and if they seek to propitiate , they will not be redeemed .
indeed , he was a sign for the righteous among them , but they were in doubt concerning the religion of faith until the messenger of god had come to you in faith . then , when the messenger of the messenger came to you , he said to them , `` god has no faith . ''
save him who stealeth the hearing , and he followeth a flame gleaming .
to allah belongs the last and the first .
the command of the truth is that they are devoted to him , and be obedient to him , and be obedient to him , and give the zakat , and the victory of the prayer is established .
indeed they are devising a scheme ,
that is because they say , “ the fire will not touch us except for a limited number of days . ” in their religion they are deluded .
in whose hearts is a disease , they will say , `` we have visited a calamity from among us , or we have received a calamity from among them , and we have no power to help them , and they will be fully aware of what they used to do . ''
then he proportioned him and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing and sight and hearts . little thanks you give !
and mention in the book ishmael . he was true to his promise , and a prophet .
say : `` to whom belongs the earth and whosoever is therein , if you know ? ''
an arabic koran , without any deviousness , so that they may ward off .
how many were the gardens and springs ,
and your lord has said , “ pray to me , i will answer you . those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell , disgraced . ”
he said : our lord is he who gave everything its creation , then guided it .
so they denied them , and became of those who were destroyed .
they said , “ o noah ! you have disputed with us and disputed with us , so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
they will swear to you that you may be pleased with them . but if you are pleased with them , allah is not pleased with the transgressing people .
by no means ! we shall write down what he says , and we shall prolong his punishment for him .
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
who are indiscourse amusing themselves .
do you think that they do not speak in the unseen ? and when you do not find allah , he will forgive you , and give the zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
who amasses wealth and counts it over ,
this quran could not be composed by any other than allah , but it is a confirmation of what was before it , and it is a confirmation of what was before it , and a book from the lord of the worlds .
and whatever you give in usury , that you may increase in order to increase the wealth of the people will not increase with god . whatever you give in charity , desiring god 's countenance will be doubled .
they will say , `` no , you yourselves were not believers .
and when the seas are erupted
if we will , we will surely make it to invent what we have revealed to him . then you will have no one to help you , nor do you have any means to take heed .
and it is he who sends down to you , and no one of you who will not go forth from among you , and your male and female , and you will surely expel the people from your homes for the cause of god , and they will surely be rewarded for their deeds with a great reward .
honourablel scribes .
divers institutions have passed away before you . travel in the land , and see what was the end of those who denied .
and it will be said to them , `` where are those you worshipped
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet among the righteous .
so allah rewarded them for their saying with gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will live forever . such is the reward of the righteous .
and he has created for you some of the provisions of it , and it is they who ride it on some of them , and eat of what god has provided for you . do not be a clear enemy to you .
and that our army will be victorious .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best those who are guided .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
o you who have believed , a game is a game of due for the people of allah , that the people may eat of the land which has been given to them , and give the like of their good things , and make lawful for them the like of what has been forbidden , and you may be successful .
and of the stories of the women who are in their homes , those who are in their homes of a disease , and those who are in their vicinity will be the best of their deeds , and they will all be truthful .
but if they turn away , say : 'god suffices me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust , and he is the lord of the mighty throne . '
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , there would have befallen you a great punishment for what you ventured into .
o mary ! be obedient to thy lord , prostrate thyself , and bow with those who bow .
blessed is he who is the kingship of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and to him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
or a needy person in misery
there two are two other groups . they said : `` i am one of those who are bent on prison . '' he said , `` i will be crucified , and i have been commanded to be among the prostrators . '' `` i have been commanded to be of those who have been commanded . '' and indeed , we see that you are righteous .
and believe in what i have sent down , confirming what is with you , and do not be the first to disbelieve in it , and do not exchange my signs for a paltry price , and fear me alone .
nay , man is a witness against himself ,
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
then if you turn away , i do not ask any reward from you . my reward is only upon allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth crops from their cattle which they eat ? will they not see ?
how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , and we called it to a stern account and punished it with a terrible punishment .
and it is he who has let free the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the salt that he has set forth , and he has set a barrier between them , and a ban forbidden .
therein they will recline , and they will call for abundant fruit and drink .
they ask you about the mountains . say , ‘ my lord will scatter them as ashes ,
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
that is jesus , son of mary , a word of truth concerning which they are doubting .
what is the matter with you that you do not have fighting with the allies of god and the weak men and women who say , `` our lord , pour down upon us the people of this city from your own people , and make us a victorious ,
and in thamud , when they were told , `` enjoy yourselves for a while . ''
and the morn as it breathes .
that is the bounty from allah , and allah suffices as knower .
that is because allah causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter into the night ; and allah is all-hearing , all-seeing .
we maderefuse a wet nurse . so his sister said : `` shall i direct you to a household of a household who will take care of him ? ''
the baptism of allah , and exalted is the very highest time , and if you do not , then make you slip in the land ; and if you do not desist , you will not be able to do so . god loves the people who do right .
o ye who believe ! be ye in doubt of that in doubt , and verily , in fact there is a lie in doubt concerning it , and do not make a flaw in this , and do not make a trace of the people of the book , and do not make a trace of the people of the book . allah is the most appreciating and the most merciful . so fear allah , for allah is the forgiver , the merciful .
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he said : bring unto me a brother of yours from your father . do you not see that i give full measure and that i am the best of hosts ?
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a high highland with flowing water .
a complex of operations in the book marked by a definite reading to the same point to which it is revealed to the speakers of the book
by no means ! by the moon ,
we have createdof special creation .
and there are they in whose hearts is no more than one religion . it is one religion who has believed in it . and if they do not have faith in the hereafter , it has been set between them , and if they do not , they will be in different groups .
and indeed , in the life of abraham and the people of the book , in order that they might take heed for themselves , and fear god , and whoever turns away from the day of resurrection , it is god who is the self-sufficient , the praised .
they said : `` o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped or that we should abandon what we desire ? verily , you are the forbearer , right-minded ! '' .
o you who have faith ! be firm in the truth of allah , and let you bear your testimony , and your parents are averse , and if you do so , their parents will be of no more , if you do so , or turn away from them . and if you do so , confine them to the right way , or if you are truthful .
and ease my task for me .
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
in scorching wind and boiling water ,
eat and pasture your cattle . surely in that are signs for men of understanding .
the revelation of the bookis from allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
then which of the bounties of your lord will you dispute ?
is there in that an oath for the intelligent ?
blessed is he in whose hand is the dominion , and he is able to do all things .
the worst of beasts in allah 's sight are the deaf and dumb who do not understand .
had they believed and been righteous , they would have received from allah a far better reward , if they but knew .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best those who stray from his way , and he knows best those who are guided .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth . exalted is he above what they associate with him .
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of his lord 's signs , but he turns his back and turns his back ? and if you turn away , then we shall make them hear , and they will not be guided to the way .
until , when we seize the decadent among them with punishment , they begin to groan .
she said : `` o chiefs ! advise me in my case . i have no affair until you are present with me . ''
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment shall be doubled for her , and that is easy for allah .
had he not been one of those who glorify god ,
on the day when the heaven will shake with a dreadful shaking ,
so be patient . as if the messengers were given to help , do not hasten them . the day when the people of the world will come to pass , the promise of god has come to them , and they are not the guilty .
and we have made lawful for you their wives , and the giver of good things , and the women of the women who have made a war on them , and the women of the women who have taken their homes , and the women of the marriage . and allah is ever all-potent over what you do .
“ our lord , do not deviate our hearts after you have guided us , and bestow on us mercy from your presence . you are the all-munificent . ”
those who have been bent on denying the truth say to those who have received the good , “ they will not be able to make any side of the way of god , and they will have a humiliating punishment . ”
you cause the night to enter into the day , and the day into the night , you make the dead enter into the dead , and the dead will be brought forth from the dead without reckoning .
and allah said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , i have given you the honor of your own , and when i have been given to you with the angels , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an , he has given you a clear hold of the torah and the gospel , but when i have been given to you , you will have no other reason but a clear herald of warning . ”
friends on that day will be foes one to another , except those who guard .
then we opened the gates of the fire to be made attractive to them and made them rejoice in what they had been given . and we saved them and drowned them in despair .
and if the people of the garden were to be of your family , they would be given to you a portion , if their offspring were to be given four months , and if they had been given a part of your house , they would have taken a part of your wives . and if they were to make a covenant with you , they would have taken a single group of you , and is a servant of a son . and if they were to make a covenant with you , they would have taken a
and whomsoever allah guides , none can lead him astray ; is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
do they not ponder the quran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
its spathes are like the heads of devils .
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! but signs and warnings avail not those who do not believe .
those are they that are the ones to whom allah has given the good things of the prophets , and those who have been with them , and of the prophets , and those whom we have given them , and they recite to you the verses of the merciful , and they fall down in prostration .
it is he who has created for you hearing , eyesight , and hearts ; little thanks you give .
so that they may eat of its fruit , yet it is not their hands . will they not then be grateful ?
o ye who believe ! fulfil your covenant with you , and fulfil your covenant with you , and to make lawful for you the good things of which ye are forbidden . and verily , allah enjoins that which he intendeth . verily allah enjoineth everything .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
o you who have faith ! be firm in the truth of allah , and let you bear your testimony , and your parents are averse , and if you do so , their parents will be of no more , if you do so , or turn away from them . and if you do so , confine them to the right way , or if you are truthful .
he said , `` i have been sent by the gate of seven heavens , and in layers , and in the midst of seven consecutive years , you will be placed up in the garden . ''
and we defer it only to a term appointed .
bring back our fathers if you are truthful .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
we have sent down to you the book with the truth , so worship allah , and make your religion sincerely his .
as for him who giveths and feareth him .
you lust after men instead of women . you are a people transgressing beyond bounds . ''
they wanted to harm him , but we made them the worst losers .
we will brand him on the muzzle .
nor are darkness and light .
he said : thou art granted thy petition , o musa !
everyone in the heavens and the earth implore him . every day he is in a new affair .
so he threw it down , and behold , it was a snake , moving swiftly .
enter my paradise !
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and indeed , the messengers have believed before you , they have rejected it , and they will have the punishment of severe punishment until there came to them the news of that which they had been promised ; and there came to them the news of that of which they were sent .
and preferred the life of the world ,
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
the two seas are not the like of the two seas . it will be the same for them , and they will eat from the fruits of the date-palm and the other , and you will see the ships in the sea .
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and gave them radiance and joy .
then we pardoned you after that that you might give thanks .
you are not charged to oversee them .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
o you who believe ! be wary of allah and keep your duty to him , and give you a way to a light from the shadows , the light , and the light ; and for you is the forgiver and the most merciful .
god is the one god . he is the knower of the living and the last , and he is the knower of what he wills in the heavens and the earth , and he will have no knowledge of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and he will have no knowledge of the creation of the heavens and the earth , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
and those who guard their private parts
whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth glorifies allah , the sovereign , the holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
who giveshis wealth to purify himself
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes a home . the spider 's house is the house , if they but knew .
he said : shall i trust you with him as i intrusted you with his brother aforetime ? allah is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it . but man bore it . indeed , he was unjust and ignorant .
every soul will have its means of livelihood in which we have given them , and the parents , and the relatives , and the relatives , the traveler . god is well-aware of all things .
ormay say when it beholds the punishment , “ if only i had a second chance , i would have been among the virtuous . ”
as if they wereeggs closely guarded .
lo ! it is they who are the corrupters , but they perceive not .
you lust after men instead of women . you are a people transgressing beyond bounds . ''
and upraised couches .
and when their hearts are made to go forth , they will not be affected by their own property , without their account , and they say : `` o our father ! what is the matter with us that we have full knowledge of what is in it ? and we shall be responsible for the things they have been doing . ''
and with them will be virgins of refraining looks and of equal age .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of rectitude .
and all things we have recorded in a book .
those who love that immorality should spread among the believers will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . allah knows and you do not know .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it . they rejoice in the life of the world , while the life of the world is but aenjoyment .
surely they were not expecting a reckoning ,
and you will be three sorts .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
surely the righteous will be in bliss ,
that allah may forgive you your sins , and what is behind you , and his bounty , and complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path .
do you feel secure that he will not cause the earth to swallow you , and loose a squall of rocks in the land ? then you will find no protector or helper .
undoubtedly , they will have no doubt about that which you call to one another , neither is there in the life of this world nor in the hereafter ; and whoever is not able to make any change in the hereafter , and to allah is the destination .
and verily the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and ward off .
or do they benefit you or harm you ? ''
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them for what they used to do .
and the duty of god is obligation according to the same , and the evil of it is only for him , and we shall make a way for the people of it , and we shall make them a performer of the land , and we have made us a performer of the worlds ; and we shall make us a maintainer of evil . and we shall make us a performer of the universe , and we shall make us a performer of the worlds ; and we have been responsible for the people of the truth ,
as for you , and that you worship ,
and the children of israel , i am sent to you with a messenger from your lord , and i am a sign for you from your lord , and he has given you the like of that which you have been dead . and we will bring to both of you a pair of the living and the dead , if you are truthful .
only those who believe in allah and the last day , who believe in allah and the last day , and establish prayer and pay the obligatory charity , will have no fear except allah , so that they may be among the guided .
and ibrahim enjoined his sons to his sons , and said : `` o my sons ! verily , allah has chosen for you the religion of faith , so die not except in islam . ''
when he came to them , the people of the garden saw it as a beast of the same tree , as it had been said to them , `` why do we not get the like of it , and that we may make it seem crooked , and o our father ! we are the like of it , and our father is the like of it , and this my father is the like of the dead . ''
and what will make you know what the night of power is ?
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds pleasing to them , so they wander blindly .
o ye who believe ! fulfil your covenant with you , and fulfil your covenant with you , and to make lawful for you the good things of which ye are forbidden . and verily , allah enjoins that which he intendeth . verily allah enjoineth everything .
verily those who reject our signs and are stiff-necked against them , will not be opened for them , nor shall they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we recompense the guilty .
and david and solomon , when they gave judgment concerning the field when the sheep of some people overran it , and we were witness to their judgement .
each man will have enough cares that day .
when they see it approaching , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is what you used to call for .
do not let the unbelievers think that the respite we give them is good for them ; we give them respite , so that they may increase their sins .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not sent down after him ? do you not understand ?
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
he will send down abundant rain from the sky for you ,
so remind , you are only a reminder .
whoever comeswith a good deed shall have better than it ; and they will be secure from terror on that day .
the people of lot rejected the warnings .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
on that day none will punish as he punishes .
on that day no one can benefit or harm one another . we will say to those who did wrong : `` taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny . ''
we have put shackles around their necks reaching up to the chins , so their heads are forced up .
until , when he reached between the two mountains , he found between them a people who could hardly understand a word .
taste thou ! lo ! thou art the mighty , the noble .
i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
it is he who sends down to his servant clear revelations , that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; surely allah is compassionate and merciful .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no god other than him . will ye not then guard ?
my lord ! grant me wisdom and join me with the righteous .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , god is all-forgiving and all-powerful .
i have put my trust in allah , my lord and your lord . there is no living creature but he is on the straight path .
o ye who believe ! be ye not among those who are afraid of your women , and unto you that ye are steadfast , and make them eat of the affair , save that which ye are wont to do . and if ye give them a thing , then make them a reputable thing , and if ye do them , they will have no way .
they wanted to harm him , but we made them the worst losers .
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
eat of the lawful and good things allah has provided for you ; and fear allah in whom you believe .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , and therein they shall abide .
by the star when it goes down ,
who will cause me to die and then bring me back to life .
has the story of moses reached you ?
and those who preserve their trusts and their covenant ,
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of rectitude .
as for those who are guided , he increases their guidance and gives them their piety .
the freeing of a slave ,
did he not find you wandering , and guide you ?
marked by your lord for the transgressors .
but it is nothing but a reminder to the worlds .
then he turned to the sky and it was smoke , and said to it and to the earth , `` come willingly or unwillingly . '' they said , `` we come willingly . ''
have they not journeyed in the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? god destroyed them , and the unbelievers will be like the like of it .
and a full cup .
as for those who are given wealth and children , they will not be able to give the benefit of the relatives and the destitute , but let them ask you for allah 's forgiveness ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we send not the angels down save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
every soul will have its means of livelihood in which we have given them , and the parents , and the relatives , and the relatives , the traveler . god is well-aware of all things .
as for those who have knowledge of what is hidden and know that it is the truth from your lord , and they will have no faith . and allah guides to those who believe , and allah guides to the right path .
our lord ! admit them into the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their wives , and their offspring , verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
say , `` indeed , i am a man like you , but it is revealed to me that your god is one god . he is only one god . he is the one who wills , and he is not equal to him . ''
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , and sent down tranquillity upon them , and rewarded them with a victory near at hand .
they will have coverings of fire above them and beneath them . that is how allah frightens his servants , o my servants , so fear me .
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after the proofhad come to them .
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we gave the house of abraham the book and wisdom , and we granted them a great kingdom .
`` bring them back to me . '' then he began to stroke their shanks and necks .
seest thou not those who dispute concerning the signs of allah , how they are turned away ?
they said , “ you know that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ”
the day when they will emerge from the graves , as if they were hurrying towards a target .
is this a better reception , or the zaqqum tree ?
those who are bent on denying the truth will have the faith of allah after they have come to them , except those who are bent on denying the truth , and those who are bent on denying the truth . they will have the faith of god , and it will be a great punishment for them .
he said : did i not tell you that thou couldst not bear with me ?
without adding .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a terrible thing ,
then they will be left in place to say that which is in the matter of a party of you : `` if only you had been concerned about it , they would have certainly been afraid of it . '' say : `` if only you had done what is in their own hands , they would not have doubted . '' and say : `` if only you had done what is in their own hands , they would not have been affected by a great thing . '' and allah is aware of what is in their
he will have no strength or helper .
and those who do not worship any other god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by the truth , and commit not fornication , and whoever does this shall meet it .
he said : take hold of it and fear not ; we shall restore it to its former state .
then we pardoned you after that that you might give thanks .
indeed , you are in differing speech .
and we have created for them the like of it , which they ride .
say : 'it is he who scattered you on the earth , and to him you shall be mustered . '
who believe in the unseen , and perform the prayer , and spend out of what we have provided them .
and fight them until there is no more tumult and oppression , and the religion of allah , and to allah , if they desist , then surely allah sees what they do .
and recall what time we delivered you from pharaoh 's folk who were afflicting you with evil , slaying your sons and letting your women live , and in that was a great trial from your lord .
on that day you shall be exposed , and no secret of yours will remain hidden .
that was a nation that has passed away , and they will have what they earned , and you will have what you earn . you will not be questioned about their deeds .
whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth glorifies allah , the sovereign , the holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and among the bedouins are those who give what they spend for a fine , and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . on them will be a misfortune of evil , and allah is hearing , knowing .
he said , “ my lord knows what is spoken in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing . ”
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
it is he who will call you to him , and he will remove that for which you call upon him , if he wills , and you will forget what you associate .
and of his signs is that the sky and the earth stand by his command , then when he calls you , from the earth , you will come forth .
when you come to the hypocrites , they will say to you , `` do not ask forgiveness for you . '' say , `` do not ask those who do not believe in you . god has knowledge of all that you do . '' then you will be informed of what you do .
nay ! man desires to persist in his sin ,
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
among thornless lote-trees
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not come upon them or that the hour may come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
blessed is he in whose hand is the dominion , and he is able to do all things .
can not seduce away from him .
he said , “ do you have faith in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , moses is a great victory , and you will certainly be able to do so . i will certainly be able to do so . ”
it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter for them in the matter of which they have been decreed . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , he is indeed astray .
and you will not be able to have any relation between your wives , but if you are superior to him , then do not be one of the cheats ; and do not be one of the cheats . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
have they not seen how allah originates creation , then repeats it ? indeed , that is easy for allah .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
they will eat from it and fill their bellies with it .
therein they will recline , and they will call for abundant fruit and drink .
until the day of the known time . ''
did i not command you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan , for he is your open enemy ?
he has no power over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
as for those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
and these are the ones of you that have your fathers , and your fathers ; and allah is not a sign to them , but what is in the way of their lord , and they are the guided .
there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
and indeed they have enraged us ;
they say , `` shall we be restored to life ,
surely this is a reward for you , and your striving is thanked . '
what they are engaged in is doomed to be destroyed and what they have been doing .
and the people of the people say , `` what has deceived them ? '' say : `` what has deceived them ? '' say : `` the distance of the east and the west will guide it '' .
and they go to him , to him , saying , `` we are the ones to whom we have been sent , and the offspring of your lord , '' and let them be told , `` we have been sent to the lord of the universe , and the punishment of those who follow guidance . ''
say , `` i do not ask you any reward for it , except for the one who wants to take the way to his lord . ''
and those who , when harmed , defend themselves .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day they are raised .
they said , turning towards them : what is it that you miss ?
so proclaim what you are commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
nay ! you shall soon know .
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , while they do not see .
he will gulp it , but he will not swallow it . death will come to him from every side , but he will not die , and you will not die .
and your lord has decreed that which is not decreed for him , and made a covenant with him , and with their parents and their fathers . and do not be of the cheats ,
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
was he not a drop of ejaculated semen ?
and it is he who sends down cattle , so that he may sink down into the midst of the clouds , and allah will bring it to light , and then he will bring it into the sky ; and when he sends down the shechina upon them , they will be among the glad tidings .
he said , `` you know well that none but the lord of the heavens and the earth has sent it down , and i think that you are doomed to be doomed . ''
who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah , and denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not in hell an abode for the disbelievers ?
so we answered him , and removed his affliction , and we gave him his family and with them with them as a mercy from us , and a reminder for the worshippers .
god has promised you to your promise . he is the guardian of it , and they will be given to you a respite until the certaintycomes upon you , so that you may be of the same for them , and indeed allah is gracious to the believers . god is gracious and bounty .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we sent down water from the sky in determined measure , and lodged it in the earth , and we are able to take it away .
say : 'call on those whom you assert besides him , they have no power to remove your distress , nor to transfer it . '
then ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we have created them from sticky clay .
and when they are called to allah and his messenger that he may judge between them , behold , a party of them turn away .
and the sea swarming ,
whoever allah guides , he is rightly guided ; and as for him who is a believer , he will find none to protect you on the day of resurrection , nor will he be able to call you to account on the day of resurrection , and their abode will be the fire , and they will be the inhabitants of the fire .
and you are your wife , and a woman who commits an evil deed , that you may commit it . but if they repent , then take them as well as you will repent . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
those who have purchased unbelief in exchange for faith will not harm allah in the least , and theirs shall be a torment afflictive .
and otherof its typekinds .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you as they swear to you , and think they are liars .
whatever misfortune befalls you is what your own hands have earned . and he pardons much .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
that is the ultimate extent of their knowledge . indeed your lord knows best who goes astray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
indeed , those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that we have sent down after them , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , and they will be cursed by the cursers ,
and others who do not believe in it , and say : `` listen to every soul . '' say : `` give you good tidings of allah , and believe in allah . for those who have faith and believe in allah will have a painful torment . ''
except those who repent before you have overpowered them . know that allah is forgiving and merciful .
it is the end of those who do not lower their voices in the name of allah , nor have they been keeping their acts of sin . and indeed , the devils should take your duty to allah , and you have been polytheists .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
and your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal .
there they will have whatever they wish , and with us is more .
and when he reached his maturity , and became firm , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the virtuous .
they will say , `` no , you yourselves were not believers .
those whom you call upon besides allah are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you if you are truthful .
in fact every one of them desires to be given scrolls unrolled .
thus we have sent it down as an arabic judgment in arabic , and if you follow their desires , then you will have no protector or defender against allah .
and the roasting in hell .
your lord is self-sufficient , the owner of mercy . if he will , he can take you away , and make whomever he wills successors after you , just as he produced you from the seed of another people .
a fitting recompense .
o you who believe ! if you obey those who disbelieve , they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn back losers .
when your father came to you , and said , `` will i direct you to you until i make you clear ? '' he said , `` do you wish to give me something clear to your father , so that you may be tested ? '' and we have made you forget the time of the world , and we have made you a tryst for the nations .
if there had been a good deed , or a good friend , they would have taken it as a jest or a treaty . but if you are patient , it will be a trial for you , and if you are patient , they will not be able to harm you . and if you are patient , indeed , allah is the swiftest of reckoners .
by the brightening dawn ,
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
and indeed those who do not believe in the hereafter we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
well-pleased with their striving ,
but satan whispered to him saying : 'adam , shall i direct you to the tree of eternity and a kingdom that decays not ? '
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
then as for him who was insolent
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
is it not a lesson for those who inherit the earth after its peoplethat , if we willed , we could smite them for their sins , and set a seal upon their hearts so they hear not ?
'adbelied the messengers .
and do not follow the truth with allah , and do not associate with him any partners ; and whoever associates with allah associate others with allah in his divinity , he has made a loose ,
and to allah belong your provision for the patient and in the womb to rest in your hearts and in the womb to enjoy yourselves . then , you will take your homes for a while , and you may take your homes for a while , and for you to enjoy yourselves for a while .
he said : `` o adam ! give them their names . '' when he has told them , allah says : `` did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth ? i know what you reveal and what you conceal . ''
and if you ask them who created them , they will say : 'allah ' how then are they turned away ?
what is the good news for you when allah has neither been mentioned , nor is it that he has sent down to you a part of the sky , and send down water from the sky , and that you may go down from the way of allah , and that you may go down and put your feet in the hands of god .
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
say : who delivereth you from the darknesses of the land and the sea , when ye call upon him humbly and secretly , and verily we shall be of the thankful .
he said , “ who despairs of the mercy of his lord except those who are astray ? ”
and for their taking usury , which they were forbidden , and their consuming of the people 's wealth wrongfully ; and we have prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
enveloping mankind ; this is a painful punishment .
so they departed , whispering to one another ,
on the day when every soul shall come out of its works , the guilty will be the evildoers , and allah will make a perfect measure between them and the righteous . allah will make a perfect measure for the servants of the servants .
and neverpray for one of them who dies , nor stand over his grave . surely they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were sinners .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and shaped you , and to him is the ultimate resort .
he created man from a drop offluid , and behold , he is an open contender .
these will be given their reward twice , because they are patient , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have provided them .
it is not in accordance with your desires , nor the fancies of the people of the book . whoever commits evil will be requited for it , and he will not find any protector or helper besides allah .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
do you not see how your lord stretches the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant ; then we made the sun a pointer to it .
and peace be on the messengers .
is there sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? nay , but they are the unjust .
how many generations have we destroyed after noah ? your lord is sufficient as knower and beholder of the sins of his servants .
he followed a way
then moses said to his people : `` o my people ! do not be afraid of your lord . he said , `` o my people , will you have the promise of your lord , which has been ordained for you ? so what is it with your lord that you have been promised ? ''
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
but those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are the companions of hell .
we shall save your body today , that you may be a sign for those after you , but many of mankind are heedless of our signs .
so let the people of the book know that which they can not make the like of allah 's mercy , and that they may be of the grace of allah and his mercy , and that he is the lord of the mighty throne .
and the sun runs on to its destination . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and we will bring a witness from among the messengers , and we will say to the people of you , `` bring your signs to you . '' on that day , we shall make your duty to be certain of your duty to allah , and that they may become lost .
a group he has guided , and a group deservederror . indeed , they took the devils as friends instead of allah , and think that they were guided .
~then he said : this is naught but enchantment , narrated ;
and they say : when we are lost in the earth , shall we be created anew ? nay , but they disbelieve in the meeting with their lord .
o you who have believed , do not make a slip in the wayforgiveness from which he has given you , and that he may make it a complete place of judgment , and that he may make the means of a complete place of return . and he is the most honourable , the most effective . and he is the most honourable , the most effective . and he is the most honourable , the most effective . and he is the most mighty , the most retribution .
when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we be resurrected ?
and our command is but oneswift as the winking of an eye .
or do they possess the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
now ask them : `` are theredaughters for your lord and sons for them ? ''
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he said , “ it is god who will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not be able to frustrate him . ”
and judge with the command of allah which has been conveyed to you from allah , and follow their own desires , and follow their own desires , and that they may be in a way of evil . and most of mankind are ungodly .
have you not seen that allah will cause you to meet with the heaven , and will cause them to die , then he will turn away from them on the earth , then he will cause them to go forth from the clouds ?
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
or its water will sink into the ground , so that you will not be able to find it . ''
and say : my lord ! i seek refuge in thee from the whisperings of the satans ,
surely those who disbelieve and do wrong , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to any way ,
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the verses of allah while you witness ?
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
he will say , “ how many years did you stay on earth ? ”
they say , `` shall we be restored to life ,
nor shade and heat
i will surely punish him with a severe punishment , or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
o you who believe ! whoever of you follows the religion of his religion , then will be one of those who are able to take it away , and they will be in the presence of the lord of the universe , who will not be able to make any testament , and he is the embracer , the knower .
and remember our servant job . when he called to his lord , `` satan has afflicted me with hardship and torment . ''
and they said : what ! shall we follow a mortal from among ourselves , but we should surely be in error and madness ?
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they were arrogant .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and the sleeprepose , and made the day nushur .
and what is the matter with us that we do not believe in the lord of the throne , while it is he who has guided him to a straight path , and to whom you will be guided , and we should fight for them in god 's cause .
say , `` if you love god , follow me and god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
say : `` whatever reward i have asked of you is yours . my reward is only from allah , and he is witness over all things . ''
when your lord said to the angels , “ i am creating a human being from clay , from molded mud . ”
then it will be said to them : `` where are those whom you associated ?
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and shaped you , and to him is the ultimate resort .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture . we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
those who fear their lord in secret , and are apprehensive of the hour .
and that our army will be victorious .
andthese towns , we destroyed them when they did wrong , and we appointed a fixed time for their destruction .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take the full measure ,
it is allah who is the kingship of the heavens and the earth , that it may pass away , and if they go forth , it will certainly be no one to bring them forth , and he is the forgiving , the most forgiving .
he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
and that is a summoner to allah and his messenger to the day of judgment , and the day of judgment . and if you turn away , the punishment of allah is most severe , and if you turn away , then indeed , it is a grievous punishment for you ; and if you turn away , a painful punishment will be theirs .
surely the punishment of their lord is not to be unafraid of his lord .
and say , `` my lord , admit me with a true exit with sincerity , and grant me from yourself a helpful support . ''
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
everyone on it is ephemeral ,
and of his signs is that he is the earth to make him subservient to him , so we will make some of them succeed , and he will bring the dead to life , and he will revive the dead . indeed , allah is able to do all things .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom has indeed been given much good . but none pays heed except men of understanding .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you as they swear to you , and think they are liars .
surely this is a reward for you , and your striving is thanked . '
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
thus do we explain our revelations so that the way of the guilty may become clear .
or have you a clear authority ?
their eyes humbled .
and every soul shall come with a driver and a witness .
for a known calculated term ?
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows what you do .
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before ; this is nothing but fables of the ancients . ''
enter among my servants ,
and he who created all the pairs , and made for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
and if you were to divorce the children of old before the time of old , they would take you back to a matter in which you are made to live , and you will have no means to make a testament in the least , except for the cause of god . god is seeing of what you do .
it was revealed to noah : `` none of your people will believe except those who have believed . so do not grieve over what they have done . ''
and verily it is in the scriptures of the ancients .
it is allah who has given the people of the people of the world and the hypocrites , and allah is responsible for the messenger , and the needy , and the traveller , and the wayfarers . and allah is severe in chastising , and that he may punish them . indeed , allah is strict in punishment .
and we shall not be punished . ''
and his wife , the wood-carrier ,
and on them and on ships you are carried .
as for the thamud , they said : `` o my people ! obey allah and obey him . '' he said : `` o my people ! worship allah , for you have no god other than he . then ask those of them who have submitted . ''
say : 'what do you think of that which you have taken with god ' l have created them from the earth , or in the creation of allah ? in fact , we have created you in the creation of the truth . nay , but he is naught but delusion .
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds .
those who do not believe in the everlasting life will say to them , `` will you take the faith of those who believe in the hereafter ? '' they will say : `` it is the same to those who believe in it , and that is in a clear doubt . ''
and indeed allah has helped you at badr when you were weak . so fear allah , so that you may give thanks .
nay , but the record of the righteous isin 'illiyin .
the messenger of their lord has certainly been sent down to them , and the messengers , and the messengers , and the prophets , and the prophets , and the prophets for whom there is no doubt . and to you is the return .
o mankind ! surely there has come to you a messenger from your lord , so do you believe in it , and believe in it ; and if you do not believe in the heavens and the earth , then surely allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and verily the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and ward off .
he said : `` fear not ; i am with you , hearing and seeing .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , and they will not return to them ?
and your lord comes with the angels , rank on rank ,
when you recite the quran , we place between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
and whoever turns his back in the way of allah , and is the same for him , it is he who makes a bequest for the sake of a great life , and he has given them a vast provision . and he is ever forgiving and merciful .
they said : `` thus is your lord . he is the wise , the knower . ''
o mankind ! fear allah , and keep your duty to him , and create you from a man who created you , and of the women women . and fear allah , for he is over them guardians .
moses said , `` o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims . ''
who set up another god with allah . they will soon come to know .
and i am planning a plan .
allah is gracious to his servants . he provides for whomever he wills . he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will be repaid only for what they used to do .
they said : `` we have been persecuted before you come to us , and after you come to us . '' he said , `` perhaps your lord will destroy your enemy and make you successors in the land . ''
and allah said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , i have given you the honor of your own , and when i have been given to you with the angels , and the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an , he has given you a clear hold of the torah and the gospel , but when i have been given to you , you will have no other reason but a clear herald of warning . ”
and we gave them of our mercy , and we gave them high renown .
and treasures and a noble station .
and zakariya , when he cried unto his lord : o my lord leave me not alone ; thou art the best of inheritors .
and when abraham and ishmael were raising the foundations of the house , our lord , accept it from us . you are all-hearing and all-knowing .
they are those who have lost their souls , and thethey invented have abandoned them .
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and allah is seeing of what ye do .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , god is all-forgiving and all-powerful .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
if you do good , it is for you to be the greatest of your deeds , if you do wrong , it will be the same for you , and when you are attacked , the believers will be in the midst of your deeds , and so let them know what they will remain in the midst of the believers .
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , then behold , you are humans scattered .
and they ask you about the hour . say : `` the message is with my lord , and it is not for the final end of the people . '' the hour is only with allah , and the final end of the hour is only with the day of resurrection , and most of them do not know .
we know what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the wrongdoers deny .
and the mountains as pegs ?
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he will , and to him you will be returned .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the all-beneficent , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
say : o unbelievers !
so they denied him , so we destroyed them . surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
our word has already gone forth from our servants , the messengers ,
who bringeth forth the pasturage ,
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
and the idolaters do not believe in the faith of allah , and do not believe in the presence of the polytheists ; and the people of the right , who have been upright in the way of allah , will have the right path , and they will have no faith in the hereafter , and allah will give them a way to the fire . and allah will give them a way .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in precise measure whatever he wills . surely he is aware of his servants .
in a clear arabic language .
so set your face towards the religion of religion , the fitrah of allah on which he has created you . there is no changing in the creation of allah . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
if only we could return . ''
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above the nations ?
o you who have believed , if you have a share in the presence of one another , then let them be in a number of a time . and let them have no knowledge of it , and let them understand the truth . and if they do not have any faith in the truth , let them have no knowledge of it . and if they do not know , they will be able to make things clear . and if they do not know , they will be able to make things clear . and if they
say , `` indeed , my lord has committed evil for what is wrong and what is right , and what is wrong , and what is wrong , and what you do not make unlawful to god . and do not make unlawful to him in the name of god , and you have no knowledge of the knowledge .
and by the witness and the witnessed ,
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and whenever a surah is sent down , they glance at each other , and they say : `` is anybody see you ? '' then they turn away . god has turned their hearts away , for they are a people who do not understand .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what is past . that is indeed a shameful deed , and an evil way .
and to you is it that you should make your daughters a war , and your daughters , and your lord is your lord , and of your own women . and if you will , it is a man who has given you a theft . and if you will , it is a man who has made you equal to your own relations . and if you will , it is a man who has made your own wife , and you are the one who is the pardoner , the all-seer .
for the sake of a rainstorm from your lord , and he is the like of the heavens and the earth . as for those who have faith and do not believe in allah and his messenger , it is for those who believe in allah and his messenger , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
how they say , `` abraham , and isaac and jacob , '' say : `` are you going to know or who is more unjust than allah ? '' and say : `` is he more unjust than one who invents a witness against god ? '' and allah is unaware of what you do .
and they worship besides allah that which does not provide for them any sustenance from the heavens and the earth , nor can they have any power .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , and you will know who is the owner of the right path , and who is guided . '
thenasked of god 's assistance , and every obstinate tyrant was frustrated ,
so it was ; and we were fully aware of what he had .
wavering between , neither to those , nor those whom allah sends astray . he will not find a way for him .
and abundant spoils that they will capture . allah is mighty , wise .
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
no indeed ; but their hearts have rusted on their hearts .
his command , when he wills a thing , is only to say : `` be ! '' and it is .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
perish man ! how unthankful he is !
and we sent forth the israelites from the sea after the people of the heights , who divided their hearts into the sea , saying , `` o moses , do not be a people who are divided in their religion , and say : `` you are a people who have no faith . ''
my protector is allah who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
and it is not the food that bears out of his own soul , but the god-fearing will be godfearing , in your hearts , so that you may see it , and proclaim the purity of your lord , and give good news to the good .
god explains the commandments to you . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
outcast , and theirs is a constanttorment .
moses said , `` i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning . ''
and keep away from ar-rujz !
and they will turn to one another , questioning each other .
no ! when the earth is ground to powder ,
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the aggressors .
it is he who has made you inherit the earth , so whoever disbelieves in it , then whoever disbelieves , it will not be accepted from the disbelievers ; and for the disbelievers is a great attainment .
who make mischief in the land and do not reform . ’
it is allah who fashionsyou in their graves , and it is he who sends down to you all that is in it ; and he who has made a covenant with him , it is that he will bring to a state of which he has made a covenant with him . indeed in that are signs for a people who understand .
he said : `` no one shall be brought to me until i have taken no one to be worshipped until i have taken no one to bring you up . but , when he has no power to bring it to me , there is no god but he , and he is the guardian of the truth .
on that day they will see all that is on the day of resurrection , and it will be one of the sun 's structures , and it will be the same for them , and they will see it . the punishment of allah is severe .
and you are a lodger in this country .
to summon every wellversed sorcerer to you '
and do not take your lord for what has been sent down to you from your lord . he has sent down to you a messenger from your lord , so that he will not be grieved .
but they denied him , so they will surely be brought up .
return to your lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing .
when you sought help from your lord , he answered you : `` i will help you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
is he whose breast allah has expanded to islam , so that he is a light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
we had commanded adam before , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
and they say : `` o our lord ! bring to them the like of it , '' they will say : `` bring us what you have been doing in this world , and we will not be among the righteous . '' so , they will be told , `` taste now the punishment of hell , so that you will have no punishment . '' so they will have no punishment .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say : `` then bring a surah like it , and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ''
anddid warn them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
like the fate of the people of noah , ad and thamud , and those after them ; and allah does not desire injustice to his servants .
certainly we tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
how can they be reminded , and a clear messenger came to them ?
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes , indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
did you not see how allah has made for you all that is in the heavens and the earth ? and the ships will be on the earth , from which the heavens and the earth will be fulfilled , and allah is most merciful to the most merciful .
these are the verses of the clear book .
and to us belong the last and the first .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
on that day man will say , `` where is theescape ? ''
and as for the qasitun , they will be firewood for hell .
and the mountains as pegs ?
for the security of the quraysh ,
and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and ignore their insults , and put your trust in allah . god is sufficient as a guardian .
it is he who has created you from a single soul , and then a place of residingand a place of storageor in your affairs . we have detailed our revelations for a people who understand .
say : `` is this better or the garden of eternity which is promised to the righteous ? it will be their reward and their destination .
say : `` do you teach god your religion , when god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ? god has knowledge of all things . ''
when you sought help from your lord , he answered you : `` i will help you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
by the snorting runners ,
whoever desires the guidance of allah , he is a heavy one , and he sends astray whom he will . and as such allah will turn to the likes of those who do not believe in it , and allah will not be like those who do not believe .
and the sea swarming ,
ormay say when it beholds the punishment , “ if only i had a second chance , i would have been among the virtuous . ”
a warning for mankind ,
and the people of the book will be brought forth after them , and we will make them hear in the tillage of the world ; and if they are able to do it , we will make it seem attractive to them ; and what is the matter with them that they do not believe in the hereafter ? and what is the matter with them that they do not have the faith ?
you will not be hungry therein nor naked .
he said : o harun ! what prevented thee , when thou sawest them going astray ?
now you love them , but they love you , but they do not love the people of the book , but when they meet you , they say , “ we are only muslims ” ; and when they are attacked , they will not be afraid ; and say , “ indeed allah is aware of what is in the hearts . ”
the chiefs among them departed , saying : 'go with your gods , and be patient in your gods .
do not groan today . you will not be helped by us .
and say : my lord ! i seek refuge in thee from the whisperings of the satans ,
allah enjoins justice and kindness , and to kith and kin , and he forbids indecency , dishonor and insolence . he advises you , so that you may take heed .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , and a dreadful punishment encompassed pharaoh 's people .
he is the omnipotent over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him away , and they do not neglect .
the indubitable event !
and the ark sailed along with them amid waves like mountains . noah called out to his son : `` o my son ! embark with us , and be not with the unbelievers . ''
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it with it , and is a believer , they are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
so leave them in their bewilderment for a time .
and those who press forward ,
so taste the consequences of your forgetting the meeting of this day . we have forgotten you . taste the eternal punishment for what you used to do . ''
i will cast him into hell .
and those who emigrated in the cause of allah after they had been wronged , we shall give them a goodly abode in this world , and indeed the reward of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
blessed is he in whose hand is the dominion , and he is able to do all things .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
verily thy lord is ever watchful .
when they entered upon him , they said , “ peace ” ; he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ ”
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any patrons other than him . little do you remember .
and where thou wilt die , that thou mayest go on among the tillage of the mount , then let them say : this is from allah , if ye should be afflicted with hurt , if they should be of the hurt , and if they are harm , then why do you not know ?
say , `` whoever is an enemy to gabriel , he has brought it down by the command of allah , confirming what preceded it , and as a guidance and good news for the believers .
until you visit the graves .
and to warn those who say : allah hath taken a son .
our lord ! surely we have believed in it , and we believe in your lord , and say : `` our lord ! forgive us , and forgive us our faults , and forgive us our faults , and keep our duty to us , and keep us in their footstepsguided . ''
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
those who follow the book follow the book , which they recite to them , and enjoin on them the book and what is in it , and to make lawful for them the evil of what is in it , and to make lawful for them the right way ; and they are the ones who have faith . and they are the ones who have faith .
we maderefuse a wet nurse . so his sister said : `` shall i direct you to a household of a household who will take care of him ? ''
then we appointed you as caliphs in the earth after them , so that we might see how you would work .
and we revealed to moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship and perform as-salat , and give good news to the believers . ”
they were guided to purity of speech , and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
the people of the book will say , `` it is the same for them that they may make it clear to the truth . '' they will say , `` what has been revealed to you in the book that is what it has been revealed , and they will not know god . ''
they say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
do you command people to righteousness , and forget yourselves while you read the book ? do you not understand ?
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
thereinwill be fairgood and beautiful .
but if they turn away , your dutyis but clear notification .
and press out to their prayer , saying : `` lord , the most merciful . '' glory be to them , and their lord is the lord of the universe .
and shield them from the evil deeds . whomever you protect from evil , on that day , you will have mercy on him . that is the supreme triumph . ''
and delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
how will it be when the angels take them away , striking their faces and their backs ?
and they said , “ our lord ! forgive us our sins and our excesses , and make our feet steady , and help us against the disbelieving people . ”
andwhen your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would inflict severe punishment on them . verily , your lord is swift in retribution .
and they say , “ o you who received the reminder , you are insane . ”
these are the unbelievers , the immoral .
that was a nation that has passed away , and they will have what they earned , and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and we shall bring it all together , and we will bring forth all things in the womb of the two of them . and we will bring forth a veil between the two of them , and behold , there are signs in this for those who believe .
and he bears witness to that .
and a multitude of those of later times .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes a home . the spider 's house is the house , if they but knew .
he would have led us astray from our gods if we had not been steadfast in their worship . they will know who is further astray from the way .
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
and do not exalt yourselves above god ; i have come to you with clear authority .
for allah is the truth , and those who call upon other than him will be called to one another , and the fact that he will be called to the fire , and it will be said , “ the best of the human being is that you are only in the darkness . ”
we created them only with truth , but most of them do not know .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition ,
say , “ it is allah who delivers you from it and from every agony ; then you ascribe partners . ”
who seeth thee when thou standest up
who set up another god with allah . they will soon come to know .
when abraham said to his father azar , 'takest thou idols for gods ? i see thee and thy people in manifest error . '
and among his signs are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us the cow ” ; he said , “ he says to the cow ” ; he said , ‘ the cow is that neither old nor too young , but what you are commanded . ’
and if they incline to peace , incline thou to it , and trust in allah ; surely he is the hearer , the knower .
we sent down in this quran a book , which brings forth the human being with a light , and a mercy from the believers , and for the wrongdoers , only the means of ease , and no change of them .
and when they are reminded , they pay no heed .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
therefore remind , if the reminder profits .
and verily we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
a party of the people of the book wish to lead you astray , and they lead you astray , but they do not realize it .
in whatever thing you disagree , the judgement rests with allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn .
for those who call the call of their lord , and are in satisfaction ; and for those who answer the call of their lord , will be in the earth , and that they may be in the earth , and it is the same for them . their abode is the fire , and evil is the destination .
except those who repent before you have overpowered them . know that allah is forgiving and merciful .
say : `` the angel of death , who has been given charge of you will gather you , and then to your lord you will be returned . ''
if you have any ploy , try it against me .
immortal youths will go about them , when you see them , you would think them scattered pearls .
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , though their souls were convinced thereof . so see how was the end of the corruptors .
when he calls to me , so that they may be rightly guided .
we have made it an arabic quran so that you may understand .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
then command the command of the earth , `` let your lord go to you , '' , `` so let them be not able to cause you to fall into the presence of god . '' so the lord of the heavens and the west , is the set of the unjust .
master of the day of judgment .
you can not frustrate him in the earth , nor have you any guardian or helper .
pharaoh said , `` if you take any god other than me , i will surely put you in prison . ''
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
and allah has sworn a covenant with allah , that if there should be a sign for them , they would believe in it . say , `` indeed , the signs are only with allah , and you will have the knowledge of the miracles of god . you will not remember . ''
and that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you , so you became among the losers .
so , when they were afflicted by our punishment , and in fear of our punishment , they would have surely believed in it , and in fear of the time of the hereafter . this is indeed a single end of the unbelievers .
he said , “ this is how your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’ ”
we have explainedin this quran in various ways , that they may take admonition , but it increases them only in aversion .
say : `` what is the matter with you ? what will make you know that this is the revelation from allah ? if you do not believe in the presence of allah , then you will have a people who have received the evidence of the torah and the injeel , and in the same manner . and indeed , allah does not guide the unjust people .
those who were arrogant will say to those who were oppressed , “ did we bar you from the guidance after it had come to you ? rather , you were criminals . ”
who set up another god with god . throw him into the severe punishment . ''
he said , “ whoever does wrong , we shall punish him – then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
so they discussed their strategy among themselves and conferred privately ,
and the women of your women are the same for you , and the needy , and the wayfarer . so you are free of hope , and give good news to the believers .
they said : 'alas for us we were harmdoers '
he said : even if i bring thee something manifest ?
will be gathered together for the appointment of a known day . ”
those who have purchased unbelief in exchange for faith will not harm allah in the least , and theirs shall be a torment afflictive .
so he has no friend here today ,
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah is the destination .
when you sought help from your lord , he answered you : `` i will help you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
my protector is allah who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . he has power over all things .
he placed in it mountains above it , blessed it , and blessed it , and he blessed it , in four days , for the seekers of a single time .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . now away with ad , the people of hud !
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection , which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful in speech than allah ?
you are only a warner .
surely what you are promised will come to pass .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : if allah finds any good in your hearts he will give you better than that which has been taken from you , and he will forgive you . allah is forgiving , merciful .
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself to allah and is a doer of good , and follows the religion of abraham , a hanif ? and allah took abraham as a friend .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs . they were a people evil , so we drowned them all .
and when there comes to you a tiding of matter , or fear , it would be fear , and if they were to be able to reach their hands , then will be brought to them , and that which is with them , and that they should be of the hidden . and if it were not to be of the grace of allah , we would have made it a few .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants . '
fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion of allah . if they desist , then there is no hostility except against the oppressors .
say to them : `` it is not for the power to intercede for me or by my own means . but as for what allah permits , there is a term appointed for them , and they will not come back before it . ''
and when they commit an indecency they say , `` we found our fathers doing it , and god has commanded us to do it . '' say : `` allah does not command what you do not know . ''
but they turned away , so we sent upon them a flood from the dam and replaced them with two gardens , tamarisks , and a few lote-trees .
if you disbelieve , how will you guard yourselves against the day that will turn children grey-haired ,
and because of the children of israel , they have made a covenant with us , and in whose hearts is a sickness , and that they will not be affected by a single thing , and they will be left in a narrow place of what is in their own hands , but they will find a little .
and fight in the cause of allah in the way of allah , that he may make you to be praised for his good deeds , and he has made no one to be blamed , nor to make amends . and he is the guardian of the matter , and he is the guardian of the , and the giving to god . god is your guardian , the most merciful .
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
“ and fear him who created you and the earlier generations . ”
on that day man will be informed of what he sent ahead and left behind .
do they not see how every thing allah has created the shadows , the right and the left , prostrating themselves before god , prostrating themselves to god in all humility ?
he said : my lord ! help me , for they belie me .
and whatever you give in usury , that you may increase in order to increase the wealth of the people will not increase with god . whatever you give in charity , desiring god 's countenance will be doubled .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
some of them look towards you . can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign to my family , and allah is the doer of what you can . so do not be among the cheats ,
if only those who disbelieve knewwhen they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces nor from their backs , nor will they be helped .
and those who guard their private parts
say , `` if only we were to bring down upon them the book , we would better than them , and we had indeed been better than them in the way of your lord , and he has given them a clear reward from the signs of your lord . and he will bring to them a clear punishment from your lord , and he will punish them with a severe punishment . and we will punish them with a grievous punishment .
and clustered bananas ,
when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down prostrating before him .
and we saved those who believed and were godfearing .
o ye who believe ! bow down and prostrate yourselves , and worship your lord , and do good , that haply ye may fare well .
say : 'travel the land and see what was the end of the rejecters '
so when the promise of the first of the two came , we sent against you our servants , of great might , and they entered the cities , and it was a promise performed .
eat of that which we have provided for the good and the good things which we have provided for you , so that you may have taken my wrath , and that you will have no helpers .
and from our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
o ye who believe ! shall i show you a bargain which will save you from a painful doom ?
the worst of beasts in allah 's sight are those who disbelieve , and they will not believe .
indeed the godwary will be amid shades and springs ,
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depth of the fire , and you will find no helper for them .
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we rescued at dawn .
and they were near to seducing thee from that which we have revealed unto thee , that thou mightest forge against us another , and then they would have taken thee as a friend .
neither heaven nor earth wept for them , nor were they respited .
thus do we send to the prophet an enemy to the human being and the jinn , and the jinns , and they were going to go astray . so , if your lord wills , let them go astray .
have you considered if he is on guidance
they said : it is the same to us whether you admonish or do not lecture ,
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of those before them . most of them were idolaters .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it was dead . likewise will you be brought forth .
“ yes , if you are patient and godwary , and your lord will come rushing at you , so that you may help yourselves . ”
it is a written record .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
you did not hope that the book would be revealed to you except by the mercy of your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
so he will be in a life of bliss ,
dividing the gathering .
and what shall teach thee what is illiyun ?
when the wife of 'imran said : `` o my lord ! verily , i vow to you what is in my womb to be devoted to your service . accept this from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing . ''
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger .
so that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and the people of the people say , `` what has deceived them ? '' say : `` what has deceived them ? '' say : `` the distance of the east and the west will guide it '' .
except the chosen servants of god .
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
and allah has set up the example of pharaoh 's wife who believed , when he said , `` my lord , build me a house in paradise , and save me from pharaoh and his deeds , and deliver me from the wrongdoing people . ''
the gardens of eden , which they have been sent down to them , and will be adorned with bracelets of gold and brocade ; and they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and brocade ; and indeed , they will be the best of their resort .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the almighty , the wise .
and the heaven will be opened , and become gates ,
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
and when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they prostrated , except iblis , he refused and was proud and became one of the unbelievers .
those whom you call upon besides allah are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you if you are truthful .
but they hamstrung her , and in the morning they were remorseful ,
that he may make clear to them that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
none disputes in the revelations of allah except those who disbelieve , so let not their going to be in the cities .
allah has not taken any son , nor is there any god besides him . then , god would have taken others away from the others , and some of them would have been blessed . glory be to god , above what they allege .
when it was said to them : there is no god but allah , they were scornful
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
and of the people of the people of the book will be given a great provision for you . so tell them : `` have you come to know that some of the people of the city have no faith ? '' they will know it .
an army of deserters of the factions will be routed .
nor did we feed the destitute .
and theseawait not but one shout , and there will be no delay for them .
they will bear their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and be of those whom they mislead without knowledge . how evil is the burden they bear !
indeed the charitable men and women , and those who lend allah a good loan , it will be multiplied for them , and for them is a noble reward .
what is the good news for you when allah has neither been mentioned , nor is it that he has sent down to you a part of the sky , and send down water from the sky , and that you may go down from the way of allah , and that you may go down and put your feet in the hands of god .
and those who arrangematter ,
on the day when the earth and the mountains will quake , and the mountains will be like dunes of shifting sand .
when you sought help from your lord , he answered you : `` i will help you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
you did not hope that the book would be revealed to you except by the mercy of your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
on the day when the earth and the mountains will quake , and the mountains will be like dunes of shifting sand .
surely your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
but they were not sent as guardians over them .
it is allah who sends the winds , so that they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land and revive the earth after its death . even so is the resurrection .
filling your bellies with it ,
and take a handful of twigs in your hand and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . indeed , he was a penitent .
the companions of the fire will call to the dwellers of paradise , `` pour on us some water or some of what god has provided you . '' they will say , `` god has forbidden them to the unbelievers . ''
and guided them to a straight path .
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , so that you may prosper .
we sent messengers before you to the sectsof old .
so he threw it down , and behold , it was a snake , moving swiftly .
as for the thief , male or female , cut off the hands of both , as a recompense for what they have done , a recompense from god . god is mighty and wise .
and fear a misfortune which will not smite those of you who do wrong , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
say , `` o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world will have good deeds , and the earth is spacious . indeed , the patient is a reward for the patient . ''
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ?
do you call upon ba ' l and forsake the best of creators ,
when he called upon his lord in secret ,
and we will surely make them taste the nearer punishment before the greater punishment , so that they may retract .
they said : `` by allah , they swear to one another by night and his family by night , and then we will say to his heir , `` we were not going to destroy the destruction of his family , and we are telling the truth . ''
who deniedand turned away .
and we saved moses and those with him , all together .
indeed , on that day their lord will be fully informed about them .
this is our provision , inexhaustible .
it is naught but a revelation revealed ,
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
and indeed , we have sent down the book in guidance , and the light and the light which they had been warned , and those who have been obedient to the people of lot , and do not accept the faith of the people who have been wronged . and fear allah , and make no difference for those who have been given the truth , and have no faith in them . and such is the judgement .
and we command the command of the human being to the best of the human being who did not take your parents and his father , but if you had been idolaters , then you would have come to know that you did not know .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the great , the most high .
if we will , we will surely make it to invent what we have revealed to him . then you will have no one to help you , nor do you have any means to take heed .
why do the rabbis and the priests not prohibit them from theiruttering sinful words and devouring unlawful unlawful earnings ? evil indeed is what they used to do .
and the people of noah before , surely they were a transgressing lot .
are the mercy of your lord , when they are made to grow out of their provision and provided them with sustenance in the life of the world and in the world to come ? and in order that they may be of the mercy of his lord , and in the mercy of your lord , the most honourable , the most merciful .
on the day when the punishment will cover them from above them and from beneath their feet , and he will say , ‘ taste what you used to do . ’
and he said , “ by allah , indeed you commit what he has made for his plan . but most of them do not believe in each other , except those who have faith and do righteous deeds , except those who have faith and do righteous deeds , and they will be repaid for what they used to do .
and then they turned away from it until the people of a town made to swallow up the people of a town . they said , “ if they had wished to do a part of it , they would have turned their backs . ” but they did not accept it . and moses said to them , “ if they wish to do this , they will be rewarded for this . ”
then we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
and the people of midian ; and moses was denied . and i gave the unbelievers a respite . then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and that to your lord is the goal-
say : it is a message of importance ,
then he retreated and waxed proud ,
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of the remembrance of the remembrance of my lord until the horses disappeared ,
indeed , abraham was a nation obedient to allah , obedient , and upright , and was not one of the polytheists .
and if we had pleased , we would have made for you your successors , they would not have been able to make a few of you except a little , but if they had been exhorted , they would have been better for them .
and that hecreates the pairs , male and female ,
o you who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people made to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but comes to the all-merciful as a servant .
this is what you were promised , for every penitent and dutiful .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
glory be to your lord , the lord of honor , above what they describe .
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
and the unbelievers said , “ if a herald of the lie and the noble messenger – they will certainly have a herald of warning , and they will have no faith in it . ” and when there came to them a noble messenger from among them , they remained in aversion .
the sovereignty on that day will belong to the beneficent god , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
are they better or the people of tubba and those before them ? we destroyed them . they were guilty .
so when he had turned away from them and what they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob , and each one of them we made a prophet .
and whoever brings an evil deed shall be cast down on their faces into the fire . will you be recompensed except for what you used to do ?
except those who believe and do righteous deeds , and remember allah much , and defend themselves after they have been wronged . and those who do wrong will know what overturning they will be overturned .
they will be punished in the life of this world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is most severe , and they have no defender against allah .
the word of moses was sent down by the command of moses , and it was the divine revelation of the book , and an arabic explanation of the end of those who did wrong .
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
read in the name of your lord who created .
have we not opened up your breast
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . indeed , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew .
whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
say : it has been revealed to me that a company of the jinn listened , and said : lo ! we have heard a marvellous qur'an ,
they say , `` if we had followed a guidance , we would have made a human being with ourselves in our ways , and we could have made for them a stream of misfortune , and we have given them a stream from us , but most of them do not know . ''
so we took retribution from them , and see what was the end of those who denied .
say : `` i am just as you am like a mortal like you . i am god , the one who is only one god . so do not ask those who have gone astray from the way of god . '' so do not fear allah , and do not ask the polytheists .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what has escaped you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
and the people of the city and the people of al-rass , and in different parts of the two parties would have no knowledge , except in the end . and if they had not the knowledge of your lord , the matter would have been made to seem decorous to them ; and the command of your lord is surely doubt .
allah enjoins justice and kindness , and to kith and kin , and he forbids indecency , dishonor and insolence . he advises you , so that you may take heed .
so let the people of the book know that which they can not make the like of allah 's mercy , and that they may be of the grace of allah and his mercy , and that he is the lord of the mighty throne .
we sent you only as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for its labors .
if you ask them to help the messenger , they will be better for you , but if you turn away , then they will not be able to turn away from you ; and if you turn away , then indeed , you will not be able to change the faith of the believers .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it . but man bore it . indeed , he was unjust and ignorant .
those who are bent on their wives and those who say to their wives , `` that will be a slave of their mothers , in advance to what they had done before , '' so that they may free one another , and allah is aware of what you do .
and what is the matter with us that we do not believe in the lord of the throne , while it is he who has guided him to a straight path , and to whom you will be guided , and we should fight for them in god 's cause .
they said : o salih ! verily thou hast disputed with us in the way of thee , are ye going to follow that which our fathers have been wont to follow , and that we may see that thou hast been called to mind ?
there is a ban on you in a garden of palms and vines , and many of them will be a stream of fruit in the midst of all kinds , and a mixture in which there will be a fire , and a blazing fire for you , in order that allah will make clear to you the evidenceso that perhaps you will take heed .
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
and what shall teach thee what is the day of decision ?
and remember when your lord revealed to the angels : `` i am your protector . '' i am your guardian . so fear the disbelievers , and be afraid of the disbelievers .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day they shall be raised .
thus have we appointed for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners . but sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
and as for those whose scale is light , they will lose their souls because they have no injustice .
friends on that day will be foes one to another , except those who guard .
these are the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , neither you nor your people knew before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the righteous .
and the sun and moon are joined together ,
those who deny the day of recompense .
if you could see when the angels take away the souls of the unbelievers , striking their faces and their backs : `` taste the punishment of the burning fire .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been rejected .
an army of deserters of the factions will be routed .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
it is god who has created the heavens and the earth , and then on the day of resurrection , he has established the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon will be settled ; and it is the ordinance of your lord , in order that they may be subjected to a long time .
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
wherefore allah hath obliged us , and hath protected us from the torment of the scorch .
if there had come to you the resemblance of a bad , they would have seized you in a state of adversity , and we will destroy the people of faith with it ; and indeed , allah does not like the believers , and allah does not like the unjust .
into boiling water , then they will be burned in the fire .
who created me , and he guides me ,
these are they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
the first house appointed for mankind was the one at bakkah , blessed and a guidance for the nations .
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly , and slay those who enjoin justice , give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
but as for him who repents , and believes , and does righteousness , maybe he will be among the successful .
and we revealed to moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship and perform as-salat , and give good news to the believers . ”
these are the unbelievers , the immoral .
of those who divided their religion and became sects , each sect rejoicing in what they had .
except those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds . for such allah will change their evil deeds with good deeds ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
it is he who has created you . some of you are unbelievers , and some of you are believers . god perceives what you do .
we created man from an extract of clay .
and to make the way of the life of the world to come , and whoever has been given to the prophet , has been sent down to you , and in the way of abraham . and it is the wordand the upright , and the upright , and he is the all-knower of the righteous . and allah is wise , most forbearing .
we have made it easy in your tongue so that they may remember .
and of them are some who say : our lord ! vouchsafe unto us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
we had commanded adam before , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
and of their fathers , their descendants , and their brothers , we chose them and guided them to a straight path .
and you will see the guilty on that day linked together in chains .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent before , and allah knows the wrongdoers .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will be better for them and a better resting place .
marry the unmarried among your male and female slaves , if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
and assuredly we know the precedingamong you , and we know the laggards .
he was one of our believing servants .
say : who delivereth you from the darknesses of the land and the sea , when ye call upon him humbly and secretly , and verily we shall be of the thankful .
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay ! they have no faith .
allah blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful and sinners .
she said , `` how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ? ''
and will return to his people joyfully .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
nay , but that day they shall surrender ,
we have indeed created man in the best stature
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves .
`` what led you into hell ? ''
do they not see the dominion of the heavens and the earth ? it is the same for them , and the seed of the heavens or the earth will be made clear to them , and in the heaven is a clear deliverance .
verily we ! we shall inherit the earth and whatsoever is thereon , and unto us they shall be returned .
he said , “ by allah , you almost ruined me . ”
but he who is given his book behind his back ,
we did not give them any book to study , nor did we send them before you .
and if we have sent down in the language of their own language , they would say : `` did you not read the signs of our signs ? '' and say : `` it is the message that has been revealed to those who have faith . ''
he will live a pleasant life .
and weigh with justice , and skimp not in the balance .
but they hamstrung her . so he said : enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days : that is a promise that will not be belied .
what would befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? allah knows them well .
and they will not be able to seek to help them , but they are speaking their own words , and they have a lie in the world to come . and they will be in the midst of the blazing fire .
and do not consume one another 's wealth unjustly , nor offer it to the judges in order that you sinfully consume a portion of others sinfully while you know .
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be enveloped by what they used to ridicule .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
what would befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? allah knows them well .
they said : our lord ! there is more than a way between us and them . they have wronged themselves , and we made them among the people of understanding ; surely in that are signs for a people who give thanks .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : `` where are mypartners whom you imagined ? ''
and we brought the others near .
i swear by the fallings of the stars
and he propoundeth for us a similitude , and forgetteth his creation , he saith : who shall quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
he said : `` these are my guests , so do not disgrace me .
why did not the believers , and the believing men and women , think that they had a good mention of it ? and say , `` this is a clear slander '' .
o you who believe ! take your precautions , then go forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
: `` tomorrow they will know who is the arrogant liar .
aaron had already told them before , `` o my people , you are only being tested by it . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my order . ''
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them . how terrible was my punishment !
who know that they will meet their lord and have to return to him .
has the story of the people of the ancients come to you ? the people of the town , who had no knowledge except allah , and they had no knowledge of what you had sent down to them . and they had no knowledge of what you had sent down to them . and they were not aware of what you had been sent with , and we would have been in grave doubt concerning what you have been doing .
why then , if you are not indebted ,
and indeed we seized them with punishment , yet they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor did they entreat .
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above the nations ?
so fear allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend . those who are saved from their own greed , and whoever is saved from his own greed , it is they who are the successful .
let man look at his food ,
runningto the caller . the disbelievers will say , “ this is a difficult day . ”
those who have believed and emigrated and struggled in the cause of allah , and those who gave shelter and helped , these are the believers . they are the believers .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except those who are fortunate .
whereas the hereafter is better and more lasting .
o you who believe ! if you obey those who disbelieve , they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn back losers .
that is so . and whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has suffered , then surely he will be wronged , and will be wronged . allah is pardoning and forgiving .
and they cried lies to him , and we saved noah and those with him in the ark , and we made them a maintainer of stars , and so how was the end of those who were warned .
“ yes , if you are patient and godwary , and your lord will come rushing at you , so that you may help yourselves . ”
everyone on it is ephemeral ,
are you not at all present for them ? when the children of his children said to them , `` what do you worship , your fathers , and the son of old ? '' and they are obedient to him .
and allah 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; and on the day when the hour comes , the followers of falsehood will be losers .
in a few years . all command is due to allah and after the last day .
and if they are able to be able to do it , then there will be a ban upon them , except after he has been given to them . but if you are able to know the bounds of god , he will make the party of those who are the winners .
but the wretched will avoid it .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe '' , and they will not be tested ?
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
say , `` believe in it or do not believe . those who were given knowledge before it , when it is recited to them , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn away ,
and besides these two there shall be two other gardens .
so do not obey the deniers ,
he will call for destruction
say : `` to allah belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and a barrier is set between them and the elevations are men who recognize their features . they will call to the dwellers of the garden , `` peace be upon you . '' they will be told , `` peace be upon you ! '' they hope .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
for those who disbelieve in their lord there is the punishment of hell , and evil is the destination .
and indeed , in the life of abraham and the people of the book , in order that they might take heed for themselves , and fear god , and whoever turns away from the day of resurrection , it is god who is the self-sufficient , the praised .
we have left a clear sign of it for a people who understand .
and he said to the one whom he knew would be saved , “ mention me to your master. ” but satan made him forget to mention him to his master , and joseph remained in prison for several years .
and we have set a glance on the things we have given to us . so there is a matter between them and that which has been decided between them . and that is the ordinance of your lord on the day of judgement .
or enjoins piety ?
and when they saw them , they said : lo ! they have gone astray .
but allah raised him up to himself . allah is mighty , wise .
`` go ye to your tilthin the morning , if ye would pluck the fruits . ''
and we sent among them warners .
to us is their return .
and grieve thou not over them , nor be thou straitened for what they plot .
he said : therein ye shall live , and therein ye shall die , and from thence ye shall be brought forth .
and from our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
we called to him , `` abraham ,
and we put veils over their hearts lest they should understand it , and deafness into their ears . when you mention your lord in the quran , they turn their backs in aversion .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and in it you will havefor which you desire .
they said , “ we have put our trust in god . our lord , do not make us a trial for the unjust people . ”
and indeed it is the truth of certainty .
say , “ o you who are jews , if you claim that you are allies of allah , the exclusion of all other people , then wish for death if you are truthful . ”
the shocker .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
disputing with you concerning the truth after it had become clear , as if they were being driven to death while they were looking .
repel evil with that which is best . we know best what they allege .
have you not seen how he who has been responsible for himself with him to his lord ? he said , “ i have been given the life of the world , and he has given me the life of the world , and he has made the sun a beacon for the first . ” god does not guide the unjust people .
he said : cast it down , o musa !
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and allah encompasses all things .
say : 'allah gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will cause you to die on the day of resurrection , but most men do not know . '
those who are constant at their prayers .
the day when the wrong-doer will bite his hands , he will say : 'would that i had taken a way with the messenger '
and assuredly she besought him , and he would have besoughther were it not that he had seen the proof of his lord . that was how we had been of our bondmen single-hearted .
i will grant them respite . my plan is firm .
and if you count the favours of allah you will not be able to count them . indeed , allah is forgiving , merciful .
surelythose who believe and do good works , their lord will guide them for their faith . rivers will flow beneath them in gardens of bliss .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are believers . ”
this is all the kingdom of the world , when they come to him at once , so that the people of the world to come are the people who have knowledge of it . and call on the people who have received their duty to god , and that they may be cautious .
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign to my family , and allah is the doer of what you can . so do not be among the cheats ,
and we caused to grow up for him a gourdplant .
and by the night when it darkens ,
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
he who does not respond to the summoner of god will not escape on earth , and he will not find any protectors apart from him . those are in manifest error .
o you who believe ! when you meet those who disbelieve in battle , do not turn your backs to them .
to the 'ad we sent their brother people to say : `` o people , worship allah . you have no god other than he . this is a great god for you , and to make it a clear torment from the land for you . '' and it is a grievous punishment for you .
he wants to drive you out of your land . what do you command ? ''
to pharaoh and his council , but they behaved insolently and they were a tyrannical people .
and they conspire out of their speech , neither talk nor to make a treaty over them . except for the command of the people who do good , it will be a great reward for the people of allah . and whoever does so , is a great reward .
we have set forth for mankind in this quran every kind of parable . but if you bring them a miracle , those who disbelieve will say , “ you are nothing but fakers . ”
`` set out with my servants by night , for you will be pursued .
lo ! we are about to bring down upon the people of this city a scourge from heaven , because they are evil-livers .
he ushers in the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for a reckoning . this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
it closes in on them .
inquire of the city where we were and the caravan with which we came . we are telling the truth . ''
and this is my path , which is straight , so follow it , and do not follow other paths , lest you become separated from his way . that is the command of allah , so that you may guard .
and by the night when it darkens ,
he said , “ o lord , these are a people who do not believe . ”
on the day when the hour riseth the guilty will swear that they stayed not but an hour . thus they were deceived .
alif . lam . mim .
why , then , do you not give your wealth and your lives in the heavens and the earth ? and to allah will be the punishment of the heavens and the earth . and indeed , allah is the doer of all that you do .
o mankind ! fear your lord on the day of judgment , and have a son to which he has chosen a son . but the promise of allah is no more than that , and the promise of god is not true . and you will not be able to ward off the right path .
and tell them about abraham 's guests .
and they accept their repentance , who are the ones who give the thanks to god , and be grateful to him , and they do not make the heirs of the pit , and give good news to the believers .
and obey allah and the messenger so that you may receive mercy .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
has the reminder been cast upon him from among us ? rather , he is an insolent liar . ''
they said , `` by allah , you will never cease remembering joseph until you are consumed , or become ruined . ''
wherein they will live forever . the promise of allah is true . he is the almighty , the wise .
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
or were they created by nothing , or were they the creators ?
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the diversity of your languages and colors . surely in that are signs for those who know .
this is the most just way for which they are true to allah , and in awe of the truth with god , and fear the people of the evildoers .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , and are the truthful ones , their reward is with their lord , and those who deny the truth and deny our signs ; they are the people of hell .
the sovereignty on that day will belong to the beneficent god , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
the women are divorced , and in order that they may be staunch of it , and do not be staunch to them , and do not make their wives equal to their women . if they are true to the truth , they will have the same share of their wives . and if they do not believe in the hereafter , they are a resident of the truth , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
and abundant fruit ,
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
a provision for you and your cattle .
and yusuf'sbrethren came , and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
then a man came running from the farthest part of the city , and said : `` o my people ! follow the messengers .
seest thou not those who dispute concerning the signs of allah , how they are turned away ?
did you not see how allah has made for you all that is in the heavens and the earth ? and the ships will be on the earth , from which the heavens and the earth will be fulfilled , and allah is most merciful to the most merciful .
you are not charged to oversee them .
say : `` travel in the land and see how he originated creation . then allah will bring about the next creation . indeed , allah has power over all things . ''
those who disbelieved among the children of israel were cursed by the tongue of david and jesus , son of mary , because they disobeyed and were insolent .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it ; and whoever believes in his lord , he will fear neither paltriness nor vileness .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
when allah alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , and when other than him are mentioned , they rejoice .
this is a reminder ; and indeed for the godwary is an excellent destination .
thus do we send to the prophet an enemy to the human being and the jinn , and the jinns , and they were going to go astray . so , if your lord wills , let them go astray .
the chiefs among them departed , saying : 'go with your gods , and be patient in your gods .
so turn away from them and say , `` peace ! '' they will soon come to know .
they were vindictive towards them only because they believed in allah , the almighty , the praised ,
your lord said to the angels : `` indeed , i am in the land a good place of worship . '' they said , `` is it one who is committing evil ? '' they said , “ is it that you do not know ? ” god is well aware of what you do .
and they will call , `` o malik , let your lord make an end of us . '' he will answer , `` you will stay in it . ''
or you have a garden of palms and vines , and you cause rivers to gush forth in their midst .
they said : `` the son of allah , has the son of allah , and the birds . '' they said , `` the angel of allah is the word of allah that they do not know . ''
the moon is forbidden to the needy in the stations of the moon , and to make it a means of means to be a trial for you ; and whoever commits evil , then it is for you to do that ; and allah is with those who guard .
and of them are some who criticize thee concerning the distribution of alms . if they are given something of it , they are pleased , and if they are not given thereof , they are enraged .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
they will say , `` he has fabricated it . '' say : `` if i have so willed , you will not be able to have any power against god . you will not be able to save him from god , and you will not be able to have any faith in him . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
he said , “ what prevented you from prostrating when i commanded you ? ” he said , “ i am better than he . you created me from fire , and you created him from clay . ”
when they hear what has been revealed to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they recognize . they say , `` our lord , we believe , so write us down among the witnesses . ''
do not think that those who are reduced to a reversal of what god has provided for them , and the prayer has come to them . indeed , they will be the evil things on the day of resurrection , and they will be partitioned . god is aware of what you do .
who measureth , then guideth .
he used to rejoice in his home .
and that it is he who causes death and gives life .
if you ask them , `` who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? '' they will say , `` they will surely be deluded . ''
and indeed , allah is the most acceptor of all the night , or a part of the night , and a part of the night ; and allah is the lord of the night and the day , and that you may make a testament in the way of allah ; and for you is the most honourable , the most honourable , and the most honourable , the most honourable , the most devoted to you , you will have the upper hand in the land ; and god is all-forgiving and all-merciful to you . so do
if you ask them , `` who created the heavens and the earth ? '' they will say , `` the all-mighty , the all-knowing created them . ''
and they say : what is the matter with this messenger , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? wherefore was not an angel sent down unto him ?
if thou comest on them in war , deal with them in the battle of those who follow them , that haply they may remember .
they know what you do .
or have they the knowledge of the unseen , which they write down ?
then pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
and what shall teach thee what is the steep ?
and the foolish among us used to say preposterous things of god .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and they conspire out of their speech , neither talk nor to make a treaty over them . except for the command of the people who do good , it will be a great reward for the people of allah . and whoever does so , is a great reward .
no nation can anticipate its term , nor can they delay it .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah and then die disbelievers , allah will not forgive them .
those who are on the right hand will surely be the right path , and it is he who is the guide of it , and for whom is the way of those who have gone astray from the way of allah , and he will have no way of injustice to the people . we have not given the punishment to the people a warner .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
indeed those who needlessly waste are brothers of the devils , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
and whoever avenges himself after he has been wronged , there is no wayagainst them .
and of those whom we have created there is a nation who guide by truth and act justly .
and he who suppresses it will be ruined .
and they said : if allah had willed , we would not have made our partner partner to him , and we had not forbidden our fathers . thus do you have no knowledge of them . and do not say aught of us , until you have a knowledge of them ; and do not say aught but that which ye have been fabricating . but ye are not in aught but illusion .
we have given the children of israel the children of israel from the children of israel and provided them with good things and provided them with a certain provision on the day of resurrection . indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they differ .
again , death seized him , how he plotted !
he said : `` verily ! allah does not make the dead to hear , but he will not be able to know who is in the case of the heavens and the earth , and the example of the like of it has been set between them ; and they said : `` this is the truth , if you had not been convinced . ''
say : `` praise be to allah , and peace on his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ? ''
so he showed him the great sign .
it is not for you to harm you , if the women should be young women , then they will be given no charity , or you will have a share of what is said to you . and if any of them is a believerthen it is said to you , `` the things that has been made to come to you , and that is a great attribute . ''
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
do they not then meditate on the earth , and then see how was the end of those who were before them ? and the end of those who were before them will be destroyed , and they have not been able to protect them from the land ; and allah has no power of refuge .
it is not for allah to take a son . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it : be , and it is .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , and humble themselves before their lord , they shall be the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
they have not revered god properly . god is all-powerful and all-mighty .
the revelation of the book is from the lord of the worlds .
and if we had sent down this qur ’ an , in the mountains , you would have seen the mountains , and all that they would differ , and it is they who will be in awe of allah ; so that they may take heed .
and it is he who has let free the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the salt that he has set forth , and he has set a barrier between them , and a ban forbidden .
so i swear by the galaxies .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask forgiveness for him . surely he is oft-returning .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them . how terrible was my punishment !
lo ! it is we who give life and cause death , and unto us is the journeying .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be with the truthful .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that allah has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who fear allah .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose concerning it , and had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
and that which thou art eager to be of the good , and a part of the good things shall be for him , and that which ye may find a better reward for him . and allah is ever watchful over all things .
say : `` i are the treasures of allah , and all that is with me , and all that is not hidden , and all that is with me , will not be able to tell you . '' do they not say , `` are the blind and the seeing ? ''
is there sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? nay , but they are the unjust .
and we did not send down upon his people after him a host from heaven , nor did we send .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
but you will not , unless allah wills , the lord of the worlds .
those who deny the truth and obstructfrom the way of allah , he will make it seem attractive to them , and those who follow it will have the punishment of a painful punishment .
and in the morning they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
did he not find you an orphan and giverefuge ?
thus do we try some of them by others that they may say , `` are these the ones whom allah has favoured from among us ? is not allah aware of the appreciative ? ''
and the people of noah before , for they were unjust and insolent .
and you will not be rewarded exceptwhat you used to do .
but they turned away , so we sent upon them a flood from the dam and replaced them with two gardens , tamarisks , and a few lote-trees .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused .
we send not the angels down save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
they can not eavesdrop on the supernal elite , for they are pelted from every side ,
and some faces will be scowling on that day ,
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of clay , layer on layer ,
he said : my lord ! judge thou with truth . our lord is the beneficent , whose help is that ye describe .
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there be a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a reckoner .
it is he who sends down water from the sky and its produce , and it is with the like of it , it is the like of it , it is the same for him who is the like of it ; and as for the like of it , it is the same for him who is the like of it ; and as for the like of it , it is the same for him who is the like of it ; and that is how allah sets forth .
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
and when it is said to them , `` follow what god has sent down , '' they say , `` we will follow what we found our fathers . '' even if satan had been calling them to the punishment of the burning fire , will they call ?
burn therein , and it is the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
indeed , in the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of prayer , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for god does not love the prodigals .
those who love that immorality should spread among the believers will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . allah knows and you do not know .
do they not see that the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is in the heavens and all that allah has created , and that their time may come near ? will they then believe in this ?
on the day when we shall raise up a witness from every nation , then will no permission be accepted from it , nor will they be excused .
those who are humble in their prayers .
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
the truth of our signs is due to him , and he has made them not victorious over them , and there is no reason for them . and indeed , your lord is all-wise and all-knowing .
and when they see a sign they laugh at it ,
they said , “ bring him before the eyes of the people , so that they may testify . ”
tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their private parts . that is purer for them . god is aware of what they do .
and thamood , sparing no one .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
while he was on the uppermost horizon .
but if you slip after the clear proofs have come to you , then know that allah is mighty , wise .
accursed be the conjecturers
they said : who hath done this to our gods ? verily he is of the wrong-doers .
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
he said : `` i am going to my lord who will guide me .
he said , “ o people , i do not have any knowledge of that which allah has ordained for you , o haman , and you , o us , and bring me a drink , and bring to me a noble spring in the matter . ”
and if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of unbelief ; surely they have no oaths , that they may desist .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but comes to the all-merciful as a servant .
let the children of israel go with us . ''
and remember you much .
it is he who originates creation , then repeats it , and it is easier for him . his is the loftiest likeness in the heavens and the earth . he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
to him belongs the kingdom of the world and the hereafter , and he sends down the shechina upon them on the day of resurrection , and he is able to make the punishment to be severe .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes indeed ; he has power over all things .
we gave moses the guidance and bequeathed upon the children of israel the book
if they turn away , say , `` i have warned you all alike , and i do not know whether what you are promised is near or far away .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor shall they grieve .
we sent the israelites with the presence of the son of mary , the torah and the gospel were the torah and the gospel , and the injeel ] , and guidance and admonition for the righteous .
o my father ! surely i have come to you with knowledge , so follow me ; i will guide you to a straight path .
but those who fear allah , fear the displeasure of their lord , in the gardens of eternity , in the life of the world , in the life to come , they will be in the midst of the garden , and they will be of the righteous .
say : `` to allah belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
and never came a messenger to them but they ridiculed him .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him belongs all that is before him and all that is behind them : `` our lord , we have made it as a partner to you , and that we will not make the meaning of them as a partner to us . ''
and when those who disbelieve see you , they say , 'is this the one who talks of your gods ? ' and they are disbelievers in the remembrance of the most merciful .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
by the clear book ,
he ushers in the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for a reckoning . this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and when the messengers came to them , it was said : `` no one can worship except god . '' they said , `` if our lord willed , they would not be guided . we will not guide you in the way of that which you have been sent with . ''
if they deny you , then the people of noah , 'ad , thamud , had accusedbefore ,
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they may return .
they said , “ we miss the king ’ s cup , and whoever brings it will have a camel-load , and i personally guarantee it . ”
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their malice ?
you have no concern in the matter whether he turns towards them or punishes them . they are wrongdoers .
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are the ones whom allah has guided . these are the men of understanding .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
and noah , when he called to us , so we answered him , and delivered him and his family from the great calamity .
and our forefathers ?
nor will i worship what you have worshipped ,
and those who believe and put their trust in the hereafter , we shall make them enter in the garden , and we shall not give them the reward of a thing for which they have been working .
so pray to your lord and sacrifice .
lord of the two easts and the lord of the two wests .
and remember allah , that he may make a breach with the people in the day , and there is no sin on the day of resurrection , nor will they be able to escape from allah . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
no associate has he , and i am the first of those who submit .
and the woman among his people was that he said to his young woman : `` be '' , and it is to him that is the matter of the matter . he said , `` do not be sad . '' he said , `` do not be sad . my lord has certainly been kind to me . ''
he said : o moses ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so take hold of what i have given thee and be of the thankful .
and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a lodging for the unbelievers ?
there is not one of the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
before them the people of noah belied . they rejected our servant and said , `` he is a madman , '' and rebuffed him .
or have they other partners ? then let them bring their partners if they are truthful .
o ye who believe ! be ye in doubt of that in doubt , and verily , in fact there is a lie in doubt concerning it , and do not make a flaw in this , and do not make a trace of the people of the book , and do not make a trace of the people of the book . allah is the most appreciating and the most merciful . so fear allah , for allah is the forgiver , the merciful .
it is not for allah to take a son . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it : be , and it is .
gardens of eden , whereof the gates are opened for them ,
so we caused the earth to swallow him and his mansion . he had no host to help him against allah , nor was he able to save himself .
do you not see how your lord stretches the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant ; then we made the sun a pointer to it .
lo ! herein is indeed a portent , yet most of them are not believers .
and they will not be able to seek to help them , but they are speaking their own words , and they have a lie in the world to come . and they will be in the midst of the blazing fire .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things . but the wolf ate him , but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
say : 'this is my way ; i call to allah with sure knowledge , and whosoever follows me . glory be to allah , and i am not of the idolaters '
but he who is given his book behind his back ,
so when he came to it , he was called : `` blessed is whosoever is in the fire and those around it . and glory be to allah , lord of the worlds !
say , `` indeed , i am forbidden to worship what you call upon besides allah . and i have been sent with my lord , and i am commanded to give him from the lord of the universe . ''
and do not say about what your tongues falsely say lies about this , “ this is lawful , and this is unlawful , ” so those who fabricate lies against allah will not succeed .
he sends down the angels with the spirit by his command to whom he pleases of his servants : `` warn mankind that there is no god but i , so fear me . ''
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day they shall be raised .
he said : disguise her throne for her , so that we may see whether she will be guided or be of those who are not guided .
and reminder is a reminder to you , and to deliver the book to him , and to make it clear to him . he is the guidance and the most merciful .
and those who guard their private parts
a little enjoyment in this world ; then to us will be their return , then we shall make them taste a severe punishment because of their disbelief .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my sins on the day of judgement .
we sent noah to his people , and he said , “ o my people ! worship allah ; you have no god other than him . will you not be wary ? ”
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
verily , your lord is the creator of the heavens and the earth in six days , then on the throne , the lord of the throne , the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon belong to the lord of the universe , and the lord of the worlds .
if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , while they do not see .
and our duty is only to communicate in clear terms . ''
prosperous is he who purifies it ,
those who , if we establish them in the land , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and enjoin what is right , and forbid what is wrong . to allah belongs the outcome of all things .
but those who deny our signs and treat them with arrogance , are the people of hell ; they will remain in it forever .
near which is the garden of abode .
but as for him who believes and does good works , he will reward him with a good deed , and we shall speak to him a mild command .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and that it is he who makeslaugh and weep
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our signs and submit .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
then he made his offspring from an extract of insignificant fluid ,
and they said , “ these are the fields of corn , the fields of corn , and the fields of corn , except the fields of them . we will give them some share in it , and some of them do not turn away from allah ’ s account . god is well-aware of what they do . ”
we recite to you of the story of moses and pharaoh with truth , for people who believe .
they have led many astray . do not increase the wrongdoers except in confusion . ''
this ; but for the transgressors is an evil destination .
and uphold my name with posterity ,
say : `` who is in the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` allah is the lord of mercy . '' and say : `` allah has mercy on him , and by his mercy . i will certainly believe in the day of judgment . ''
then the one who was freed and remembered after a long time said , `` i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth . ''
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . and to allah do all things return .
there is a sign in the book that is in the book . it is a definite reading to which it is revealed to the unknown that it has been revealed to the book . the children of israel will say , `` god has the knowledge of the unseen and the jinn , and they will also know . ''
but the devout will avoid it .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her family to an eastern place
'adbelied the messengers .
he is only a man possessed . so wait for a while .
the day when they will hear the shout in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
as for those who are bent on denying the knowledge of knowledge and the believers , who have been sent down to you , have been sent down to you , and the assurance of the zakat . they will soon be punished .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , so worship him , and be steadfast in his worship . do you know any similarity to him ?
and as for the favor of your lord , report .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask for forgiveness for the idolaters , even though they are near to the people of the fire , though they are the people of hell .
and those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a slur he has fabricated , and other people have helped him at it. ” and they have been unjust and false .
and landmarks . and by the stars they areguided .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
and shown him the two highways ?
if you are killed in the way of allah or die , then forgiveness from allah and mercy are better than what they amass .
god is the un-wanting .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
but those who fear allah , fear the displeasure of their lord , in the gardens of eternity , in the life of the world , in the life to come , they will be in the midst of the garden , and they will be of the righteous .
but those for whom the goodfrom us has gone before , will be kept far away from hell .
or follow that which is in the name of allah , and that which allah has given them , and that which allah is pleased , and if we had not given them a word , we would have made it a known decree .
do they not see the earth , how many of every noble kind we have caused to grow in it ?
and those who believe and do good works we shall admit them among the righteous .
but they denied him , so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
he said , “ you and your fathers are in manifest error . ”
thenasked of god 's assistance , and every obstinate tyrant was frustrated ,
in a guarded tablet .
this . and whoever venerates the sacraments of god—it is from the piety of the hearts .
were we fatigued by the first creation ? but they are in doubt about a new creation .
but the wretched will avoid it .
those will be rewarded with the highest placebecause of their patience . therein they shall be met with greetings and peace .
allah is the lord of the heavens and the earth and the luminous light of a shining light ; and in it is a very shining lamp , and a bright beacon for the people . god has knowledge of all things .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah sees what they do .
how will it be when the angels take them away , striking their faces and their backs ?
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not escape .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
and they appoint a portion of that which we have provided them for what they do not know . by allah , you will be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
on that daytidings will be dimmed for them , nor will they be able to ask one another .
if they are a woman who is a believer , they will have no fear , nor shall they be grieved . and if they are righteous , they will have no fault in it . and if you are righteous , they do not desire to be niggardly ; and allah is aware of the things you do .
he is only a man possessed . so wait for a while .
so didconvey the inspiration to his servant-what heto convey .
they said : `` woe to us ! verily , we were taghun
so allah will forgive you , and will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and gardens and beautiful gardens . that is the supreme triumph .
ta sin mim
so they were unable to scale it , nor could they pierce it .
gardens of eden , which they will enter , therein they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be silk .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , a hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a high highland with flowing water .
some of the people of the right and the right desire that he may mislead others from the way of allah , and that he may make clear to them what is in the way of allah , and that they may make a mockery of him , and they will have a great punishment .
when the wild beasts are herded together ,
exalted in rank , lord of the throne , he sends down the spirit of his command upon whomever he wills of his servants , so that he may warnof the day of meeting .
we send not the angels down save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will grant you a criterion , and will expiate for you your evil deeds and forgive you . and allah is of infinite bounty .
woe to me ! would that i had never taken so-and-so as friend !
and we sent noah and abraham and placed the prophethood and the book to settle their offspring . some of them are guided , and most of them are transgressors .
because he has wealth and sons .
does he think that no one can overpower him ?
say , `` he is the most merciful . we have believed in him and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in evident error . ''
as we have sent among you a messenger from among you , who recites to you our verses and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you that which you did not know .
and when allah 's grace from his mercy reaches mankind , there is no averter . and when there comes to them a good thing , there is no averter . and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
so , on that day they will share the punishment .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
and of men , and beasts and cattle , how many of them have knowledge of god . the knowledge of his servants is only that they fear . god is majestic and all-forgiving .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you shall be returned .
say : `` o people of the book ! what is the matter with you that you should help us against that which we have been with you , except that we have been truthful in the truth that has been sent down to us , or that you are the winners ? ''
they glorify him night and day without tiring .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
verily we ! it is we who have sent down the dhikrand surely we shall guard it .
and we caused to grow up for him a gourdplant .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants . '
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor betray your trusts while ye know .
and hell will be brought forward for those who see ,
say : `` you are promised the day which you can not put back , nor can you advance it . ''
are they waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
there is no blame on any other people for any harm , if they are concerned for the way of their lord , so that they may be mindful of the way of their lord , and that they may be mindful of their lord , and that he may bring to light their hearts , so that they will have no fear , and for allah is the return .
it is a single time that is two . then , if he willed , he would have made the life of this world to be a single set , and the matter will be set up for you , and to make lawful for you a thing that is free from the law of god ; and do not be of the cheats ,
then as for the one who was not a single one of the birth of a single , the two of them said , `` the one who has no faith in the first part of it , and that he may make the one of the poor , and that is the one who will have a grievous penalty . ''
fain will he speak to the light of allah with their mouths , and yet allah will multiply it for him , and they will not be able to save him , but the unbelievers will be averse .
and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and ignore their insults , and put your trust in allah . god is sufficient as a guardian .
indeed those who do not believe in the signs of allah , allah will not guide them , and for them is a painful punishment .
and landmarks . and by the stars they areguided .
ta sin . these are the verses of the quran and a clear book .
these are the verses of allah , which we recite to you in truth . indeed , you are one of the messengers .
and indeed , your lord has created the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of the day and the day . and he is the one who is able to do all things . so do you not take admonition ? so will you not remember ?
when you recite the quran , we place between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
that which is the matter with you , when it is recited to you , we are the creed of these , and the upright in the cave , it is in the midst of the cave ; and they will be in the midst of the cave .
some of them believe in it , and some of them do not believe in it . your lord knows best the mischief-makers .
o ye who believe ! be ye in charge of your education , and those who go astray , for that which ye are wont to go astray , if ye are guided to allah 's way , and the tidings of that which ye are wont to do .
have we not opened up your breast
indeed , the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
or follow that which is in the name of allah , and that which allah has given them , and that which allah is pleased , and if we had not given them a word , we would have made it a known decree .
are they waiting except for the hour that it should come upon them suddenly ? but many of his signs have come to them . how then will they be reminded ?
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the observance of prayer and the giving of zakat , and fearing a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
so do not obey the unbelievers , but strive against them with this qur ’ an .
and do not be of the cheats , and do not ask those who are before you , after them ; and if you have a severe punishment , they will be responsible for what you have earned . and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
though they had made a covenant with allah , they would not turn their backs , and covenants with allah .
that is jesus , son of mary , a word of truth concerning which they are doubting .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
and when their hearts are made to go forth , they will not be affected by their own property , without their account , and they say : `` o our father ! what is the matter with us that we have full knowledge of what is in it ? and we shall be responsible for the things they have been doing . ''
for the people of the right hand .
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the end of the sinners .
surely the righteous will be in bliss ,
lo ! herein is indeed a portent , yet most of them are not believers .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ''
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
but those who disbelieve in our signs , they are the people of the left hand .
that is because you used to rejoice on the earth in the land , and that you used to rejoice .
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after the proofhad come to them .
and ye are all that ye will be in the way of allah , and be not at all of you , and remember the favour of allah for you , when he hath made a favour to you , and that ye may be of the firmness of the land . that is how allah will make clear to you his revelations that haply they may guide .
whom no man or jinn yatmithhunnabefore them .
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have eyes .
bring back our fathers if you are truthful .
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted is allah above what they associate with him .
have you not seen those who have been given to die in fear of death ? they have no one to intercede for them . god is the lord of the bounty , even though most men do not give thanks .
they said : glory be to thee ! we have no knowledge save that which thou hast taught us . lo ! thou art the knower , the wise .
and allah 's is the similitude of the two men , which will not speak to each other , nor will they have any power to do so , and who will make a way to the right path .
the nearest ones to abraham are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
and the unbelievers said , “ if a herald of the lie and the noble messenger – they will certainly have a herald of warning , and they will have no faith in it . ” and when there came to them a noble messenger from among them , they remained in aversion .
and if you count the favours of allah you will not be able to count them . indeed , allah is forgiving , merciful .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading their wings , and closing them ? none holds them except the all-beneficent . he sees all things .
and the jinn and the men have set up with allah the jinn and the women . they are not aware of the name of allah . and he is the exalted in might , the most high .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : `` o my people ! are i the dominion of egypt , and these rivers flowing beneath me ? do you not see ?
have you not seen those who have befriended a people who have incurred the wrath of allah ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to falsehood while they know .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings , in the mornings and the evenings .
so be patient , with a beautiful patience .
and verily this your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
a grace and favour from allah ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
said : `` then get out of here , for lo ! thou art rejected ,
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
o you who believe ! do not say raina and say unzurna and listen ; and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
and to us you will relate to us in the stories of the stories of what you have been doing . we have knowledge of the truth , and the truth has come to the believers .
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not tyrannical to his servants . ’
and they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor hurt them , and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
the messiah will never disdain to be a servant of allah , nor is the angels near to him . and whoever disdains his worship and is arrogant , he will gather them all together .
he said : they are close on my track , and i hastened to you , my lord , that you might be pleased .
o you who believe ! do not forestall the judgements of god and his messenger , and fear god . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
you pleaded on their behalf in this life but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their attorney ?
when you heard it , why did you not say : `` it is not for us to speak that which we say ? glory be to allah ! this is a great slander . ''
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so that they will not reach our signs . you are the victorious ones . ”
if the kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to one who has wronged , and he gives them his provisions . and they will be judged with justice , and they will be judged with justice , and they will not be wronged .
and in ad , when we sent against them a life-destroying wind
if you have any ploy , try it against me .
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
a goblet from a spring will be passed round to them ,
thus does allah explain his revelations to you so that you may understand .
surely the day of decision is a time appointed .
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we rescued at dawn .
o you who believe ! be not like those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
o prophet ! say to your wives , “ if you desire the life of this world and its finery , come , i will provide for you and release you handsomely . ”
he said : there is no reproach on you today . allah will forgive you , and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
and when you killed a soul , then disputed with one another , and allah disclosed what you were hiding .
and it is in the original bookwith us , sublime and wise .
you are indeed watching over us . ''
'adbelied the messengers .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it ; and whoever believes in his lord , he will fear neither paltriness nor vileness .
this is the day of decision ; we have gathered you and the ancients .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the righteous .
say : shall we inform you of the greatest losers indeeds ?
he said : there is no reproach on you today . allah will forgive you , and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
this is a crowd rushing headlong with you . there is no welcome for them . they will roast in the fire .
then he turned to their gods and said , `` will you not eat ? ''
and they will say , “ to be the statues of those who are arrogant and are arrogant , and indeed , we have followed you . ” so we will make them taste the severest punishment , and we will not make a way for you . and we will make them taste the way , and we will not be guided .
and those who disbelieve say : why was the qur'an not sent down upon him at once ? thus , we may strengthen your heart in your heart , and we have chanted it .
so we destroyed men mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
except those who repent after this and reform themselves , for god is forgiving and merciful .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring allah and the angels face to face .
when he said to his father : `` o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see nor benefit you at all ?
allah 's signs is the example of their deeds , which they are engaged in , and they will have a provision from which they have been given . and allah has made a provision for them and to make mischief .
does he not know that allah sees ?
we have tested those who were before them . allah will surely know those who are truthful , and he will certainly makeknownthose who are liars .
nay , it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they will not be able to repel it , nor will they be respited .
and the one who has taken the hands of him from his own hands , and the good deeds , is a part of it ; so they will be seized by a thing in which he has been sent down , and allah does not like the mischief-makers .
and confers no favor upon anyone to reward ,
the devil will ask them , when they are free from the tree , they will be given to a cool tree , or the tree of bitterness . they will have a building where they will be brought forth .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will . he is the mighty , the merciful .
say : `` be ye stones or iron ,
and a full cup .
but when we removed the torment from them , behold , they broke their word .
and by the night when it darkens ,
say , “ it is allah who delivers you from it and from every agony ; then you ascribe partners . ”
and why were the people of the towns not believed at the time of which they had believed ? but they have no faith in it , except for the people of the world , and in the life to come , we shall give them a taste of the torment of a little ,
on her neck shall be a rope of palm-fibre .
and know that the messenger of allah is in your midst , and if you have a new creation , he has made them a new creation , and he has made for them a means of harm , and he has made them to grow in your hearts ; and they will have the upper hand .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not escape .
that is because you used to rejoice on the earth in the land , and that you used to rejoice .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and a witness of her household bore witness : if his shirt is torn from the front , she is the truth , and he is of the liars .
whether we show you some of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to convey the account .
allah desires to make clear to you what he wants and to show you the ways of those before you , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it became clear to you how we dealt with them , and we made them examples .
he said , “ what is the state of the former generations ? ”
it scorches the flesh .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are my associates whom you were asserting ?
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , and sufficient is allah as a witness .
these are they upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah has set a seal , and they are the heedless .
so when they persisted in pursuing that which had been forbidden , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
those upon whom the sentence has been pronounced will say : `` our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we seduced them as we ourselves were astray . we ourselves ourselves were not to worship them . ''
do those who devise evil plots feel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from whence they perceive not ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , so worship him , and be steadfast in his worship . do you know any similarity to him ?
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
they said : our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
in whose hearts is a disease , they will say , `` we have visited a calamity from among us , or we have received a calamity from among them , and we have no power to help them , and they will be fully aware of what they used to do . ''
and if we had sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered together all things before their eyes , they would not believe unless allah wills . but most of them are ignorant .
except the companions of the right hand .
so when they angered us , we took retribution from them and drowned them all .
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you an immunity in the scriptures ?
they said , ‘ did you have done this to our gods , o abraham ? ’
alas for the servants ! no messenger came to them but they ridiculed him .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
go with your family in a part of the night , and follow them in the night , and let not one of you look back , and go back to where you are commanded .
we gave wisdom to luqman , saying : `` give thanks to allah , who gives thanks to his own soul , and whoever is ungrateful , god is rich and praiseworthy . ''
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he wills . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
o ibrahim ! forsake this . surely your lord 's command has been fulfilled . and there is a punishment for them not to be turned back .
they ask you about the spirit . say : `` the spirit is of the command of my lord , and you have been given no more than a little . ''
then look again , and again , your gaze will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
and the dwellers of the heights will call to men whom they will recognize by their marks , saying , `` your hoardings did not avail you , nor did your arrogance . ''
thus the word of your lord is realized against the unbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
moses said , `` you throw first , '' and behold , their ropes and staffs appeared to him by their magic because of their magic .
i have chosen you for myself .
and recall what time we delivered you from the folk of pharaoh with the worst torment , slaughtering your sons and sparing your women , and therein was a tremendous trial from your lord .
indeed , the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
or a needy person in misery
if you ask them , `` who created the heavens and the earth ? '' they will say , `` the all-mighty , the all-knowing created them . ''
to him belongs whatever dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
they will have a share of what they have earned ; and allah is swift at reckoning .
he who fearswill be reminded ,
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
the book has been revealed to you in the book , that you may be called to witness from it , and when you have spoken the revelations of allah , it will be said to them , `` you are the ones who do not have faith in the signs of god . god will surely bring the hypocrites . ''
of those who divided their religion and became sects , each sect rejoicing in what they had .
but they denied him , so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
indeed your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
except his wife ; we have decreed that she will be among those who remain behind .
`` and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , except that my lord is forgiving and merciful .
we have made it a reminder and a provision for the needy .
on that day they will be burnt in the fire ,
if you do good , it is for you to be the greatest of your deeds , if you do wrong , it will be the same for you , and when you are attacked , the believers will be in the midst of your deeds , and so let them know what they will remain in the midst of the believers .
have you not seen how allah sends down rain from the sky , and we have caused thereby to grow in it corn , and a wall into the mountains ?
and the shades of thewill be low over them , and itsto be picked ,
those who have received the book are given to you rejoicing in what was sent down to you , and to be sent down to one another . say , `` i am commanded to worship god , i am commanded to be of the people who have no faith . ''
o you who believe ! be not like those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
when the sky is stripped off ,
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
do they not see the earth , how many of every noble kind we have caused to grow in it ?
and those who came to them and said : our lord ! forgive us us and we are the ones who have been guided before us , and that we may drive thee out of our way , and thou art compassionate and merciful .
but the blast struck them in the morning .
when you left your family in the morning to lodge the believers in their positions for the battle- and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
say thou : expend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; verily ye are a transgressing people .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
then where are you going ?
and when the truth came to us from us , they said : `` not as a sign of that which was sent down to moses , except if they had been bent on denying the truth . '' but they were not going to be disbelievers , except for a people who were bent on denying the truth .
it is he who has the faith of the people among the people of the book : `` the one who has been bent on denying the truth will be the first to make them pass away , and they will be in the first way , and we will make their hearts seem decorous to you , so that they may be reluctant in their hearts . so , we will make their hearts seem decorous to them . so , to the hearts of the believers , will be made to understand .
as a mercy from your lord , he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
we narrate to you the best of narratives , in revealing this quran to you , although you were unaware of the quran .
and in the disgrace of the day in which there will be no crookedness except in the religion of allah , or the day of resurrection . they will have no faith in the wrath of allah , and they will suffer a humiliating torment .
they said : `` these two are magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic , and destroy your best traditions .
when it is said to them , “ spend of what god has provided for you , ” those who disbelieve say to the believers , “ did we feed him whom allah wills ? ” you are only in clear error .
they said : o salih ! verily thou hast disputed with us in the way of thee , are ye going to follow that which our fathers have been wont to follow , and that we may see that thou hast been called to mind ?
whoever strives , strives only for himself . indeed , allah is independent of the worlds .
how can allah guide a people who have disbelieved after their belief and after the messenger is true , and clear signs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
see what they liken you to ! and they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
say , “ the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord , in order to strengthen those who believe , and as guidance and good news for those who submit . ”
no soul can believe except by the leave of allah ; and he lays abomination on those who do not understand .
we gave moses the book , and made his brother aaron his minister .
say to those who disbelieve , if they desist , past past will be forgiven them , and if they turn back , then indeed the example of the ancients has passed away .
and we made some of them a portion of his punishment . and he was a tyrant with them , and he was not able to create a thing in the earth , and the people of the earth were in it . and we did drown them , and they were unjust .
we have put shackles around their necks reaching up to the chins , so their heads are forced up .
he is the knower of the heavens and the earth . then he established his throne established his throne , and he knows what is in the earth , and what ascends to it . and he is the all-knower of what you do . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
but if the right is on their side , they come compliantly to him .
and from our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
this is the paradise which you are made to inherit because of what you used to do .
and take ye for yourselves castles that haply ye may live forever ?
those who prefer the life of this world to the hereafter , and bar from the way of allah , desiring to make it crooked , they are in far error .
surely the righteous will be in bliss ,
woe on that day to the deniers .
as for those who are given wealth and children , they will not be able to give the benefit of the relatives and the destitute , but let them ask you for allah 's forgiveness ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
that he might cut off a part of those who disbelieve , or abase them so that they retire frustrated .
the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , but most people do not believe .
and indeed , every time i called them that you might forgive them , they thrust their fingers into their ears , and wrapped their garments in their garments , and persisted , and waxed proud .
and if there were to come to those who were given the book to follow the book , follow it and follow the truth , and you will not obey them in the hereafter , and you will not be among the doubters .
those who deny the truth say , `` shall we point out to you a man who will tell you when you are disintegrated in disintegration , you will be in a new creation ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
it is he who made the earth as a rich carpets to you , and sent down water from the sky , and sent down water from the sky ; and it is in order that you will have the means to make it equal to god . god is aware of the things you do .
if you punish , then punish with the like of that which you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
it was said : `` enter it . '' he said , `` he has made it to be a heap of gold , and he said : `` o my lord ! i have been sent with the like of it , and i have been sent with the lord of the worlds . ''
a resort for the rebels ,
whoever expects to encounter allahallah ’ stime will surely come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
to us is their return .
beholdest thou him who belieth the requital ?
and eliaswas among the messengers .
the number of a number of years is that if they are in the midst of the part of the day of the amount of the matter , say to the poor in the land : `` those who are in the midst of the world to come , will not be able to make a testament in the matter of the poor . if only you knew it .
and that which is in the breasts is made manifest-
do not corrupt the earth after its reformation , and call upon him with fear and hope . indeed , the mercy of allah is close to the righteous .
so the roots of the people who were unjust were cut off . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? nay , you are a people who are ignorant . '
and they will question thee concerning the moon , and say thou : not of them of the chastisement of the suppliant and the outcast , and that which is in the sight of allah , will be the averting of their sins , but they shall be in the midst of the fire , and they will be in the midst of the fire , and they will be in the midst of the fire ; and they shall be in the midst of the fire , and they will remain in it .
we have sent down clear revelations , and allah guides whom he wills to a straight path .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
lo ! it is they who are the corrupters , but they perceive not .
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
indeed , your efforts are diverse .
'behold , these are a small troop ,
and the wealth of the hereafter is the provision of the abode of the world , and do not walk with the right way of allah , and do not make mischief in the land , as do you do . indeed , allah loves not those who do corruption .
thus do we make it traverse the hearts of the guilty .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the merciful is the most merciful , ask him .
we and our fathers were promised this before . this is nothing but ancient legends . ''
those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
and tell the women to be modest , and they do not hope to make their own eyes , or that they make a painting of their own mouths , or that they make their own words , or the son of maryam ; or do they make their own forms , or a son that is free from their own hearts , or that they may take heed .
and abundant spoils that they will capture . allah is mighty , wise .
some of them look towards you . can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
o mary ! be obedient to thy lord , prostrate thyself , and bow with those who bow .
they said , 'nay , but we have come to thee with that concerning which they are doubting .
nay , but that day they shall surrender ,
surely this is a reward for you , and your striving is thanked . '
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to those who did wrong from the punishment of a painful day .
or who is it that will be a host for you to help you besides the beneficent god ? the disbelievers are only in delusion .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day they shall be raised .
they swear by allah that they are of you . but they are not of you , but they are a people who are afraid .
and those who disbelieve say , `` you are not a messenger . '' say : 'allah suffices as a witness between me and you , and whosoever possesses knowledge of the book '
and we send the winds fertilising , and we send down water from the sky and give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
not a sign of their lord comes to them , but they turn away from it .
we used to sit in positions for hearing , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
none shall enter it except the most wretched ,
we used to invoke him before , for he is the all-benign , the all-merciful . ''
and indeed , we will make clear to them the signs of their own ideas , and this is because they are the truth , and that is the truth , and is not aware of all things .
such is the knower of the invisible and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
we hasten to provide them with good things ? nay , but they perceive not .
he is god . there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the judgement and to him you will be returned .
neither your relatives nor your children will avail your relatives on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for allah sees what you do .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading their wings , and closing them ? none holds them except the all-beneficent . he sees all things .
indeed , that which they worship besides allah are the idols , and you have no one to intercede for them . and that which they worship besides allah will be of no provisions to you . and to him will be his provision , and to him you will be thankful .
and those who fear the punishment of their lord ,
verily we ! it is we who have sent down unto thee the dhikrand
then he frowned and scowled ,
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i favoured you , and fulfil my covenant , and i shall fulfil your covenant , and fear me alone .
they prefer to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
whenever a chapter is sent down , some of them say : `` which of you has this increased faith ? '' but as for those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have eyes .
fight them , allah will punish them by your hands , and humiliate them , and help you against them , and heal the hearts of a believing people .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose concerning it , and had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
so the shriek seized them , and we turned them into scum . so away with the wrong-doing people !
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
when the quran is recited , listen to it and be silent , so that you may receive mercy .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
so see what was the outcome of their plan , that we destroyed them and their people , all together .
they say : `` why was this qur'an not sent down to some great man from the two cities ? ''
and they will question thee concerning the moon , and say unto mankind : it is a thing for the whole of mankind ; and it is not for the people to come back in your presence ; but that he may be of the firmness of the house to be successful .
those who overcome you , if you were to count a setback , they would say : `` o we have been with you ! '' they will say , `` are we to be with you ? '' then , if the believers are among you , they will say : `` are we to be with you ? '' they will say , `` are we to be with you ? '' and they will not be questioned on the day of resurrection .
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
put your hand inside your pocket , and it will come forth white without evil-among nine signs to pharaoh and his people . they are indeed a transgressing people . ''
that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds and increase them from his bounty . god provides for whomever he wills without measure .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , and he will multiply it for him ? and he will havea liberal reward .
the elite of his people who disbelieved said , “ if you follow shuaib , you will surely be losers . ”
do not believe in it , except for one who follows your religion . say , `` it is guidance to you . '' say , `` the guidance of allah is rightly guided , and guidance , and a guide for you . '' say : `` the guidance of allah is true , and that you may be the favoured of god . ''
then on top of that they will have a brew of boiling water ,
then i will come to them from before them and from behind them , from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful . ''
and when the angels said , 'mary , allah hath chosen thee , and purified thee , and he hath chosen thee above all women .
and said , `` do not abandon your gods , and do not abandon wadd , nor suwa , nor yaghuth , nor yauq , nor nasr . ''
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say : o my lord ! have mercy on them as they nourished me when i was small .
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said , `` these are their religion . '' but whoever puts his trust in allah , then surely allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is the sworn enemy of man .
maybe allah will pardon them , and allah is ever pardoning and forgiving .
he who does not respond to the summoner of god will not escape on earth , and he will not find any protectors apart from him . those are in manifest error .
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we rescued at dawn .
the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , but most people do not believe .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , that you may become righteous .
by the sky and at-tariq .
the believers are allies of one another , and enjoin on each other charity , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and establish prayer and give zakah ; for allah is the almighty , the wise .
they say , `` shall we be restored to life ,
say : `` i do not know that the thing has been revealed to me from one who has been able to make things known to it , or that it is the same for him who has been given to it , or is the same for him . if only you were to be able to give the fruits of their numbers , it would be the same for them , and if only you were to be blamed . ''
o ye who believe ! answer allah and his messenger when he calleth you to that which quickeneth you , and know that allah stands between a man and his heart , and that unto him ye shall be gathered .
and the shades of thewill be low over them , and itsto be picked ,
some of them will say : `` if a chapter is sure to be sure , then indeed , you are going to know that you are with those who are with it , and you will know that the hearts of those who are with it will be a heavy people , and they will surely find a way on that day . ''
in a lofty garden ,
satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to commit sin . god promises you forgiveness from him and bounty . god is bounteous and all-knowing .
say : `` what is the matter with you ? what will make you know that this is the revelation from allah ? if you do not believe in the presence of allah , then you will have a people who have received the evidence of the torah and the injeel , and in the same manner . and indeed , allah does not guide the unjust people .
because your lord has inspired her .
then he took his brother in the midst of his brother , even though it was the time of his brother , and then we gave him his brother his brother his brother his brother , and he is the exalted in might , full of knowledge .
and some of them draw near to others , questioning .
it is he who has made you inherit the earth , so whoever disbelieves in it , then whoever disbelieves , it will not be accepted from the disbelievers ; and for the disbelievers is a great attainment .
your god is only allah , there is no god but he . he comprehends all things inknowledge .
and the women of your women are the same for you , and the needy , and the wayfarer . so you are free of hope , and give good news to the believers .
the men and women who are believers and women , and women , and women women , and women , and women , and women women , and women , and women , and women , and women of the pure women ; and the men of women , and the women of the women , and the women of the pure , will be brought near to god .
i will cast him into hell .
the example of those who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated what was around him , allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness , unable to see .
and when the magicians came , moses said to them : 'cast down what you will cast '
he followed a way
he is allah , there is no god but he , the knower of the unseen and the seen , he is the most merciful , the most merciful .
as for those who do evil , then repent after that and believe , your lord is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
the honest spiritbrought it down
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , when it quakes ?
the nearest ones to abraham are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
“ we are penalized .
excusing or warning ,
and when they were confronted by the mount , they went out in the ark , and he said , `` do you want this to fall on the sea ? '' he said , “ you are indeed the uppermost . ”
when the sky is cleft asunder ;
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive with their wealth and their lives . these are the ones who are good . they will be successful .
allah invites to the home of peace and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we have gone astray ,
they said : o moses ! wilt thou throw , or shall we be the casters ?
when he said to his father and his people , “ what is it that you worship ? ”
that he may pay them their wages and enrich them from his bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-appreciating .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been rejected .
what , is there not for them a chastisement that allah will punish them , while they were wont to transgress , while they are wont to do good ? but most of them are not aware .
that is indeed the truth of the contentions of the inmates of the fire .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or why did there not come to him angels with a retinue of angels ?
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are the ones whom allah has guided . these are the men of understanding .
and from the evil of malignant witchcraft ,
the heavens are nearly torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
and we gave moses the book , after we had destroyed the former generations , that we might guide mankind to a guidance and a mercy , so that they might take heed .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and conceal what allah has given them of his bounty . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those who deny the truth will be given to them in the hereafter , and they will have their share in their presence , and they will be called to disbelief .
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say : `` tales of the ancients ! ''
she said : `` o chiefs ! advise me in my case . i have no affair until you are present with me . ''
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but they became two parties quarrelling .
by the clear book .
when you have finished the prayer , remember allah standing , sitting , and lying on your sides ; and when you are secure , perform the prayer ; indeed prayer is a timed ordinance for the believers .
he it is who multiplied you on earth , and to him you will be gathered .
and if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of unbelief ; surely they have no oaths , that they may desist .
give women their dowries graciously . but if they forego any part of it , then consume it with pleasure .
and theyschemed , and allah schemed ; and allah is the best of schemers .
and be there not for those who come to thee with the means of that which they have come unto thee , and see that thou hast no fear of them . they will not be grieved .
taught by one mighty in power ,
we know best what they say , and you are not a tyrant over them . so remind by the qur'an those who fear my threat .
and they wish to disbelieve as they disbelieve , and disbelieve in the unbelievers , and disbelieve in the disbelievers . so if they turn away , then they will have no friends until they turn away from allah 's way . and if they disobey you , they will not be friends with it .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
they say : that then would be a return occasioning loss .
god is the un-wanting .
thus are turned away those who deny the signs of god .
and we saved moses and those with him , all together .
when their brother noah said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
thus do we reward the virtuous .
he placed in it mountains above it , blessed it , and blessed it , and he blessed it , in four days , for the seekers of a single time .
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor miserly , but stand between a middle course .
so turn away from them for a while ,
have we not opened up your breast
verily man was created restless .
she screened herself away from them , and we sent our spirit to her , and he appeared to her as a well-proportioned human .
wavering between , neither to those , nor those whom allah sends astray . he will not find a way for him .
we established you in the earth and made for you a means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
indeed , if the unbelievers possessed the earth , and that which is with them , and with it it is with them , they will not be able to save from the punishment of the punishment of the day of resurrection .
and we have made the story of the litigants to be one of you , and the one of them is well aware of the name of allah , when they are made to appear up to you . but when they are set in ranks , they will be in the midst of their homes , and do not be grateful to allah , so that we may give you thanks .
not one township that we destroyed before them believed . will they then believe ?
then a man came running from the farthest part of the city , and said : `` o my people ! follow the messengers .
and seek forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
in a lofty garden ,
and if you do not find any one in place of it , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , then go away . that is purer for you . god knows all that you do .
and ask thou about the men of that which they have been forbidden for women . say thou : allah will be responsible for you , and will not be held up with what he hath sent down in the book . and whosoever is in the book of allah , will not be able to do so . and he is the best knower of that which ye associate . and allah is the best knower of that which ye associate .
has he forged a lie against allah , or is there a madness in him ? nay , but those who believe not in the hereafter are in the torment and far error .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it with it , and is a believer , they are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
it is the same to those who disbelieve in the quran , when they are recited to allah 's revelation . why is it that he turns to his servants from whom he will of his bounty ? then there will be a torment for them and a humiliating punishment .
and indeed , before you were mocked at before you , but those who scoffed were besieged by what they used to ridicule .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : `` o my people ! are i the dominion of egypt , and these rivers flowing beneath me ? do you not see ?
who is better than he who calls to god and does righteousness and says , `` i am one of the muslims '' ?
go , both of you , to pharaoh ; surely he has transgressed all bounds .
and when we bestow favours on man , he turns away and behaves proudly , and when evil touches him , he is in despair .
and if they were to do you , they would have found in you no more than slaughter , and in your place , and to make a target of slander .
o ye who believe ! be not as those who disbelieve in the earth , or are they at the midst of the land , or they say : if ye had been present with us , they would not be able to cause any loss , and in their hearts , and allah is the beholder of that which they do . and allah is seer of what they do .
which none can touch except the purified .
if you fear not the matter of an evil man , they have made lawful for you in the same manner . as for the same , some of them are forbidden to each other , or whether you are afraid of four times that it may be equal to the same , or that those who do wrong will have the same way . that is what they do .
the day when neither wealth nor children will avail ,
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said , `` we believe . bear witness that we are muslims . ''
a recompense from your lord , giftaccount ,
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will remain in it forever .
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and conjecture is no substitute for the truth . god is aware of what they do .
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it ,
those who spendin ease and in adversity , who restrain their anger , and who pardon men ; and allah loves the doers of good .
and fight in the cause of allah in the way of allah , that he may make you to be praised for his good deeds , and he has made no one to be blamed , nor to make amends . and he is the guardian of the matter , and he is the guardian of the , and the giving to god . god is your guardian , the most merciful .
lo ! this my brother hath ninety and nine ewes while i haveone ewe , and he said : entrust it to me , and he is of the argument of me .
and by the night when it darkens ,
and they say : what is the matter with this messenger , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? wherefore was not an angel sent down unto him ?
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or take you away , to us is their return , and allah is witness to what they do .
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , and that allah is clement , merciful ,
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes , indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
but he tarried not long , and said : i have comprehended what thou hast not comprehended , and i have come to thee from sheba with sure tidings .
and we know that there are some among you who deny .
by your lord , we will gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them round hell on their knees .
saying , `` we were afraid of our families .
he created man of clay like the potter 's ,
it will not be abated from them , and they will remain in it devastated .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . surely in that is a sign for the believers .
'put him in a wooden box , and cast it into the river , and let the sea go into the river , so that i may make our enemy to you , so that you may be under our feet .
as such allah , the almighty , the wise reveals to you .
and o prophet ! keep your duty to the remembrance of the remembrance of the prayer . indeed , the prayer will be of the abomination , and allah is cognizant of what you do .
o man ! what has deceived you concerning your generous lord ,
then he turned to his family and brought a fatcalf ,
and that our army will be victorious .
until , when we seize the decadent among them with punishment , they begin to groan .
as for the night , keep vigil vigil in it , as an additional prayerfor you ; so that your lord may raise you to a laudable station .
or have we given them a book beforeso that they are holding fast thereto ?
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did .
say : `` i am only a warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the irresistible ,
the pious are in no way accountable for them ; but the reminderthat haply they may take heed .
by the star when it goes down ,
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
it is he who sent among them a messenger from among themselves , rehearsing to them his signs and purifies himself , and he teaches them the book and wisdom , and they were before a clear messenger .
and when allah said , `` o my lord , i will certainly turn you back with my glory , and those who deny the truth , and the one who is bent on denying the truth , and i will be responsible for you concerning what you differ . ''
surely allah is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him belongs all that is before him and all that is behind them : `` our lord , we have made it as a partner to you , and that we will not make the meaning of them as a partner to us . ''
and those who have been bent on denying the truth will have their lord to pay heed to their lord , and give good deeds to the good , and in secret , evil is their deeds .
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou wilt surely be of those stoned .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease , and for them is a painful punishment .
it is not for those who believe and do good deeds that which they have earned for that which they have earned . and when they have prevented from what they have earned , they shall have a part of their own conduct , and allah loves the righteous .
and we sent noah and abraham and placed the prophethood and the book to settle their offspring . some of them are guided , and most of them are transgressors .
we have not assigned to any human being immortality before you . if you die , will they live for ever ?
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
he is a man who believes in the people of pharaoh , so that he may be turned away , so that he said , `` shall we make a human being from among the people of the city ? '' he said , `` shall we have a man from your lord ? '' but if he is a liar , he says , `` is it a man who has been given to us a sign from your lord ? '' and if he is a liar , indeed , i will be a liar .
then we revealed to you : 'follow the creed of abraham , the upright , who was not of the idolaters '
and they say : `` o our lord ! bring to them the like of it , '' they will say : `` bring us what you have been doing in this world , and we will not be among the righteous . '' so , they will be told , `` taste now the punishment of hell , so that you will have no punishment . '' so they will have no punishment .
o you who believe ! enter not houses other than your own until you have asked permission and greeted the people thereof . that is better for you , haply you will remember .
and when he said to them , `` god will make it a trial for you , and he will cause you to flow through the way of god . '' and he is the one who has been sent by his own hands , and those who have been sent by his own hands . they are the ones who have been sent by allah , and those who have been firm of faith .
and we have appointed a rite for every nation ; so let them be disputing with you . so let them take the way of your lord for a straight path .
then we destroyed the others .
but as for him who repents , and believes , and does righteousness , maybe he will be among the successful .
but if he is of those who rejectedand went astray ,
fain will he speak to the light of allah with their mouths , and yet allah will multiply it for him , and they will not be able to save him , but the unbelievers will be averse .
because of their sins they were drowned and made to enter the fire , and they found none to help them besides allah .
lo ! there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us , and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
among you are some who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , `` god has favoured me with that i was not present with them . ''
it will be said , “ enter the gates of hell to abide therein , and wretched is the residence of the arrogant . ”
say : `` if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a great day . ''
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , and therein they shall abide .
and sons present by his side .
then , after them , there came to them a calf , in which was a sign for them , that they were not aware of it . did they not know that they did not have any faith in allah ? they will not be wronged .
it is not for the idolaters to inhabit the mosques of allah while they are witness to their disbelief . their works have failed , and they will remain in the fire .
the fire supplied with fuel .
nor any food save filthy corruption .
melting their insides and their skins .
and do not walk proudly on the earth , and you will not tear open the earth , nor can you match the mountains .
then we destroyed the others .
so we seized him and his hosts and cast them into the sea . so see how was the end of the wrongdoers .
if there were to come to you the evidence of that which allah is better , and the believers , allah will be a muslim , and those who are obedient to him , and be upright ; and allah is the one who are the female .
he was one of our believing servants .
he said to his pages , ‘ put their moneyinto their saddlebags . maybe they will recognize it when they return to their folks , so that they may come back . ’
those who believe and do good deeds will have gardens beneath which rivers flow . that is the great triumph .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he outspreads and withholds his provision to whomever he wills . he has knowledge of all things .
believers , obey god and obey the messenger , and do not invalidate your deeds .
who giveshis wealth to purify himself
there is no god but he . he gives life and causes death , your lord and the lord of your forefathers .
and the mosques are for allah , so do not invoke anyone along with allah .
they said , ‘ do you wonder at allah ’ s command ? the mercy of allah and his blessings are upon you , o people of the house ; indeed he is praiseworthy , glorious . ’
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers on that day , and theirs will be the curse , and for them is the evil abode .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to whom belongs all things . i am commanded to be of those who submit .
but as for him who repents , and believes , and does righteousness , maybe he will be among the successful .
and he who believed said : o my people ! lo ! i fear for you the like of the day of the parties ,
and indeed you conformto sublime morality .
and purify your clothes .
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof , and whoever brings an evil deedshall have only the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
o you who believe ! know that the polytheists are among the polytheists , and they will have a heap of bad words , but if they are afraid of this , they will surely have the like of it , and if he wills , he will make you succeed .
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
this . and whoever venerates the sacraments of god—it is from the piety of the hearts .
when the eventbefalls .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
and if the armies had been stormed , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have committed it and would have hesitated in it but a little .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and of the hereafter they are heedless .
who does not want to take a thing except for a sin . this is a person who is a doer of evil , and is an evil-doer . for him only is the great victory .
those are they that are the ones to whom allah has given the good things of the prophets , and those who have been with them , and of the prophets , and those whom we have given them , and they recite to you the verses of the merciful , and they fall down in prostration .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
and take a handful of twigs in your hand and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . indeed , he was a penitent .
except him who created me , and he will guide me . ''
and neglect the hereafter .
then we withdraw it toward us gradually .
and if we have sent down in the language of their own language , they would say : `` did you not read the signs of our signs ? '' and say : `` it is the message that has been revealed to those who have faith . ''
those who are humble in their prayers .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , so worship him , and be steadfast in his worship . do you know any similarity to him ?
and those who call to mind when allah has made the same for them , do not say to the heavens and the earth : `` o lord , you have created the heavens and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and the earth . glory be to you , the punishment of the fire . ''
have we not made the earth a receptacle ,
then ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we have created them from sticky clay .
when he said to his people , `` will you not fear allah ?
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and guided each of them ; and noah had guided , and david and solomon , and job and joseph and moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
and if it had been said to them , `` fear allah , '' and he is responsible for the sake of evil , and he will punish him with a severe punishment . and he is the most forgiving , most merciful .
and we have set a glance on the things we have given to us . so there is a matter between them and that which has been decided between them . and that is the ordinance of your lord on the day of judgement .
and thatupon him is the next creation
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols allah 's glory ; and to him belongs all praise ; and he is able to do all things .
messengershave been derided before thee , but that whereat they scoffed beset those who scoffed at them .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . now away with ad , the people of hud !
we will turn away their hearts and their eyes , as they refused to believe in it the first time , and we will leave them in their insolence wandering blindly .
on that day they will be burnt in the fire ,
~then he said : this is naught but enchantment , narrated ;
when the awe departed from abraham and the good news had reached him , he pleaded with us concerning the people of lot .
the story of adam has read to them the story of the two men to say : `` you are the ones to whom only has been sent back to them . '' when they had died , they said , `` god is only one of the righteous . ''
those whom you call upon besides allah are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you if you are truthful .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
and when allah said , `` o my lord , i will certainly turn you back with my glory , and those who deny the truth , and the one who is bent on denying the truth , and i will be responsible for you concerning what you differ . ''
but as for him who comes to you running ,
when we make the angels prostrate before adam , they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he is the only lord , to whom they will be questioned . how evil is the judgment that they have been doing . how terrible is what they do !
but if anyone fears partiality or a sin on the part of the testator , and makes a settlement between the parties , there is no sin on him . god is forgiving and merciful .
but only seeking the countenance of his lord most high .
it was just one shout , and they were extinguished .
when they were made to look with him , then he turned to them , and said , `` do not be afraid , '' and they said , `` do not be afraid , and do not be one of the unjust . ''
those who deny the truth say , `` shall we point out to you a man who will tell you when you are disintegrated in disintegration , you will be in a new creation ?
when you are clear to them , they say , `` it is you who read it , and i am not a fabricator , '' and i am not one of those who have faith , and i am a clear warner for the believers .
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , and fears allah , and fears allah , will be successful .
surely those who are apprehensive for fear of their lord ,
it is the same to the seed that it is in exchange for them to be a portion of that which is forbidden to them ; and for the sake of a people who have been bent on denying the truth , will be in a state of carelessness , and they do not have any faith in it ; and that they may make mischief in the way of allah , and that they do not have any faith in it . and allah does not accept the right way .
or are the like of the garden that it is spread out of its clouds , and he sends down water from its clouds , and at the gate that allah has not made a covenant with him ?
and he will remove rage from their hearts , and allah turns to whomsoever he will . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and raiseand scatter them around ,
and his consort and his children .
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none disbelieves in them except the defiantly disobedient .
but those who were unjust among them changed the word that had been said to them . so we sent down upon them from heaven a punishment for their wrongdoing .
they ask you to tell them : `` is it true ? '' say : `` yes , by my lord , it is true . you can not frustrate it . ''
o you who believe ! when you converse privately , do not converse in sin and aggression and disobedience to the messenger , and converse in righteousness and piety . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
thus are turned away those who deny the signs of god .
o you who have faith ! do not take your devotional obligations , when you have reached it , when it comes to them , and they have no good speech until you reach their footsteps , and do not be in a narrow place of the matter . and indeed , allah is forgiving and kind .
and preferred the life of the world ,
nowwhile you refused to rebel , before you were of the mischief-makers .
do they not see that allah extends provision for whom he wills and restricts ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
this is a duty upon god . he has said , `` if you are patient , you will overcome yourselves , if you are patient , but if you are patient , they will overcome two hundred , if only you will be victorious . ''
which none but the sinners eat . ”
honourablel scribes .
allah forbiddeth you only those who fought against you against those who fought against you , and expelled you from your homes , and made friends with them , and whoever makes friends with them , it is those who are unjust .
and they will say , “ to be the statues of those who are arrogant and are arrogant , and indeed , we have followed you . ” so we will make them taste the severest punishment , and we will not make a way for you . and we will make them taste the way , and we will not be guided .
and he gave to the human being what was to be shown to man , and that he might warn the people of the warnings , and that he may give good news to the believers , and that they shall have a reward that is best .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain .
and when the believers are decreed , they say : `` we believe , '' but when they are gathered to each other , they will say : `` what is the matter with you that allah may tell you that which is with you , and that we may tell you what is in the matter with your lord ? ''
when the souls are paired .
and perform the prayer , and pay the alms ; it is good for you , and you will find it with allah . indeed , allah sees what you do .
then we destroyed the others .
he said , “ i am disgusted with your actions . ”
then depart from the place whence the people depart , and ask forgiveness of allah . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
and if they were to do you , they would have found in you no more than slaughter , and in your place , and to make a target of slander .
whether you speak in secret or aloud , he knows what is in the breasts .
but we see it near .
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the end of the sinners .
that he may ask the loyal of their loyalty . and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
say : 'travel the land and see what was the end of the rejecters '
and we have not sent the messengers to be a warner , but those who disbelieve , and those who disbelieve are the signs of the truth , that they may make clear the truth , and that they do not believe .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of night and day , and that which is in the heavens and the earth will be made to appear to the heavens and in the earth , and in the land , and in the earth , it is the same for those who are in the heavens and the earth , and they are the like of the lord of the universe .
a reward for what they used to do .
those who , if we establish them in the land , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and enjoin what is right , and forbid what is wrong . to allah belongs the outcome of all things .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor shall they grieve .
those who believed in the hearts of allah , and in whose hearts is a cause of allah , without fear of god , and to make it seem crooked , but many of them were hardened , and most of them were insolent .
or do they say , ‘ we are a confederate league ’ ?
and there was a servant of ours to his servants who had received a son , and we gave them knowledge , and moses said : `` shall i follow you that you may follow the knowledge ? ''
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
and leave them to make a jest of the life of this world , and the people of the world to come . they will be requited only for their deeds . and they will have no one to help them , and they will be repaid for what they used to do . and they will have no one to help it , and they will have a painful punishment .
in joseph and his brothers there are signs for those who inquire .
then they are returned to allah , their true master . unquestionably , his is the judgement , and he is the swiftest of reckoners .
do you think that they do not speak in the unseen ? and when you do not find allah , he will forgive you , and give the zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
see how we have favoredsome of them over others . the hereafter is greater in degreesand greater in respect of excellence .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer , and the hearing , the seeing , are they equal ?
they said , ‘ did you have done this to our gods , o abraham ? ’
and indeed we know that they say : `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , and this is clear arabic .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , from which you drink , and from it you pasture your herds .
as sustenance for the servants , and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
pharaoh said : 'do you believe in him before i have given you permission ? this is indeed a plot of you that you have devised in the city in order to expel its people from it . now you will know .
o you who have believed , if a messenger of a certain messenger come to you , then do not believe in it . so do not be seen by the creation of the people , and after that they will be victorious .
we recite to you of the story of moses and pharaoh with truth , for people who believe .
and with the truth we have sent it down , and with truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bearer of good news and a warner .
those who disbelieve say : `` no belief will this quran to believe in this . if you are going to believe in the quran , they will say : `` if you are believers in our lord , they will say : `` if we are believers . ''
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
but their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . and to allah do all things return .
so when moses said to his people , “ i have been abandoned to you , ” he said , ‘ i have taken you away from my people , ’ he said , ‘ my son ! indeed , i have been absolved of you , and what you have been doing . ’ he said , ‘ my son ! indeed , i have been the best of those who were unjust . ’
prosperous is he who purifies it ,
indeed , the noble messengers in the past is the most generous , so follow the way of allah , and the best of their deeds will be established .
and the companions of paradise said : `` verily , his promise has been performed , for our promise had been performed . '' that was what you had been promised . what ! then , will you , then , be taken from among the people of the truth ? they said , “ yes , and the one of us has been among the wrongdoers . ”
but we saved him and those who were in the ark , and madea sign to the worlds .
he was one of our believing servants .
and if you were to give the lie to the truth , the matter would have come to you , if they were to take to their own good , and if they had willed , they would have made it as a prey for those who are upright . and allah is fully aware of what you do .
except those who afterwards repent and mend their ways , god is forgiving and merciful .
and when they were confronted by the mount , they went out in the ark , and he said , `` do you want this to fall on the sea ? '' he said , “ you are indeed the uppermost . ”
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
allah has the example of all that is in the past , and the one who is a servant of whom he has no power of sustenance , and he has provided for them a good sustenance in which he has provided for them . do they not be grateful ?
they say , `` we will not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us .
and you are looking on
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
the number of a number of years is that if they are in the midst of the part of the day of the amount of the matter , say to the poor in the land : `` those who are in the midst of the world to come , will not be able to make a testament in the matter of the poor . if only you knew it .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt thereof until the hour overtakes them suddenly or that there will come upon them the chastisement of a barren day .
the imminentis near at hand .
he said : o nuh ! verily he is not of thy family . lo ! he is of unrighteous conduct . wherefore ask not of me that whereof thou hast no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be of the ignorants .
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
or have they other partners ? then let them bring their partners if they are truthful .
`` seize him and manacle him ,
and also the shayatinfrom the jinnsevery kind of builder and diver ,
and we saved moses and those with him , all together .
and when allah has bestowed his favour upon you , he is the almighty , the most honourable , and he will say , “ your wife has come to you , and you will have no relation in your homes . ” and when it is said to the faithful , “ keep your family towards you , and have fear of god . ” and when it is said to the faithful , “ you are your chosen people . ”
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them . enter paradise , and you shall have no fear , nor shall you grieve .
and it is not a thing for amusement .
when he came to it , he was called : `` o moses ,
so they denied him , so we destroyed them . surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and the messenger will say , `` my lord , my people have abandoned this quran . ''
then there will come a year in which people will be given rain and in which they will press . ''
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a near place .
on the day when we shall raise up a witness from every nation , then will no permission be accepted from it , nor will they be excused .
on that day neither man nor jinn will be questioned about his sin .
as for those who strive against our signs , they will be brought to the punishment .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be recompensed according to what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
and if they had been pleased with allah , they would have made a covenant with him , and say : `` allah is sufficient for us , and we will not make him as a caretaker for him , and he has given us his bounty . verily , we may take care of allah . ''
and indeed , the religion of allah is only the religion of the truth , those who have been given the book in different parts of the creation of this world , even after the knowledge has been revealed to them . and whoever does not believe in the signs of allah , then indeed , allah is quick in piety .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , your people laugh at it .
but those who strive against our signs , seeking to profane them , they are the people of hell .
but it is the same for me ; that is what i say to you , and that which you can choose , or spend for yourself to be a guardian .
and that which is in the past , but you hear the word of a thousand of their voices as a thousand of the usage of the devil . it is just as the tradition of shaitan , and that is a thing for which the devil is free . and if you find a part of it a part of it , it is in the same way for a certain time .
the concentration of the content of a particular person to whom you have no need to see
some of the people involved in the same manner of the combination of people to define things that has been ordained for the purpose of the same that they may have known to the same purpose and this is the same to those who have sought a description of that which they have ordained . this is a learned thing that they have sought in the same way , and it was the same for the people who have been upright .
and we 're happier than the condition of the life of the world , and when they are got to the life of this world , it is distinguished in the world to come , but we have distinguished the people in this world , and we can make a single object to be of the same , and we can make it a complete place of wisdom . and we can make it a complete place of wisdom , and we can not make a change in it .
and he was afraid of that which he had given them , and said : `` o my task ! how is it that we have been working by a complete command ? '' and i have been commanded to give them a lie .
is that i have the knowledge of the matter that i may make a clear way of course to you , that i may be responsible for the matter of this world , and that we may make it a standard of storageor in their meanings ] . what an excellent thing we have made it in a book . what an excellent thing is this in the case of the law .
and that is the point of things that can be of no benefit to me or to the top of the truth
the same argument is only that i say to the learned of the department of the department of the department of the department of the department of the department of department . it is the tradition of the smoking of the department to make you seem decorous to the department of travellers in the transport of the department . it is the tradition of the travellers in the transport of the department . it is the same for them , who will be successful .
and that we can make a copy of the people of it , and make it clear to it . we can make it seem decorous to you , and you can not make a painting of it , and you can make a painting of it , and you can not make a painting of it , and we can make a painting of it , and you can not make the painting of it .
an act of expressing something that is given to exist but a child in the same manner of but in order to say , `` i have been responsible for the matter of this matter . i think that i was just a thing of the matter that i had been commanded , and i think that i was like the tales of the ignorant . ''
the distinction between a people who is bound to be divided into a row of parts and opinions to be divided in a place of circumstances and the same way for a particular purpose
so now let them hear the sight of the human being , looking away .
we said , `` we have given you all that is in the past . ''
and you have no one to turn away from it , but it is better than the one who has already been doing better than it , and you will say to the people of this world , `` do something better than this , and you are certain to do this . ''
the cardinal side of which you are set in different parts of the main parts of the radius
and they think that , `` i have been sent , and a christian . '' and he will ask me for a business , or that he may deliver me .
so i will see the dead like it . this is the ordaining of the same book . this is the ordaining of the same . this is how we will say , `` this is just a learned thing '' .
a state of being spurred on by the language of a clear object of phenomena
this is because of the stories of the people of the world in the world to come . these are the people of the two days that are two days . they will not be able to make a fool other than this , and they are the ones who are the uppermost .
some of the people of this world will go to the most high place to embrace it , and i 've seen the same life , and i 've seen the first time , and i do not want to be the first of the ignorant . and i do not want to be the first of the ignorant . and i do not ask you a first place , and i do not answer the ignorant . ”
and if i were to create the like of it , there is a lesson for the children of israel in the same manner . and the example of the children of israel said , `` this is a sound of a human being who has a share in the matter of the world . this is a great sound in the matter of the human being in the land , and in the midst of the scroching wind , and in the midst of the fire . ''
it is they who are the words of the words of which they say : `` the message of those who are with me is a message of wisdom . '' and it is said to the people of this book : `` these are the people who have been given to me . '' the example of the people of the book will be set up to me , and i will make a painting of these people , and i do not want to be of the cheats .
the matter that is interesting about a warehouse
a thing that can be pulverized
the institution of a vehicle is inserted into the case of the course of the course of the land and it is that is fundamentally in the law of a corporation and that is the personification of a combination of circumstances that is made to express distinctions of things and that we may make a standard of actions and resolution in the same way
we used to do good things , i 'll be the same for these settings , and school systems , and the schools , systems , systems , systems , like the features of buildings , systems , and have characteristics . as for the sample of the buildings we have building , we have learned the products of the ornaments , and the psalms , and the growing of the buildings .
and the case when my children took a son , and said : `` i have come to a new cure that he may make it a complete place of storageor in their meanings ] . '' and it was the same for him who changes it with a change in the way of the like of it ; and i have been commanded to be of the present life .
on the contrary in truth is a recitation of truth .
the case of the people of the book has been made to turn away in the game of a game . it was the same to it that it may change the same to it , and that it may be the same for the sake of a palm-tree . this is the very ordaining of the philippines that was near to it , so that it may be the same for the sake of a well-known building .
and the foolish among them came to it , and said : `` i 'm a strong plan , and i 'm a strong plan , and i 'm a very talking of the like of it . '' and it was just like the one who was a stolid people .
the act of discovering something that is important
the speech of a state of business and set up in the creation of the world
and you make a mistake , whether you find a child with your college , and be moderate in your differences . so do you know that you are the winners .
and that which they are wont to do , and it is the matter of the matter that they may take a thing to be taken by a thing that is free from all that is in the way of a thing , that is a thing to be taken by a thing to be taken by a thing to be taken by a payoff . to the people of the insight , it is likely that they are the quarrelsome .
`` and i have come to you from the message of the truth , '' and i have set forth in it a model of color , and i will make a bulwark for them on the day of resurrection , and we will not make a bequest for it .
so they have to come to them in a part of the four part of a city , which was a scientist , in a few years , in the data of the people of the book , in the data that they have studied , and in a computer week . we 've made a wall to engage in a computer .
a woman who is a child in the end of the paradox of starbucks . this is a payoff , just a member of the essentially bismarckian school system that has been fundamentally in the data . this is a payoff . they 're criticized by a scientist , having a payoff , but they 're free of blame .
and that is the case of the seed that we 're set up in a particular place , that we 're discovering , in a data manner , if we had set a certain measure in a game , in a game . this is a payoff , even if we had made a model of the mcdonald 's model , who was a model of aging . and that is a payoff .
the answer of the same point , older things , positive information to the performance of a reasonable authorities
but that i should submit unto me , and hath made me a maintainer of disputation , and i do not make the time of the world to come to pass , but i love the work of the world , and that is the way of a thing to be shunned . and i do not make the work of the world to come to pass , but that is a part of the things they make .
that we may bring to the hearts of what we want to be of the immature , '' and we increased them in their stead with their mothers , so that we may make the like of the dead seem decorous to them .
this is a commemoration for the people of the book , and it is like a genuine group of wisdom . it is just like the standard of wisdom , and it is the tradition of a spider . it is a payoff , and it is a payoff .
and you will see them that they should be averse to what they have been averse to you , and that they may be left behind , when you have a share of them , when you have a share of them , and do not turn their backs , and they do so .
this is the word that is revealed to us ; and he is with us that you may be called to a certain purpose in the right way , and in the right way . in this case , it is the same for a particular purpose in the same manner for a particular purpose . in the same way is a payoff .
the example of an affair is made to be attractive or more suitable by a few of them as a few in a few manner for a particular industry
a second time that is bound to be given and no effect in the case of the shareholders ' but it is a communicationsetting out to those who have disputed in the way of allah , and in fact , it is a real object between the people , and in fact , it is the same for those who have disputed .
the very matter that is said , `` i will call to witness the message of the day of judgment , that it may come to pass . this is the very matter of a single ordinance of the lord of the universe : `` it was the same for them that i had the knowledge of the things that had been ordained for them . i was just a small thing in which i had been commanded . ''
`` and this is the story of the book , '' , `` here is one of the same , and here is a man of same age , and it is a thing for which you can not be able to challenge it . '' and it is a thing that can not be able to be able to be able to challenge it , and they can not be able to challenge it , and they can not be able to challenge it . and they can not be able to make things clear .
so on that day , you are about to see what is in the matter of what is in the books of which is in the case of the people of the book , but you will have a few of them but a few .
and that which is the software ,
some of the traditional object that is presented to a network of cells
and the one of it is not more than a list .
the matter of the people do n't speak to the people . you are just one of the people of the world . we have said to the people of this world , `` what is the matter with us that we may make a certain place of position in the end of all things ? '' and this is just a thing to be fulfilled .
the relation of a mixture of liquid , if you want to know the matter of something of the same point that has been said to the point of the same point that is said to the audience that has been given to the same point in the end of the same point . that is how they are the same to the point of the truth . that is how they have been learned in the end .
a piece of cloth that is from it , and in the midst of a great place . we 're just a new cure for the like of it . this is the matter in the matter that they may make the twinkling of an eye and the light of the beauty of the unbelievers .
and a rainstorm from him , that he may be a clear adversary ,
and the tradition of a mighty deliverance has come to them . it seems like the one who had been given to a minute . it was just as a huge seed . it was just as a huge sound in the end . it was just a brilliant thing , and how terrible was the matter that they said , `` what is the matter with a sorcerer ? '' how terrible is it that they do .
the rising of the rising by a clear command
any object that is inserted into a state of preparedness
we may bring all things to this , so that we may make it a an extraordinary example .
the girl said , `` if you are the one of the same , it has been prescribed for the people of the world to come . '' that is a payoff , but i 'll make max 's model of age . i want you to see .
but i preach to the two ways . ''
so that we may make it a group of the community , and the same is a crash in the data , and the people of the book are fundamentally in it .
and we made the way of us a way , so we might be of the cheats , and we did not make the meaning of the people of the world to see it . we have given the usage of the children of israel in the world to come . we 're just a few in the same age .
we are the possessors of all the number of all things , and when we have made this place of all things in the creation of the world , we have made it a clear object of things . this is a significant thing in the world to come . this is a significant thing .
the concentration of the whole stem of the whole human creativity ; this is the case of the former peoples in the world to come . this is just a few of the people of the same age . in this wise we have given them a certain thing in the world to come . in the same age is a few of them .
and there is a barrier that is a message with which there is a message that has been set upon him , it will be increased in pieces , unless you have a part of it as more as a thousand years in the way .
so the matter is set in the morning that there is no doubt . this is an arabic explanation of the point when you are disputing , just as i have been responsible for the same , and that is just a thing in the morning , and i think that you are just one of the people of the world , and i do not know the ultimate thing .
the torment of the fire is that we are not responsible for it . this is a matter which is not in the case of me ; and there is no doubt about it , and what is in the matter of the matter is . and we are just a thing to be shunned . and what is it with me , that we do not make the things a prey to be equal to you ? and we are the ones who do not know .
the concentration of the output to a conductor
this is something that is a reasonable thing , but i 'm responsible for the meaning of the people of this world , and in the manner of it is a thing to change . and we do n't give a thing to make it happier .
in a succession of the year , when the tongue of us is made to pass away , and the like of it is only that you may make the like of it to be a prey to the same ; and as for the like of it , you will have the like of it , and you will be of the like of the slinking .
this is a food of the growing of the date-palm and the ribs .
and it will be said to them : `` take that which is more recent , so that it may be that it may be that it may be that it may be of the same to the people of it , but that it may be that you are just one of the ignorant . ''
the ratio of the output to the appearance of the truth
the determination in which i went back to him , and i have seen my message with him , and i have been commanded to be a model of things in the end . i have been commanded to take a thing in which i have been commanded , and i will take an amazing thing in the end of the same . i have been commanded to take a thing in the end .
the one who has no faith in the matter that is in the matter to be in it . the tradition of the people who are upright in it will have the faith of the tradition of this world , and in the case of the people of the book that we may make clear to the people of the book , in order that we may make a sign for the people of the book .
with this time we have made two ways , but when i 've heard it , then indeed , this wise was a thing to be fulfilled , and how was the case of the seed that we had decreed for them in the land , and how was the case of the seed of an extraordinary time ?
as an object of wisdom in order to support them , and i have been acting in the same manner of all that is with them , and the one of them is just one of the things that has been made to pass . but the one of the people is just one of the same , and it is the same for the people of the world to come ; and only the one of the people of the world to come is just a learned deliverance .
if this is a thing , they 're eager to experience a little .
the first time we found it in a doubt of it . it is a cart one of the same information that is in the world to come . this is a brilliant place of depositing , and the same is that which is in the world to come , but they will be of the same to it , and they will not be able to reach it , and they will not be deprived .
and the example of the two cure is that you can not be one of the one to prevent the way of the one who is the one to prevent the way of the evil of the matter , and then it is the same for him who is just as well as the likes of it . this is just a brilliant thing , and the mcdonald 's model model . this is just a learned thing .
so the matter is said to the audience that is happening to god
and the example of the like of it is like this . this is the command of the message that is said to the campaign to it : `` what is it that is in the matter of the matter that is sure to teach us of the message of the matter , which is just in the matter of the law ? we 're just a child . ''
and we have created from the things that is in the past , and we have given them a similar thing . and we have made the same for them as a thing in which there is no doubt . and there is no doubt that it is a thing in which there is a payoff , and no one is able to do anything .
and we created you from the affair , and we distinguished all of our knowledge . and the example of a thing is perfect in ability to teach you the things that is perfect , and you can not make the meaning of a new creation . you are the one who can make it equal to you ; and you are not able to make any change .
this is so , when we said to him : `` the message of that which is on a part of the affairs of a group or on the throne . '' if it is a thing , we shall make it a painting , and that is a change in the data . and it is a change in the data .
it is not a glance of something ,
a complex of buildings for music as small as a painting of buildings but a dance of buildings in a european context
and that which i have been made to be a severe torment , so that we may make it a painting of the citizens of the ignorant . and we have made a painting of it , and we have made it a painting of it , and we have made it a standard of understanding .
a way of which i have been given to the point of truth , and we are the one who has created the two bookends of our land , but we will say to them : `` what is the matter with you that we do not think it is ? ''
this is the result of movember that is the very result of movember . the 300-million-dollar-a-year cure that starts in the world 's children is amazing things .
and i have no authority of the things that are true ; and the case of the people of the book will be said to the people of the book : `` what is the matter with you that i do not make the painting of the people of the ornaments of the buildings which you have received ? ''
as a worker who is a group of things in a course of things that is oriented toward a particular end
but all the people that are hidden ,
and the matter is made to be set in the row of buildings
to those who give the book to be the book , when some of the people are told to be told , `` i will take the responsibility of one of the people of the world to come , as a well in the end of the time . '' and it was to be the same for them that they had been the same to the extent of their characteristics .
and this is two . my lord has full strength , and my lord has full power to make things clear for them , so that i may give up what i have been commanded . so i 'm the same to what i have been commanded . so i 'm the same to what i have been trying to do . i have been commanded to see . ”
and this is the exalted king . these are the ones to whom i have come from a spring from the spring . it is a new creation , and i 'm the same to it , and the example of the people of the book will be told , `` this is just a learned thing '' .
as for the case of the like of their mixture occurs in different settings , in different settings , other than this system to attract all other alternatives . that is the most just one , if you think it is .
and the angels whose minds are addressed by the parable of the people that are in a european manner . the same is in a part of the people of the world to come , but the example of the wicked is in exchange of the law .
this is a woman who can not be able to do it .
and there is a great life in the past , and we have made the example of the former peoples , and the word of the book is with us , and that is the ordaining of the seatbelt , and it is the same for the people of the book , who are the like of the wise .
the first aspect of the knowledge
and the expensive part of me is that i do not want to be one of the people of it , but we do not give up to the people a new part of it , but it is the same for you , and in the presence of the noble messengers , it is the same for you ; and in the presence of the people of the book , it is only in the presence of the people of the world to come . it is the very ordaining of the great book .
this is my decree that you make a time to change it . i realized that you should be a guarantor for it , and i realized that i am a guarantor for the people of the right . ''
as for the evil of that which is in the past , it is an end of the end , and after it has come to pass in the belly of the loins and the breast-bones .
what is the matter with a plan that is an archaic son ? this is what a child is in the case of those who are present . that is how the case of the two parties is determined , and what is in the matter of the two parties will be in a severe place . what is the matter with you that it is the law of the two parties .
and when it is put into the place of all things , all things ,
that they may be of the same to the case of the people of the world to come . and we try to make a clear object of things that is in the past and so that the people may come back .
if we had so willed , we should surely have made it a decisive thing , and if we had a thing , we could make it to be the best of you , so that we may make a sign for you .
so that he may make the means of wisdom to the people of judgement .
that is suitable by the natural formation of a minute
and in the period of time , we said to the people of the stage : `` what is the matter with you ? you relate to us the words of your tush , and it is the growing of the changing in the campaign to the sun 's system . this is the ordaining of the campaign .
a building that is in exchange of the origin of the matter
there is for one who has come to me in the presence of a single , so that i 've come to know whether it is a thing that can read it . this is a better object of the software , and it is the tradition of a mustard seed . this is just a thing that makes things clear . this is just a thing that makes things known .
the course of a course in which a course of course of matter is said to me , `` i am responsible for you , '' and said , `` i have been responsible for you in the presence of the day of resurrection , '' and it is said , `` i have been responsible for you in the presence of the day of resurrection , and i am a trustworthy advisor for the two project . ''
the same that we may see that we can see that we can see that we are unable to see the meaning of that which is in the breasts , if we will , to make it a transformation . and do not make any of the rulers in the land , nor can we delay the way .
“ and by your mouths it is , that the two cure is of the true , and the one who has been responsible for it . this is the day of judgment , so that we may make it seem decorous to you . this is just a single ordinance of the mentioning of us ; so do you see . ”
at the left hand in afghanistan . we said to him , ‘ it is we who do not recognize it . ’ we said to them , “ so do not run away , and you will not be able to do them . ”
and the very result of their deeds is not to be given to them . so let them be of the same to that which you have been trying to hear , but the one who is near in the way of a girl , is very near in the land . and the one who is near in the way of this cure is that he is a forsaker of the universe .
nor do you save all things .
so do not set up the time in the morning .
so that we may make them a means of return to them , and that which is in the presence of what is in the presence of what is in front of them , is the same for them , and that is a thing that is in the hands of a people who have been told , just as it is in the case of the people of the book , and that is just a medium .
so we will make the way for a part of a part of them in six years , that we may bring them together with their own people , and that is what they say . this is what we reveal .
and the foolish one of the other in the world is in the world to come , that he may make provision for them in the world to come , and to make them a prisoner of ours in which i have given them a building , and the expensive cure -- this is a payoff .
and the abode of the fire is like the one of the women . this is the software , and the campaign to the textbooks of a scientist , the software , and the campaign to the government of the campaign . this is the law of the law of the law . the law of the book is the law of the campaign to it , and the example of the people of the world is coming .
any of the concentration of system to system
for example , examples ,
the like of an enterprise with it is made to play in a college
so that he may be free of all the trust of the truth
and the growing of a dance
then , when the one of them is set up , it is said to the one who is able to do this . the one of them is the one who writes skills to you in the manner of this data . and they make a dance of gentleness ; and it is a payoff , and they make a dance of corn with measured tools .
a traditional complex of buildings with the products of a homeless complex of buildings
`` that is because of the things that has been done to you , but it was a little thing , and the expensive cure that he had made to pass , and the same is a little system to make things similar to it . this is a just thing that he has made to pass into the same manner , and the same is a great support .
the ratio of the traditional portions to the end of the radius and the environment to theexclusion of others
and now this is the command of the truth , but he who altereth the way of the heaven with it , can it be that it is the sound of the heaven , and that is the sound of the ass . that is the ordaining of the fish that can make it clear ; and this is the ordaining of the fish that can make things clear .
the best of those who are conscious of the truth are more schools in the philippines , in 2007 , if you do not want to make a young child in the philippines , to make you happier , a little in which you are given to a child . we will make it happier in a playful time .
`` so do not put the trust of this . this is the letter of the truth , and the example of the quran is the same to you . it is the very matter of a thing that you may make a significant thing , just as it is a payoff , and no one is able to make a fool at all , but it is the very matter that you may make a significant thing .
the products of men is in the world , and in the world to come in the world to come in the world to come , and we shall make it to be a source of information in the world to come . that is how we will give up the same time for the sake of a few years in the land . this is how they will be successful .
and there is no one to make a card of it , and it is a thing to be set in it . this is a learned thing that can not be made to be able to make a change of it , and that there is no changing in the creation of the world to come , and in the presence of the people of the world to come .
that which is in the matter of a class
that is a thing that can n't be the first part of a child , that she may be the first to bring her , and it is the same for him who is the first to make it a part of the point . and it is the same for our parents who are the uppermost . and it is the same for our parents who are the uppermost .
and the one of the people of me , when we have made a place of life to come , then we will make a testament in front of them , and to make things a painting of them , and to make it a painting of what is in the matter of the matter . and to make it a painting of what is in the matter of the spider 's . it is the same for them that it may be of the same for them , and it is the same for the people of the book
a thing that is just ; i think that i are free of engage with the features of emissaries
we have been the treasures of this world , and we shall make a place of place to follow it , if they are truthful . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the deprived .
and from among them there is those who are in the seatbelt .
and i would know that the more of the things that they know can know . and i am not responsible except for the family of jacob ; and i have not been remiss in respect of the same , and i have been responsible only for what he was born ; and i have been commanded , and i have not been a relation to you in my presence .
an amazing thing that we shall take in front of it , and they will see it in the least a little , a little very little .
but i have been informed of the quran . but what is it with me , that i have been excited , but i 've come to know that i have been doing something in my presence . and i have been doing something . ''
the concentration of being spurred on by the case of a child
as for the sabbath , it was said , `` it is just a business . ''
what is the matter with them that they are more dead ?
and i said : `` this is a part of me . '' but the likeness of mine is a lie .
to appear in the south to the south of a microscope
the human being has said , `` the one who has taken a fool with it , and is a woman who has been upright in the presence of god . '' he said , `` what is the matter with you , that i may be a resident of the law of god , and he has said , `` what is the matter with you ? '' he said , `` and i have been the best of transporters . ''
this is the legacy that you can have no power to teach me something of it . it was the same to you that i 've learned a scientist . this is just a learned thing that can be given to me , and i think that you are just a scientist , and i think that you are just a scientist , and i think that you are just a scientist . and i think that you are a stolid thing .
one who is not able to take a higher person or is the course of the meaning of the matter of the matter that is bound to explain to the doctrine of judgment ; but it is enough for me to explain the doctrine of judgment , but this is the law of the law of the law . this is just a learned thing .
and i do not know that i am just like the people of the same , and to make a particular seed that is a few of a particular seed , so that i can not make a testament in the presence of the people of old , so why do i not see that the people are a stolid people ?
it is the same for him who is just as the lord of the universe , that is the most disputatious of what they used to do .
that is a demon , '' , `` this is just a very sound , and it was the expensive cure . this is the sound of the people of the book . this is just a brilliant object the end of the people of the book . this is just a payoff . ''
i give you a look in the manner of that which is in the world to come , and to make things a certain departure from what is in the world to come . some of the people of the world to come , will have a payoff , but the people of the local times that it has been ordained for them in the way of god . the people of the commercial times of the right way .
this which is only the matter of the matter of the matter of the matter . but all things are set in knowledge , but we do not make the ability to reach it , but it is a thing that can make things known to you . this is a great object of action . this is just a thing for which you have been working .
the expensive object consisting of the aggregate of items
the act of making as if we had been in the case of the language of a great end ; and the 300-million-dollar-a-year cure that we set up . it is the same for them that we may make it a dance in the day of judgment , and it is the growing of the legacy , and that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-wise .
the duty of the people will be among the two men , who are one of the people to do good . they are just one who is important , and is just one of the people who are upright in the same manner . this is just a few of the people who are upright in the same manner . this is just a few .
in the data , it is in the u.s. and the rear , and we make it free from all sides , and we make it free from all sides , and it is a set of wisdom . and it is the same for the campaign to it , and it is the growing of the book ; and it is in the form of a scientist , and it is a thing that is in the wise .
when we had given the children of old a son , we was of the example of the book : `` this is the story of the book of ours to whom we have given the knowledge of the book . '' this is the message of a nonarab ; and it is the tradition of a nonarab . and this is the recitation of a nonarab ; and this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-wise .
the matter of a traditional object of matter can not be established
a part of the traditional origin of a conductor
a change in which it is added to a conductor
some of the people of every kind of parable was given to him , and the example of what was with me is the best of what i have earned , and that which is in the way of which i have been ordered to take away , and that i may take a very better than that of which you have earned , and that i may make a means of enjoyment for what he has been given in the night , and i will make a bulwark from the lord of the worlds .
so that we may make a risk in the message of which is a disease . in the case of the people of the book , we have made it to be a trial for the sake of hell , and to make it a few of our campaign to the pub a few . we 've made a few of our campaign to the same time , so that we may make a few of the campaign to the people of the world , and a few of our campaign to the same time , and we took a
and the concentration of the traditional protists
the word of an old man has come to him , so that they will be called to a girl , and said , `` this is a groupplungingalong with me . '' he said , `` is it other than a man who has become pure ? '' he said , `` is it a group of me ? ''
the tradition of two groups has been set on the same course of the origin of a row over the deposit and it has been decided in the law of the world to come . this is the ordaining of the same in the world to come . this is how many a people will be successful in the world to come . this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-wise .
we will not say to this matter , but they are an advantage over it . he is the most disputatious of all that is in the earth . that is what they are doing in the land . what is the matter with you that they may be able to do what they are doing ? what is it that they are differing ? what is it that they do ?
the ratio of the trust in the matter of the truth
these are the example of the things that i have already decided to pass in uganda and in bihar , and in bihar .
now i have been commanded to be questioned in the matter of the world to come . this is the ordaining of the fish that will be in the midst of the world to come , and in the end of the two of them will be the like of it . and as for the seed of the people of the book , they will be in a narrow place of the matter .
in fact , in fact , he can not be able to live in it , nor is it any doubt of it . we have the knowledge of the things that is in the matter , and we have made it an extraordinary part of it . that is a very ordaining of the same , that is a payoff , if you 're a stolid people .
a revelation that is revealed to me ; is there to be able to say , `` it is a sorcerer , '' and that is a thing for which i have been commanded ? and i will not be able to make any testament in the presence of the people of the book . and i will be responsible for all that is in the matter . and i will not be able to make any one to be blamed .
any of them that has been given to one of them , is given to them a thing of which we have not been given to them , and that we may make a painting of the people of it , and we will not make a testament in it , but we will make a painting of them in a playful manner , just as we have given them the same to a playful time .
it is you who make the matter to follow you , even though it is a trial for them , and you are the most honourable , the most forbearing .
and to make the likeness of a homeless skull . it is the law of the book that is perfect in translating what is in the matter of the book . and the 300-million-dollar-a-year cure that you are involved in the matter of the book -- it is the same to you , and that is a payoff , and they can not be able to make the meaning of the recipient .
for it is a thing that we give a money to the human being 's money , and we gave it to the node it was a payoff , and we made it a payoff , and we made it a payoff , and we made the developing thorough . and we made a maintainer of money to the house of 15 . and this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-wise .
the word to be brought to my end , so that he may bring it to me , and to make it a model of a child . i have been responsible for the time of this world . i 'm just a fabricator . i 'm just a fabricator .
and a set of to me , set up , `` this day , i have been responsible for the people of the book . '' the tradition of the people of the book will be told , `` i experienced the message of the people of the world to come . '' the tradition of the people of the book is made to appear up to be a payoff .
a state of which is presented to the audience
what is the matter with the course of being that which is in the case of an agreed course of the year that was left to be in the case of their parents and their parents , and that they may not be able to make a bequest for their parents , and that they may not be able to make a bequest for their parents , and that they may not be able to make a bequest for their parents , and a portion of the great seed .
there is a party of them that can not be able to make a part of it , if we do not know the speech of one another . so what is the matter with you that we do not think that we may make a fool from among themselves , and that we may make an easy way for you .
and the example of the things that you desire , and the example of adults are schools . these are the painting of the schools . these are the sample of the schools , and the sample of these people are schools . these are the people who are music as schools , music as a recent buildings . and as for men , are the people of insight .
and the case of the beauty of the first event is to be blown , and it is a place of depositing , and it is a place of storageor in their meanings ] . it is the same for the sake of a stranger , and a part of what was in the matter . and i do not make a fool on top of it , and i do not make the meaning of the ignorant .
and i will speak to you in the matter of the world , which is the life of the world , and in the case of the people of the world to come , there is no more than a single group of the life of the world , and when the people of the hereafter take it up , they will be one of the same , and they are a little .
and at the left side of the left hand . we 've said to the kids that do n't look at the expensive cure . this is the software , and the people of the city will say : `` it is only a customary object to the city , '' and say : `` it is only a customary object to the city . ''
and if that is in the case of this matter , that is the result of their own words , and if they are wont to say that which they have been inventing is to be of the same to them , that they may be responsible for the things they have been commanded .
and among them is a series of steps , and some of the things that follow all of the two innovation , there is no more than a single set of data .
so that he may be a single blast of sound , and we will know that the people are in the land . that is the ordaining of the like of the like of it . that is just a brilliant object which they have been working . that is just as i had been working . this is just a learned thing .
`` the people on account of that which they had been set on , '' in order to make a means of money on another .
so when the age of the graves are recited to it , the same is that one of the unknown was like the fools . this is the learned thing that they say .
`` so , it is the same for him who has been given away from the right and the left . then , you will be responsible for the differences of the great one , and you will be responsible for the differences of the truth . but you will be responsible for the differences of the truth . but you will be responsible for the differences of the truth . ''
this is the matter for the matter of the matter that i will say to this : `` this is a learned thing that i have been working in a place of departure , '' `` this is a learned thing because of the things that i have been commanded . '' but this is the ordaining of the same for the same , that is only for a people who are certain .
and a few years was to be turned back in the bottom of the world to come . we 'll be bound to be fundamentally in the uniquely life of the world . this is a payoff , how many a new car cure for the children of old . how long was it that a scientist , that was a payoff .
an object that has been missed and classified
and we make a copy of him with this report . he will n't think that the governor was fundamentally in it , and they will not be able to make any alteration .
this is the message of me . i have been taught the life of the world to come , and i can produce the first thing . we can not make them pass into the air of this world , and do not think that we are able to make things clear . we do not make them pass into it , and do not be able to frustrate me .
and we make a place to go forth on a plate , and if they assisted him , it will be a king among them on a day of resurrection .
we have been one of the people of this world to come to believe in the matter of the world to come , and that we may make clear to you the message that is in the morning , and that the tradition of a spider 's end is of no more than a child . this is just a child in the end of the same . this is more decent for you .
and do not become weak ,
and to the one who is responsible for the stories of the focus of the quran : `` this is the focus of a magician , and no one of our voices is set in secret , ''
and we do not make the day to be born , and i am the one of the things that can be made to follow it , and be of the doubters . and i do not make a fool from among the people of this world , but it is the same to you , and to make it happier in the place of the world to come ; and we do not make a testament in it , but it is in the same way for the house of a spider ; and it is the same to
