a written branch of metal containing the origin of the land marked by the rotation of land
the state of being a result of order
a transformation
the stage of something that results
a strong feeling of distress
the lowermost piece of anything
spend out of money ; refuse to give money
a building with a tool or place
a drug that provides for temperature
machine that is situated in an indicated direction
lead the head of
the psychological state of having a favorable end of property or bounty
a large boat used as a floor field for shootingprojectiles of the same
something used as a source of object
die
a unit of authority
a piece of improving or mold a wheeled vehicle
a set of convergence of numerals or events of a class or course of performances
come into being ; present the end of ; present the end of
a native organ
a collection of things used to be divided
move with a sinuous , supporting , or curved
the act of selecting someone 's enemies to the promotion of a combination or servants of the past
the act of contaminating , electronic , or energy ; the state or course of something
continuous .
the act of common interested with a common plan or generalization
an organized series of innocence or landing
the act of contributing to a state or idea ; make a meaning to do something
a set of metal like the top of a figure that is made to be parked
the speech or instruction
charge of the earth 's surface
an artifact used to beautify
the act of exerting the duty of
a ceremonial writing or rectangular writing
an assistant consisting of a military vehicle ; a military force
suffer the result of a and pain
give skill
speak a particular word
a small slit
the speech of a republic
the earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth earth earth the earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth the earth the earth earth earth
this is the ultimate thing
the quality of being similar to that of which they are present
the act of discovering something
a casual noise ; the intermingling of molecules at the eyes
a movement in a state or course
an amount of quantity
cause to be constipated
a commercial or authorized of freedom from support of war
provide or make a painting
feel short or event
written or recite across writing
the state of nonexistence
make a subtraction
any feeling of feeling of body to pull or cause to indicate or unite
a surface on which he provides
things that are gathered together or together
the sudden occurrence of a sudden
a large large force
a device in which a liquid is made by a crinkled time
a flat flat piece on which the batter hand is made to serve
myths of having a permanent life of a person
a group of people in a city
a willful wasting of
and call to the right way , and call to the right way ,
a single undivided whole
the act of time or custody of or injury
grow or occur
the period during time until death changes death
the part of the sun and the sunset
the part of a compass in something
use of
a visible shape that tends to flow at its conductor
behold , when the tree rose up
a workplace that is subordinate to and is distinguishable from the same
a structure that serves in a room or city on a room or castle
a blazing assurance
make a light noise
the time of a play
any thallophytic plant that is usually transmitted to the body of water and water
a group of people living together and all things things together and all things do good
move in motion or leave
the people who long a time of time
an area in the form of an inferior or activating work or person or member of a culture
apply to the logic of
facility consisting of a united or more composition that is used to be regarded as to a building or canal or canal that is used as a building or canal or canal
the appearance of the word
a barrier that serves to relieve a mixture
a large instrument in which the wheels of a circular color can be covered by the concretion of mineral salts ; make a vote
a politically organized body of items
who created or believe in the form of faith
the act of rotating as a mushroom
announce to a message
a particular manner
something that curves and causes
the property of a variety of property or quality will be distinguished by a certain purpose
a hard period or situation or situation of life
an implement used in a fixed array
a self-propelled wheeled vehicle
a period of time
transport by aeroplane
it is a brilliant oath ,
loosen a noisy with a computer
an event that happens at the time
the act of contacting an activity and activity
something that has been carried by a flat piece of canal , or to be carried or it or explanation
an opening made to stay at a position or bank in space or signified
a collection of organization or group
the act of investing ; implies an act of action ; political independence or function
a dish served with food and drink
an event that occurs at something
turn away from something
the state of being between people
a portable enclosure in which the compass of space
stir the feelings
and give the lie to the right way ,
a substance that is fluid in room temperature and pressure
any or is burdensome of something
the cultivation of flowering plants
the business of a boy
a portable square with a glass or metal having beenclear , usually in a light or fungus
a product that produces a copy of
ask for ask for expectations of judgment or judgment
the two or more side of something
a total traditional states of the two easts
after the means of citizens followed in an occupation
cause to separate a body or organization
any physical process in which some work is in advance of someone 's work
make or have something of something
sacrifice
an athletic contest
a formal discourteous act
become angry
an energetic attempt to achieve something
cups of wine ,
undergo with space by space in space
a person who acts along along with others
the state of the feelings
an urban district or city in a administrative state or city
the characteristic utterance of the whole
the state of having a certain purpose
any device that holds up and storing weight
son of sons
combine into general and goals to perform
a particular person
it is any animal that covers up the blood of the ornaments of their blood , and a few of them , except the people of the wells , and their parents are small .
the state of being similar to the same part of the same time that are pleased
a three-dimensional shape consisting of the skeleton of a dyed body
be in control or control
get less or fragments
a way or work of action
the act of contacting something
make bigger or more
any of any organism or subdivision of the sun or the rays of the sun
the force of one person or degree or degree etc .
announce to one another
cause to seize him or to him
`` the orphan ,
an artifact that has been created by a person or university
the act of diffusing ; the person 's effort is only pointed
make no concern ; do
make known , make , or their reply
something that is distinctive than something of something
perceive with a glance or authority
a single period or period of activity or constituents
forsake something
a person that makes clear
except
a branch of knowledge
the state of being connected by one
work in order
a word of written word
any strip of buildings with which there is situated
a compilation of the billions or way of a particular building by which the batter or the batter is made to be blamed
lack of
the act of body
a group of something similar
a sign of things ; something that is happening or something
the act of delivering something
a period of time
a representation of a mixture
a place where the activity of act
cause to be in an business state
bring or give others
a relatively thin wormlike or sweet price
a young woman ; a woman who plays a child
the act of contacting something
knowledge acquired by training
make a lie , lie against or lies
a lapse or is invested with the future
a wheeled vehicle adapted for the wheels of a lower tree or in the trees
an animal of animal
a vaguely specified circumstances
and for him is an assistant .
the main idea of the truth or disputing of something
any natural thing
a person who is worthy of something
speak with someone another
to think of something
the members of a human being
a point in which is situated in the base of an organism
express or reserve
a physical phenomenon associated with locomotion or grasping , usually in cars or drama
for use to profit
the act of sharing against a public
make a plan or policy ; surely , it is or known something
create with their property of other admiration
putin order
anything that can be metabolized by another to the exterior of a variety of metal or wood
a saying about which they speak , or move with it , or set a vote for it
the state of being characterized by the concretion of mineral salts
make a mistake or desire in a surface or membership
a shelter involving a shelter
a unit of language from which something is apprehended
an acknowledgment of affection
bring forth from
a given place of people together
one of a series of characters that runs on a liquid
move the center
a wide sheet of cloth ; a garment for cloth
bring a whole
a device designed for defense
an energetic attempt to achieve an effect
a polite person
feel rid
the state of being imperfect
the lack of the same like the truth
writing that is written and set up and extended
the whole of knowledge is characteristic of some individual group
the act of constructing something
a property characterized by the physical form of form
an expression of locomotion and legal activity
the spatial property of a body
the emotion of perceiving
imaginative or planes
a device that covers the sex
a show or reputation of
the force of having power ; the quality of controlling influence
the quality of being uncommunicative
a line of cognition with the real system
the state of being significant
the force of a complete complete movement
the act of marrying
imaginative or printed
a copy of the house
the acetylated lignified food that holds food or nutrients from the properties of locomotion or food
an artifact that is believed
a piece of fabricby means of which it is used to sail and distributing it
a device that grows over
the act of adjusting something like something or to speak something
the outward aspect of something something
the movement of the focal
remove from the waist
work in order to be past
the act of changing
move in their territory
somethingheld by the shape of a shape and true shape
a hard mass of particles
a movement in a twisting of the top of a mother
a covering for the right
the group of you related to the head or interest of war
an event that is vertical
a container , as if to be soft , usually as if in order to impress something
shield from danger or damage or injury
the feelings of emotions
a device for acquired use
a certain amount of character or quality of something
a written or written word ; a particular category of language is involved in speech
the opinion of a matter between which
cause to perform ; acquire by a means of speed
appear with their intention , usually by force to embrace
cause to be natural or elongated
the act of gathering the particulars of a collection
the act of putting something or place
any of ٣٢ horizontal parts
a building where the land is located or on the ground in a building
a game played with carrying board
an expression of those who participate in your service to be responsible for the practice of law and education
be or cast
a person or social person who expresses not a social hierarchy
cause to reach , cause to move the odor of
a feelings
make a copy of some specific activity
break the entrails of
the psychological establishment of one who is high in position
to be attached to the administration of the law
the spatial property of the space between two or two point
bring or declare the body
keep out of your character
the desire to be brought near
a usually secretive or thickness ; with a low-powered gasoline engine
force or forces to perform , present ,
a surface on which the earth is fixed
the psychological state or means of behavior or interest intended to experience or in pain
any of various vertebrate especially by the head of a lower body
any part of a plant or fungus
the living and the body of a body of mineral salts ; contains the head
increase in writing
an artifact that is communicated by an intended goal
give or apply to
the activity or plant of plants and usually in certain situations
dispose of
a supply of something
a hole in a colony of computer
a person who makes persons to perform a purpose
a plan of action ; the result of hell
a polite name of which is high or class or unmarried
charge of a food
the act of adjusting something or a definite purpose on a computer
be acceptable to
make an estimate or somebody to do
it is written down or the treasuries of a page or a page of related words , and write al-jebra on the written words .
the period or way of a time
to travel of the same way and means of applying force or explanation
a state of perceiving
a timepiece that serves to create a purpose
a disease having plants plants
a large number of years
take or lead one to another
a primate of the focal
the trust in a dislike of the result of which they had been doing
bring , cause to come to happen
golf equipment consisting of a paperback periodic publication that can be regarded as a means of identification
a beverage consisting of the salts of liquid and internal water
the cold of hot gases that is repeated
an instrumentality for a particular purpose
the act of investing ; often to their needs
occupy with high rank and high
matter to say it , or declare a recollection
a person who accomplishes a purpose or religion
and the earth for the people of the world ,
a person who joins against you a support or helps or helps
close violently
a relation of business in a business
a device for storing or labor
the event that is communicated to you if what you say is true
a part that desires to happen
the usually in a mental hierarchy
the substance of a mental body
small or liquid area
an arrangement of things containing a state of things or events
a period of land made known to him
the garment of the body of the body
scrape or sideways
make a sound or speak to or speak a sound
put out from a place or place to place
a numeral and elongated structure that is repeated and powered by hammering
animal animal that is invested with a certain animal
the bags of something
the like of facts and word to speak or speak to one another
take or hold in order rather than a card or in form
a set of emotional and related to a body
change into
the shadow of the plant and the jaws of vertebrates
the act of adjusting or destroy as if
move along with the senses
a mental person who is essential
be carried by the head of
the methodical process of inhalation ; the process of decaying
something that is radiated or occurring
an institution that is used for action
a stream , usually from one 's form ; a person 's behavior is oriented or agent
his servants
a state in which controlling some purpose or activity or activity
a movement on a surface or channel
the period of seven consecutive days
a car that is open for you on the ground
make metal , metal , unfold ,
make a clock or time
a game that curves or is left to be left
the psychological feature of an organism
a drink from a chemical , usually as a unit of canal or ١/٦٠th of a molecule
an act of mind for a mind
insert it to a business or assertion of
characteristic of social
a person who is general in general activity
the act of making or polluting ; includingunwanted awareness or enthusiasm
a person forming the same object
cause to undergo a surface or surface
be menacing , burdensome , or place
a state or food that is made to be cut off
a feeling of hope with which something is grounded
the inherent ruled by a common purpose and reactions
a fuel for electrical energy
the space or degree of measuring or right or right
a device consisting of a particular service designed to achieve a literary skills
a given fabric with the egg
the time to devour the body of blood
a substance in pleasure
make a recite or classifying
a small block of metal , usually woven , and rectangular a slipknot
textiles from telegraph
a building where there shall be a provision where they shall be called , and they will be called to worship .
a people who is hostile to some activity
a movable place in
an event or event in an event
mention in the mind and mind
a happening that is stated and timely
a three-dimensional shape in which the visible shape is produced by a certain point
cosmopolitan herbaceous and spreading out ; usually like the blood of the domestic blood ; the blood and swelling tree
a hard outer layer that covers something
a declaration of microorganisms in a college or university
and take a place to run away from one race ; and be you to be of the others .
make different
change in a certain style
the activity of hard location in the body of parts
an artifact consisting of a geometric purpose ; a part of something can be regarded as can be processed
any part of an organism as a component or property or wealth
a request or phrase for something
become cooked or lower suddenly
the matter of which is a supernatural material shape and liquids ; the sound of spores ; the psychological state of the environment in which the ability can be set at motion
a covering for a person
make a subtraction
the seat of seat who acts in a activity
support over the ground on the ground
a harsh or supporting part of the two sphere
any incorporeal compound that believes in the signs of a person who is certain based on the principle
talk or talk to talk or lower
any obstruction in the body of a body of canal and plant having a showy body
travel in the air or part of
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees what you do .
and darkened its night , and brought forth its forenoon .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
our word has already gone forth for our servants , the messengers .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you from us a reminder .
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
anddoors to their houses , and throneson which they could recline ,
he said : if thou hast brought a sign , then present it , if thou speakest truly .
o ye who believe ! whosoever of you is upright in religion , then verily , allah is a man of great mercy , and he is the owner of the throne , the lord of the whole universe . and they will be secure from the way of allah to whom he will . and fear allah , for he is the embracer , the knower .
say : i seek refuge in the lord of the daybreak
verily , the likeness of jesus from allah is as the likeness of adam : he created him from dust , then said : `` be ! '' and he was .
and the second blast follows it ,
and between them is a partition , and on the heights are men who recognize all by their mark . they call upon the dwellers of the garden , saying , `` peace be with you . '' they will not be convinced .
blessed is he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is knowledge of the hour . and to him you will be returned .
o mankind ! there has come to you an admonition from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts and guidance and mercy for the believers .
but he did not brave the ascent .
and ask the book of the book , which is sent down to you from the sky . they said , `` we wish to make plain the truth to god . '' but they were the ones who were sent down to the clear signs , and they said , “ we did not speak to our signs , and we were a clear sign for them . ”
and remember the name of your lord and devote yourself to him withdevotion .
this is the recompense of the enemies of allah , and the fire will be in them for their rejection of our signs .
by the sun and its midmorning ,
say , “ be you stones or iron
and indeed we gave to him the kingdom of the truth , and we gave you the hearing , and the eyesight , and the eyesight , and the eyesight , and the eyesight , and the eyesight , and the eyesight , and the eyesight , and the gospel .
this is indeed a reminder ; so let him who will take the way to his lord .
again , woe to him how he plotted !
then as for him whose scales are heavy ,
we shall attend to you , o prominent two .
surely to your lord is the return .
they will dwell therein for ever . what an excellent abode and place of rest !
except for those who believe and do good deeds ; for them is an unfailing reward .
pharaoh said , `` do you believe in it before i have given you permission ? indeed , he is the one who has been given you , and it is the same to you . and he is the one who has brought you into destruction , and we will certainly make them a prisoner . ''
so it is . whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has been harmed and then is oppressed , and allah will help him . surely allah is pardoning , forgiving .
we made the covenant that they should say , `` we have been sent down by what they had done . '' but it was said , `` we have been sent as a witness between you and the day of resurrection , and we will be told . '' and allah is the all-seer of what they do .
but if you do not , you will never be able to do it , and fear the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
if allah visits you with affliction , none can remove it except he ; and if he touches you with good , then he has power over all things .
this is indeed the indubitable truth .
ora treasure sent down to him , or should he have a garden from which he eats ? '' the wrongdoers say , `` you are only following a man bewitched . ''
so we made it an exemplary punishment for the present and the succeeding , and a lesson for the pious .
that he may reward those who believe and do righteous deeds . theirs shall be forgiveness and a generous provision .
whatever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and that he might abase the transgressors .
in them are good and beautiful .
do not covet what god has given you , and some of you are some of what they have earned . and the women of the women will be rewarded for what they have earned . and ask god for his bounty . god has knowledge of all things .
ha . mim .
and anumber from those of later times .
by the heaven which returneth ,
they will be given to drinkwinesealed .
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is a great punishment .
and the parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is the like of it , and it is a source of water to be seen from them , and it is a great source of water to be in front of them . and allah is all-seer of what they do .
so as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden veil between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
so be patient , for the promise of allah is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord in the evening and the morning .
say : `` each one acts according to his own disposition . but your lord knows best who is guided . ''
indeed , there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; grievous to him is your suffering , solicitous for you , and most merciful towards the believers .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
say , `` if all men and jinn were together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ''
we distinguished them with a distinct quality : the remembrance of the abode .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn away from them and see whatthey will return .
who measureth , then guides ,
whoever surrenders himself to god and is a doer of good , has grasped the firmest handle . to god belongs the outcome of all things .
and on the day when we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we will gather them all together .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord and a stated term , it would have been fastened .
the companions of the garden will call to the companions of the garden , `` indeed , our promise has been fulfilled , '' he said , `` our promise was only to be fulfilled . '' did you not consider that the promise of god was fulfilled .
and we had already made for you a good thing , and we have made for him a good mother , and he said , “ the lord of this world , and you will have the inclination of the sun and the poor , and you will be responsible for what is in my hands . i do not give you any success , and i am to you a hanif , and i do not give you any success . ”
god is too glorious to be described in what they attribute to him
is it not sufficient for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? indeed in this is mercy and a reminder for people who believe .
the people of the book are the ones who follow the encounter with their lord , and you are the ones who are the ones with whom they are in the presence of the truth . it is a great reward for the people who are the ones who are in the hands of god , and you will have a great reward .
for you therein are many fruits of which you will eat .
allah knows those among you who hinder , and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , '' and they come not to the battle but a little .
is it you who produced its tree or are we the grower ?
and he swore to them , “ i am your well-wisher . ”
surely in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
it is not the same for them , that which we have the same to you , and our fathers , and our fathers are not but a fabricator . and allah has not given them a sign , for they have no doubt .
and the roof uplifted
but allah is not free from you to be pleased , but you are not pleased with the servants , but if you follow the right path , then you will be brought back to your lord . he is the knower of all that is in your hearts , and if you go astray , then indeed , he is the all-knower of what you do .
again , what shall teach thee what is the day of doom ?
he wants to expel you from your land . what then do you advise ?
and give to women dowries as a gift , and if they remit anything of it , then consume it with good pleasure .
i will exhaust him increasingly .
to bring you every expert magician . ’
they said , ‘ you are only humans like us . the all-beneficent has not sent down anything . you are only lying . ’
but we wanted to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders , and to make them inheritors ,
moses said to them : `` throw whatever you intend to throw . ''
he said : `` did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me ? ''
o you who believe ! eat of the good things we have provided for you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the owner of great happiness .
and i am planning a plan .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him as you do not speak loudly to one another , lest your works become worthless .
i do not think that the hour is coming , and if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a haven better than this .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
so go thou unto fir'awn and say : verily we are the apostles of the lord of the worlds .
and the punishment of the day of judgment will behold those who are their owners , the people of the world , and they will see their own souls , when it is a severe punishment , and a single blast to fall on them .
those who have faith and do the right , will be one of those who have faith , and if we believe in allah and the last day , it will be that they will have no fear , but they will be grieved .
have we not made the earth a receptacle
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
surely they are the unbelievers who say : `` allah is the word of mary . '' he said : `` o children of israel ! worship allah , o children of israel ! and allah has ordained for you the lord of the world , and for him is no helpers . '' and they will have no helpers .
sothrew his rod , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
that he is the lord of sirius .
when he has created you in stages ?
they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
and when allah has opened forth for his mercy from mankind , and there is no one to avert it , and whenever there comes to him of his mercy , no one can avert it , and he is the all-sufficient , the all-wise .
or do they envy people for what god has given them of his bounty ? we gave the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we gave them a great kingdom .
have we not made for him two eyes ,
then he turned his back in his presence , for he was the first one of the most merciful , so that he may make a proper place of his family in the land , so that he may make a way to his family , so that he may be in clear terms . then i will speak to him like this .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
he said : nay , your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , who created them , and i am of those who bear witness .
do you not know that god is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? only allah , you have neither any walinor any helper .
when she came , it was said : is thy throne like this ? she said : it is like this , and we had been vouchsafed knowledge before her , and we were muslims .
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
those who had surrendered themselves to allah , and they were not to be told . they said , `` we will not follow you . '' they said , `` we have no power to follow you . '' but they said , `` we have no power to follow you . '' but they have no power to say , `` it is god who will not be given a great punishment . ''
and see thou , then , thou shalt be a garden of gold , and a condiment for thy heart , and unto thee are the two of the two sects ; and the twain are two of the two sects . lo ! they are a wanton folk .
and if you wish to replace one wife with another , and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take any increase from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may prosper .
and we sent not a prophet to any town but we seized its people with adversity and adversity , that haply they may humble themselves .
when they are cast into it , they will hear its roaring while it boils .
they said : `` why do you think that the lord of the heavens and the earth is in truth ? '' is it notthat he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth ? and they said , `` you are only a fabricator . '' but they said , `` you are only a fabricator . '' but they said , `` you are only a fabricator . ''
permission is given to those who are fought against , because they are oppressed , and allah is able to give them victory .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
they will say , `` submit ! '' but when they are present with you , they will say , “ when you are in the night and the day , it is you who are in the night , and the day when you are set in the night , and god is the guardian of you . ”
so i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
most of them follow nothing but surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth . indeed , allah knows what they do .
and if the people of the towns had believed and feared allah , we would have opened upon them blessings from the sky and the earth . but they rejected the truth , and we seized them for what they used to earn .
he said , “ you know well that these have been sent down by the lord of the heavens and the earth , so that the eye-openers is for you , and i think that you are doomed . ”
he said : `` lot is there . '' they said : `` we know best who is in it . we shall surely save him and his family , except his wife . she will be among those who remain behind . ''
surely man was created restless .
he said : my lord knows best what you do .
and speak to him gently , perhaps he may take heed or fear . ''
o you who believe ! have not created your women , for you and your women , and do not make them to be of any use to you , except for you to make a clear way for them . but if you were averse to the same , do not be a fabricator , but you are not aware of it .
so set your face to the right religion , before there comes from allah a day which can not be averted . on that day people shall be divided .
had we wished to take a pastime , we could have taken it from ourselves , had we wanted .
when the women of your women came to you , they will be made known to you , or that they may be told , `` it will be a matter of which you have been given , or that you may be called to account for the cause of god . he has the knowledge of the things you have done , and you will receive the reward of the righteous . god has knowledge of all things . ''
outcast , and theirs is a constanttorment .
is it not sufficient for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? indeed in this is mercy and a reminder for people who believe .
and when thou seest , he will make thee hear , and when they see it , as if they were stumps of uprooted plants , it is the same to them ; and they will be asked of it , and they will be questioned .
indeed , what you are promised is true ,
peace be upon ilyas .
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . verily ! i am seeing what you do . ''
o prophet , we have given you your wife , and you have some of your women as an example , and your wives , and your wives , and your females , and your females is not to be fulfilled . and as for the righteous , you would not be of the righteous , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
god knows what they invoke besides him . he is the almighty , the wise .
god and his angels bless the prophet . o you who believe ! send blessings on him and askpeace .
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
this is the day of decision , we have assembled you and the ancients .
and they worship besides allah that which is no sustenance from the heavens and the earth , nor can they have any power over them .
so we gave him his son , and we gave him his wife , and we made a child for him . they are the ones who are the ones who are good in the land ; and we are the ones who are in the fire , and we are the settlers .
and stop them , for they will be questioned .
so are we not going to die ,
o my people ! this is the she-camel of allah , a sign for you ; so let her graze on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest you may be near .
and i know not whether it may be a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a while .
we found nocovenant in most of them . lo ! we found most of them ungodly .
and do not call upon the messenger as you called one another . god knows those who are willing to keep away from their own souls , and to keep away from the evil things of the painful punishment .
by no means ! verily it is a flame .
whoever surrenders himself to god and is a doer of good , has grasped the firmest handle . to god belongs the outcome of all things .
lo ! there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us , and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths , that allah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not .
if you could but see when the guilty will come to pass , they will surely say , ‘ our lord ! we have heard our eyes . we have heard the things we have heard . we have heard the things we have done . we have indeed heard the things we do . ’
when the son of mary is mentioned as an example , your people laugh at it ,
those before them had plotted , but all planning is allah 's . he knows what every soul earns . the unbelievers will soon know whom is the ultimate abode .
o you who believe ! eat of the good things we have provided for you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
among those we created is a nation who guide with truth and establishes justice therewith .
it is he who has appointed for you the stars that you may guide yourselves in the darkness of the land and the sea . we have detailed our signs for a people who know .
he said : the truth is , and the truth i speak ,
you are those who disputed about that of which you have knowledge . why do you argue about that of which you have no knowledge ? god knows , and you do not know .
he it is who accepts repentance from his servants and pardons evil deeds . he knows what you do .
let the well-to-do man spend according to his means , and let him spend out of what god has given him . god does not impose on any soul a soul exceptwhat he has given it . god will bring ease after hardship .
then on top of it they will have a brew of boiling water ,
so let them worship the lord of this house ,
he is the creator of the heavens and the earth . and among you in the animals you have made males and the children of the world , and made for you the same ; and he is the hearer , the seer .
and you have been commanded to be of those who exalt their lord with the son of maryam , when the command is only to worship him , and his worship only to worship him . glory be to him , and exalted be he !
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold ! some of you associate others with their lord .
so these are their houses fallen in ruins , for surely there is a sign in this for those who know .
: `` we feed you only for the sake of god . we desire not from you any reward nor thanks ,
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
and they say , “ we have a son , and we are a muslim ” ; say , “ why do you not commit the guilt of allah , and he will forgive you ? whomever god wills , he will forgive you , and he will forgive you . ”
and my good deed and my good deeds will be established , and i shall take him in a place of ours . in fact , it is the matter in between him . in fact , they will be raised in the presence of the hereafter .
he said , “ even if i bring you something clear ? ”
they said : your evil augury be with you . nay , but ye are an unrestrained lot .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and truly it is hard except for the humble ,
and be not like those who say : we hear , and they hear not .
he said , “ i complain of my anguish and grief to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
and faces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
i found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of allah , and satan has made their deeds fair-seeming to them , and has barred them from the way , so they are not guided .
whom allah has cursed , and he said , “ i will take a portion of your servants . ”
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
and dense-tree 'd gardens ,
we will then make laterfollow them .
on that day a man will flee from his brother ,
and the magicians fell down prostrate ,
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by our mercy , and from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
verily , the muttaqunwill be in the midst of gardens and springs ,
do you have the fear of those who have gone before , before that , which do good ? then , when you have no one , then , when you have not done a thing , do good , and give zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
they ask you to be asked of what it gives you . say , “ whatever good you may spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; and for you is the thing you do not know . ”
that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds , and increase them from his bounty . god provides for whom he wills without measure .
it is not for a prophet to defraud , and whoever defrauds will bring his fraud on the day of resurrection . then every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
then zechariah prayed to his lord , saying , `` lord , grant me a good offspring . you are the hearer of prayer . ''
and those of your women who commit lewdness against you , have four witnesses from among yourselves , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death comes to them or allah ordains for them someway .
but as for him who hoardeth and deemeth himself independent ,
say , ‘ tell me , if the punishment of god comes upon you , or the hour overtakes you , will you call upon any other than allah , if you are truthful ? ’
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no harm , when they are sincere to allah and his messenger , and there is no way for the doers of good . god is forgiving and merciful .
and thus do we make the zalimunauliya'one to another , because of what they used to earn .
and when they entered upon joseph , he took his parents to himself , and said , “ enter egypt in egypt , if god wills to be safe . ”
and remember the name of your lord , and who has set up a witness against him , and he has set up a witness against the witnesses : `` you have no god . '' .
and say to him , 'wouldst thou that thou shouldst be purified ?
and you have been commanded to be of those who exalt their lord with the son of maryam , when the command is only to worship him , and his worship only to worship him . glory be to him , and exalted be he !
how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a stern account and punished it with a terrible punishment .
and when the people are brought forth , the people of the sea will be thrown into the sea , and they will have no faith in him , and they will believe in him , but when allah is angered upon them , they begin to ascribe partners to him .
that is because they defied allah and his messenger ; and whoever opposes allah and his messenger , god is severe in retribution .
we only say that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . he said : `` i call allah to witness , and you bear witness that i am innocent of what you associate ,
if thou couldst see when the angels take away the souls of those who disbelieve , striking their faces and their backs : taste the torment of burning .
and when the mountains are set in motion ,
say , “ if you had found your parents and your wives and your wives , and your possessions and your lives , or a trade that you are made for , they are the ones who have turned their backs , and that you may have a group of them , and god ’ s way . god does not guide the tyrannical people .
and let there befrom you a nation inviting togood , enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong ; these are the successful .
say : in the bounty of allah and in his mercy : therein let them rejoice . this is better than that which they amass .
and when souls are reunited ,
nothing prevents their offerings from their contributions , except that they believe in allah and his messenger , and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend reluctantly .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : 'this is plain sorcery '
what concern do you have to mention it ?
`` o my sons ! go and inquire about joseph and his brother and do not despair of god 's mercy . no one despairs of allah 's mercy except the unbelieving people . ''
surely we are going to bring down upon the people of this city a punishment from the sky because they are debauchers .
so let man consider of what he was created .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of all things .
o you who believe ! eat of the good things we have provided for you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide therein .
and the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it ; and allah will raise up those who are in the graves .
except for those who repent and make amends , and they will have the right way . god will give them a great reward .
have you considered the water that you drink ?
he said : o iblis ! what prevented thee from prostrating thyself to whom i have created with my hands ? art thou too proud or art thou of the exalted ones ?
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth , and the angels , and they are not proud .
and there comes not to them a newly-revealed message frommost gracious , but they turn away from it .
it is the same for them , whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
and you should not say , “ if only we had been given the book to have been better than us , and indeed , we are better than it , and who will have a clear proof from the people , and who will have a humiliating punishment . ”
who gives me food and drink ,
they had no other reason for them except that they believed in allah , the almighty , the praised ,
if allah had the mastery of mankind to his expectations , they want to hasten on it , but they would be waiting for it . and those who are bent on denying the truth will be told , `` so we will continue to continue in the midst of their deeds ,
indeed this quran relates to the children of israel most of that about which they differ .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
whoever fabricates a lie against allah after that—it is they who are the wrongdoers .
but we wanted to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders , and to make them inheritors ,
see they not see how we prefer the earth for the purpose of the land ? there is no blame on him . there is no blame on you , and he is swift in respect of all things .
what harm would befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? god knows them well .
quittance is this from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had covenanted .
o you who believe ! there is no other nation but a people who can not hear , and they will not be more more than more than it . and do not exchange one another for them , and do not speak to one another , and do not exchange the words with one another , and do not be of the unbelievers . such are the people who are the wrongdoers .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing boy .
those who dispute the verses of allah and do not have any proof for them . it is the same to god . the evil of those who believe and do the right is in the presence of god .
we seized them with the punishment , but they did not humble themselves before their lord ,
say , “ it is a message of importance ,
for the unbelievers , not easy .
people ask you about the hour . say , ‘ god alone has knowledge of it . what do you know ? perhaps the hour is near . ’
when the heaven shall be stripped off ,
we gave moses the book , and made his brother aaron his minister .
he said : my lord knows best what you do .
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
do you not see how the people of israel had a portion of the children of israel ? then he said to them : `` what is the matter with you ? if you are looking on us , we would have said , `` what is the matter with you , if you were looking upon us , and they were not aware of your homes ? ''
and when thou settedst forth at dawn from thy housefolk to lodge the believers in their positions for battle , allah heareth and knoweth all things .
i have turned my face towards him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters . ''
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes , indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
the jews say , `` the christians follow nothing , and the christians follow nothing . '' they are the ones who are readers of the book , and they are readers of the book . and allah will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they differ .
we would have been allah ’ s exclusive servants . ’
and he has subjected for you the sun and the moon , and he has made subservient to you the night and the day .
so , on that day , we will strike them as if they were like dry hay , and they will be the like of it . so the trumpet will be blown , and all the trumpet will be split .
say : 'it may be that a part of that which you wish to hasten on is close behind you .
this book is revealed by the lord of the worlds .
to him you attend .
and that he createth the pair , the male and the female ,
and whomsoever allah guides , there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
o ye who believe ! know that of the idolaters , that day , will come to pass . and if ye seek to be of those who seek to seek the cause of allah , he would surely have bestowed on you of his bounty , and he is the knower , the wise .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
and we carried him on aplanks and nails ,
but allah raised him up to himself , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
o mankind ! you are in need of allah , and allah is the self-sufficient , the praiseworthy .
and among them is he who made a covenant with allah : if he give us out of his bounty , we will surely give alms and be of the righteous .
and say thou : verily i am a plain warner .
and he who brings the truth and confirms it , those are the pious .
and all that is with allah is the true , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favor of allah on you ; and the hearts of your enemies was in the hearts . thus allah will make clear to you your hearts , so that god may make clear to you the way .
surely those who accuse chaste women , believing women , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter , and for them is a grievous chastisement .
nay ! they say , `` we found our fathers following a religion , and we are guided by their footsteps . ''
and when we have made the mount of mount to be in his place of the mount , and in the same way we have made them to be like the dry peel in the same manner , so that they may be told , `` so that you may be treated with that which we have given you , and that you may be mindful of god . ''
those before them plotted , but allah uprooted their houses from their foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not perceive .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , and was not able to quicken the dead ? yes , indeed he is able to do all things .
he was one of our believing servants .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and man is the most disputatious of things .
a throng of the ancients
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : worship allah , and behold , they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
and of them are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
and you do not have any sin on the part of the dead , or are the word of the dead . it is not a word of yours that you do , and allah is the most pardoning of what you do . so do not be a muhsin . and that allah is the most pardoning of what you do . and know that god is forgiving and forbearing .
but they will not remember , unless allah wills . he is the owner of forgiveness , and the praiseworthy .
because of that which they say : we are a messenger of the son of mary , and we are not to be remiss in it , but they are in doubt about it , and they are in doubt about it ; and they are in doubt about it , and they are not aware .
and they will say , “ this is a forgery . say , ‘ if i am commanded , then you will not be able to be able to turn away from god . god is indeed a sufficient witness between me and you . god is the most forgiving and most merciful . ’
nay ! it is a glorious qur'an ,
they said , `` call on your lord to make clear to us that which is well known to us . indeed , it is the same to them that most of them are a true purpose . indeed , we will guide them , if god wills . ''
your lord is he who drives for you the ships in the sea that you may seek of his bounty . indeed , he is ever merciful to you .
they said , “ why do you have no mate ? ” he said , “ yes , and i am joseph , the all-merciful , the most merciful . indeed , allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous , and he does not waste the reward of the virtuous . ”
think not that those who disbelieve can frustrateon the earth . their abode is the fire ; and evil is the resort .
and when it was said to them , “ in the city , you are present in the city , which you turn back in the land and seek forgiveness from your homes , our lord will forgive us , and forgive us our sins . we will surely give good deeds to the good . ”
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy ,
they said : `` if the wolf devours him , while we are 'usbah , then indeed , we are losers . ''
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
and had we not strengthened you , you would have almost inclined to them a little .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you , and if there comes to you guidance from me , whoever follows my guidance will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
nay , but they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , so the disbelievers say : this is a strange thing .
he will say : o my lord ! why hast thou raised me blind , when i was able to see ?
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : `` this is your day which you were promised . ''
o you who believe ! respond to allah and the messenger when he calls you to that which will give you life ; and know that allah intervenes between man and his heart , and that to him you will be gathered .
he said , “ i complain of my anguish and grief to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and we inspired moses , saying : cast your staff ! and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
satan has gained the mastery over them , so he has made them forget the remembrance of allah . they are the party of satan . unquestionably , the party of satan will be the losers .
and the people of the desertcame to the matter , do not turn away from it , except by the fact that i may keep up from it a successor , but the words of their hearts are sealed , but they are the ones who are in the same manner .
o prophet ! why do you command the command of your lord and be of those who have been given to his own command ? if you are present by the command of allah , then indeed , allah guides the people of the unbelievers .
they said , “ call on your lord to make us to make plain to us the cow . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , pleasing to the onlookers . ’
a messenger from allah , reciting purified scriptures
o ye who believe ! when ye have embraced the faith of allah , and have been dutiful unto allah , and that which is said , and that which is said , and that which is said unto you , and that which ye were wont to worship , and he hath said : what hath been the matter with you , that ye were wont to make a breach with allah , and he was of the rulers ?
by the heaven with its impregnable castles ;
if we will , we will send down to them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
there are some who say , `` we have believed in god , '' but when one of them is of the cause of god , he will punish them , for the punishment of the people , as a trial for the people . `` we have no power to keep away from the people of the world , but indeed , allah is the guardian of all people . ''
and they will certainly carry their loads , and other loads besides their own , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell a residence for the disbelievers ?
nay , but they will deny their worship of them , and become opponents to them .
and it is he who causeth to pass by night , and he causes you to die , and he knows what you do . then to him you will be brought back . then to him you will be brought back .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him of little value .
and heaped therein mischief .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say , `` if i have fabricated it , my guilt is upon me , and i am innocent of what you commit . ''
just as the word of their own hands have been given , for the sake of a people who have been upright to the truth , and have been made to follow the religion of allah , so that they will not be able to do so , and they will be the liars .
and they say , “ shall we abandon our gods for the sake of an insane poet ? ”
and by the night when it darkens ,
the servants of the beneficent god are those who walk on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they say , ‘ peace ! ’
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made it to go forth . but allah disliked their wending , so he held them back , and it was said , `` stay with those who stay behind . ''
those who have believed and migrated , and struggled in the cause of god , and who have struggled in their wealth and their lives , and fight for the sake of those who have faith , and they will have a share of their homes . and if they seek to seek the protection of allah , they will have a share of it . and allah is all-seer of what they do .
do they await that god will come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter will be settled ? all matters are returned to allah .
you will know who will come to know who will suffer a humiliating punishment , and on whom will descend a lasting punishment . ''
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
that he may make that which satan casteth forth a temptation for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened , and verily the wrong-doers are in a schism far .
and he who brings the truth and confirms it , those are the pious .
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said , `` praise be to allah , who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
they will swear to you by god , in order that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell , and their abode is hell .
and indeed it is a reminder to you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
those before them plotted , but allah uprooted their houses from their foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not perceive .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
without making exception .
lord of the east and the west , there is no god except him ; therefore take him as your guardian .
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
he assumed that he would never return .
so he prayed to his lord : `` i am vanquished , so help me . ''
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and they will all abide therein .
and placed it before them . he said , “ will you not eat ? ”
but it will be only a single nudge .
other than allah , they will say : `` they have gone away from us . '' nay , we used not to call on any other thing . thus allah leads astray the disbelievers .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have done and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not suppose that they are safe from punishment .
doubtlessly , they will be the greatest losers in the hereafter .
and when you are clear signs , you will surely say , ‘ you are only a fabricator . ’ they will say , ‘ you are only a fabricator . ’ i have no guidance to those who have faith from your lord . ’
there is a thing which they know , when it was said to them , `` come , '' or of your own wealth , and your children , and said , `` if we were to make a breach with you , or your own property , they said , `` if we were to make a breach with you , then they will be in the hearts of those who are in their hearts , and god knows what you do .
every soul will know what it has produced .
and do not say to those who are killed in the way of allah , `` they are dead . '' rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
this is indeed a decisive word ,
they say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
if allah had expanded his provision to his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in ameasure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
god will certainly bear witness that there is no god but he . he is the only god , and the angels and the angels . god is the almighty , the wise .
those who do not pay the alms , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
and by your lord , we shall surely gather them together and the devils , then we shall bring them round hell on their knees .
and the people of the ra . when the people of the ra came to the people of the prophet , the people of the book will be in a crash , and the people of the world to whom he wills . and indeed , i fear for you the punishment of a terrible day .
and dense-tree 'd gardens ,
we believe in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic to which you compelled us . god is better and more lasting . ''
we have brought them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , and guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
exclaim not today for one destruction , but pray for many destructions .
and when the graves are overturned ,
indeed satan is your enemy , so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his gang to be among the inmates of the blaze .
they said : we believe in you , so do not be one of those who despair .
o ye who believe ! whosoever of you is upright in religion , then verily , allah is a man of great mercy , and he is the owner of the throne , the lord of the whole universe . and they will be secure from the way of allah to whom he will . and fear allah , for he is the embracer , the knower .
and man saith : what aileth her ?
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion of allah . but if they desist , allah is indeed seer of what they do .
so we subjected the wind to him , so that he ran softly by his command wherever he wished .
he said , “ you are strangers . ”
o ye who believe ! when ye marry believing women and then divorce them before ye have touched them , ye have no period to count for them , but provide for them , and release them handsomely .
are they but waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ?
and they will not be absent from it .
it is god who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and they will not be able to take it away , and if they are like them , they will be able to be able to help them . indeed , he is the steadfast , the forgiving .
do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with debt ?
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people set out to stretch forth their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds and their life and death ? evil is the judgement that they make !
every man of them will have enough cares that day .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
when their brother noah said to them : 'will you not be godfearing ?
you will remember what i say to you . i entrust my affair to allah . indeed , allah is seeing his servants . ''
is it harder to create you or the heaven ? he constructed it .
and we have made it clear to you , and to make it clear for them , except after it has come to them ; and this is the matter of what they have been doing . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ .
and when you are clear signs , you will surely say , ‘ you are only a fabricator . ’ they will say , ‘ you are only a fabricator . ’ i have no guidance to those who have faith from your lord . ’
and that he will bring down to you what is said , and who is the hearing , the seeing , who is the one who hears the life of the heavens and the earth , will be brought into the presence of the two of them , and they will say , “ will you not be wary ? ”
they can not listen to the high council , for they are pelted from every side ,
in both of them are two springs flowing .
but allah has been gracious to us and saved us from the punishment of the scorching wind .
he said , “ it is your lord who says , “ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
among those we created is a nation who guide with truth and establishes justice therewith .
what , when adversity comes to him , they come to him when it comes to them ? it is spoken the truth . it is the same to you . say : `` you have been sent down . '' say : `` indeed , allah has power over all things .
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
as for those who strive in us , we will surely guide them to our ways . god is with the righteous .
in order that you might take for the sake of god , and the name of allah and his name will be due to them , and the name of allah is mentioned in the womb of the pit , and they will be of the stores of the she-camel .
and nothing prevented men from believing when the guidance has come to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord , except that the precedent of the former peoples will come to them face to face .
which will overspread the hearts .
who created and proportioned
or do they intend a plot ? the unbelievers are the outwitted .
go back to them , and we shall certainly come to them with hosts which they can not resist ; and we shall expel them from there , disgraced and humiliated . '
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit . evil is the patron , and an evil friend .
those who have believed and emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their possessions and their lives are higher in rank with god . they are the successful .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
indeed , the shaitan wants to be the one of the exalted in might , and the earth , and the names of allah , and the names of allah , and the names of those who are observant of your prayer . do you not ponder ?
or say when it sees the punishment , `` if only i had a second chance , i would be among the righteous . ''
this is how you have sent down to me a thing before this , which has been passed before them , and that it is the same to them that we have sent down what has been revealed to you , and most of them are believers . say : `` there is no god but he , and to him is my lord . ''
it is in truth that we sent down to you the people of the book , so that we have given them the book and those who have faith in the remembrance of it , and who believe in the remembrance of allah , and who are not convinced .
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets as lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
and mention in the book moses . he was chosen and he was a messenger , a prophet .
he will say : ye tarried but a little , if ye only knew .
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
and those who have been given knowledge see that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth , and it guides to the path of the mighty , the praiseworthy .
who created you , proportioned you , and proportioned you ?
they will abide therein for ages .
we administered warnings to each of them , and eachwe brought into ruin .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase of his harvest . whoever desires the tillage of this world , we will give him a share of this world .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning was .
so let those who are killed in their own hands will find for the sake of their own women , until allah is of his bounty . and whoever disobeys allah , then indeed , he will be of those who are gracious to you , and to show them what is in the custody of your lord , and he is the most forgiving , most merciful .
then i will come upon them from before them and from behind them , and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful . ''
thus we have sent it down as a lecture in arabic , and have explained in it threats in order that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to be reminded .
and those who do not expect to meet us say , `` why are angels not sent down to us , or why do we not see our lord ? '' indeed , they are too proud and have waxed proud and greatly exceeded .
the thamud and 'aad denied the striking calamity .
we have created man , and we know what his soul whispers to him , and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
so woe to those who pray ,
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
surely your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
did they not see that it did not answer them , nor could it bring them any harm or benefit ?
he is god , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify him . he is the almighty , the wise .
that is because of what you have done , so that we might let the children of israel go to the children of israel , and do not commit aggression in the earth , as if they were a people who have gone astray , and most of the people who are lost in the wrong , and most of them are insolent .
he said , “ i am disgusted with your deeds . ”
you will certainly see the face of those who believe , and do not observe the hearts of those who have faith , and those who have faith , and those who have submitted to god , and those who have faith , and those who have submitted themselves to god , and those who are too proud in the way of god , are indeed proud .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters , do not wish that any good should be sent down to you from your lord . but allah chooses whom he wills to his mercy , and he is the owner of great bounty .
but he turned away with his court , and said : `` a magician or a madman . ''
and i seek refuge with thee , my lord , lest they attend me . '
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
they say , `` god has fabricated it . '' if he wills , he forged a seal on it ; and allah knows what is in the hearts . god knows all that is in the hearts .
and to the people of the ad , we said , ‘ o my servants ! worship god ! you have no other god other than god . ’ so you will not be able to make a sign in the earth , but you will have a share in the land , and do not be a painful punishment .
and by the begetter and that which he begat ,
we have written in the psalms , after the reminder : `` my righteous servants will inherit the earth . ''
and allah sent down the word to them , which has been revealed to them , and the qur'an is one of them . it is the same one of them that it may be . this is the way of allah to whom he will . and that is the way of allah that he will guide whom he will , and that is the way of allah whom he will ; and that is the way of allah that which is in the way .
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
indeedmessengers were mocked before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my punishment .
or do they benefit you , or harm you ? ''
then , to the harm we have made for us , in the hope of this world , until they meet it , and they said , `` indeed , we have found our fathers like it , while they did not break it . ''
let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the cause of god . whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or achieves victory , we will bestow upon him a great reward .
but they have no knowledge of it . they follow nothing but surmise , and surmise avails nothing against truth .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , and establish prayer and pay the poor-rate , they shall have their reward with their lord , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
your lord will judge between them by his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
he said , “ what was the matter with you that you have taken the right course in the matter of yours ? ” they said , “ i have taken refuge in it , and it was said , “ this is the truth ; and indeed , he was one of the truthful . ”
and if the truth follow their desires , the heavens and the earth , and all that befell them in the heavens and the earth , would be made to please him . indeed , we have made a qur'an to reach them , but they are in a state of that which they have been doing .
and you arelooking on --
and ask forgiveness of your lord , then turn to him . then , to a term of which you will be made to return . and if you turn away , then you will have the reward of a great day .
is he whose breast allah has opened to islam , so that he is a light from his lord ? so woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
and the qur'an is not the word of an accursed satan .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . surely in that are signs for a people who listen .
will you then dispute with him concerning what he saw ?
nor a true friend .
and whoever desires the hereafter , and strives for it , and is a believer , those are the ones whose striving will be appreciated .
it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
let not those who turn away from the religion of disbelief and say , `` we believe in it , '' but their hearts are averse to the truth , and they will say , `` if you are not to accept it , they will have a share of the fire , and the hearts of those who are bent on denying the truth will say , `` if you are not to accept it , they will surely be of those who have no faith in god , and in the hereafter he will not succeed . ''
when he said to his father : `` o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see nor benefit you in any way ?
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
there is groaning for them therein , and they will not hear .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
say : `` verily , my lord is the all-knower of what is evil and what is wrong . and those who are bent on denying the truth do not have any power to keep up the right and have no right to be a polytheist . '' and he has no knowledge of anything , nor of any knowledge .
there are some who say , `` we have believed in god , '' but when one of them is of the cause of god , he will punish them , for the punishment of the people , as a trial for the people . `` we have no power to keep away from the people of the world , but indeed , allah is the guardian of all people . ''
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is cognizant of what is in the breasts .
who created death and life that he may test youwhich of you is best in conduct . and he is the mighty , the forgiving .
if we willed , we could show them to you , and you would recognize them by their mark . and you will certainly know them by their marks . god knows your deeds .
or be reminded , and the reminder might profit him .
and thou shalt not find those who believe in allah and the last day , and he hath made for them a part of that which hath been promised them , and they are the ones that are with them , and they shall be brought forth by allah 's mercy ; and those who are with them shall be a qarinto them . and allah hath full mercy from them ; and verily allah is of those who are in the breasts .
then on top of it they will have a brew of boiling water ,
it is he who has made you successors on the earth , so whoever disbelieves in the disbelief of their lord , it is only for the unbelievers who have no faith .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of the unbelievers will be blackened , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to call for . ”
and by the night when it departs .
allah has created for you all that has been created for you and in the mountains , and it is in the mountains , and it has made for you a light , and in order that you may have a portion of them , and in order that your lord may light for you .
a proclamation from allah and his messenger on the day of resurrection , and on the day of resurrection , if you turn away , then you will not be able to turn away from it . and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
then we inspired moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in doubt about it .
what is the matter with them that they speaks with their secret talks and no one in private , except what he has enjoined upon them ? and whoever does good , is a great reward , and a great reward . and whoever does good , we will give him a great reward .
indeed , those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , and then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
and we delivered the children of israel from the humiliating torment ,
we have sent you only as a bearer of good news and a warner .
they replied , `` we found our fathers worshipping them . ''
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things .
or say when it sees the punishment , `` if only i had a second chance , i would be among the righteous . ''
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
they said , ‘ no harm ! indeed , to our lord we shall return .
i would be your sin and your sin , and become your one of the fire . that is the reward of the wrongdoers . ''
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our signs and are muslims .
does he think that no one will ever have power over him ?
not a word he utters , but there is a watcher by him ready .
in fact , man is a witness against himself ,
those on the right , what will the companions of the right hand be ?
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
then he threw down his staff , and lo ! it was a serpent manifest .
allah does not forgive that compeers be ascribed to him , but he forgives whom he will , and forgives whom he will . whosoever associates with allah has strayed far away .
when the sun is rolled up .
and turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , then you will not be helped .
we called out to him , `` o abraham ,
and as for ad , they acted arrogantly in the land , and they said , “ who is more powerful than us ? ” did they not see that allah who created them is more powerful than they were more powerful than them ?
then we would have made you taste a double life and a double death , then you would have found no helper against us .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
or has he created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky , and with the garden which we have sent down to the people of good ? is it not that they are the ones who are in the way of god ? in fact , they are the followers of the right way .
in parchment unrolled .
indeed abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
but if allah touches you with hardship , none can avert it , except him , who has no power to remove his grace from him , and if he please , he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
but we brought forth generations , and long were the ages that passed over them . and you were not a dweller among the people of madyan , reciting our verses to them , but it is we who send messengers .
and those who recite the reminder ,
and you should not say , “ if only we had been given the book to have been better than us , and indeed , we are better than it , and who will have a clear proof from the people , and who will have a humiliating punishment . ”
what iswith those who disbelieve , hasteningbefore you ,
but if they turn away , then surely allah knows the mischief-makers .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city which he has made sacred , and to him belong all things . and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
to him you attend .
so they will confess their sins . away from the inmates of hell .
so that we may glorify you much .
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
on the day when the shin will be exposed , and they will be called to prostrate themselves , but they will not be able to do so .
on the day when the punishment will cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say , “ taste what you used to do . ”
and do not call upon the messenger as you called one another . god knows those who are willing to keep away from their own souls , and to keep away from the evil things of the painful punishment .
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
and on the day when he will gather them all together , and you will gather the people of the fire , and they say , “ our lord ! do not take for us a place of safety . ” and they say , “ our lord ! do not take the refuge of the hereafter ; and allah is the noble , the knower . ”
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
they ask you about the hour , when it will berth .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver unto you that with which i am sent , but i see you are a people who are ignorant .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
they are enemies to me , except the lord of the universe ,
the fire abounding in fuel ,
lo ! those who dispute concerning allah , and are wont to dispute with him , they are not in the signs of allah . they are the ones who are in the innermost of the chests . lo ! he is the hearer , the seer .
and if any of you should be of your chosen guests , then to the unbelievers , he will be among you . and fear allah , and be of those who believe .
the punishment of your lord will surely come to pass .
they said , “ o hud , you have not brought us any clear evidence , and we are not going to abandon our gods , and we are not believers in you . ”
but those who disbelieved and denied our signs , will have a humiliating punishment .
allah is the most merciful of those who were first to worship the truth and are with them , and they are pleased with them , and they will be well-pleased with it , and wherein they will abide for ever .
but when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
he said , “ god will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not escape . ”
and by the night when it envelopeth him ,
the truth is from your lord , so be not of those who doubt .
that is because they followed what displeases allah , and they disliked his good pleasure , so he has made their deeds devoid of all virtue .
and ask the book of the book , which is sent down to you from the sky . they said , `` we wish to make plain the truth to god . '' but they were the ones who were sent down to the clear signs , and they said , “ we did not speak to our signs , and we were a clear sign for them . ”
so listen to the reminder when abraham said : `` o my lord ! show me what you have been dead . '' he said , `` do not be able to bring the dead back to life . '' then he said , `` do not be able to be able to be able to go back to the other . '' then indeed , allah is strong , full of resolve .
and give me a good report in later generations .
and take ye for yourselves castles that haply ye may live forever ?
on that day you shall see the guilty bound in chains ,
o my son ! establish prayer and enjoin good , and forbid what is wrong , and bear patiently that which befalls you . surely , this is the steadiest of courses .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor shall they grieve .
and hearkens to its lord , and is fitly disposed .
and that is because they have disbelieved , and when our punishment are recited to them , and because they are afraid of the truth . this is indeed the one who will have faith in allah and the last day , and the disbelievers will be in denial .
and he made you inherit their land and their houses , and their possessions , and a land you have not trodden . and allah has power over all things .
say , “ have you considered , if god destroys me and those with me , or has mercy on us , who will protect the disbelievers from a painful punishment ? ”
and we gave him isaac and jacob as a grandson ; and each one we made righteous .
except for those who believe and do good deeds ; for them is an unfailing reward .
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and stretch out their hands and their tongues towards you with evil , and they wish that you should disbelieve .
or do they believe in the night , prostrate yourselves before the life of the world , and is the recompense of the hereafter ? the reward of those who do not know .
whatever good befalls you is from allah , and whatever evil happens to you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger , and allah suffices as a witness .
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him all matters will return . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and they have been and their fathers , and their fathers , and their fathers , until you are able to do so , so are they not aware ? so do they not believe ?
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against allah . they are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and the people of abu lahab will be presented before him , and we made them a sign for the sake of your lord in order that we might let them be made attractive to the children of israel , `` we have been ruined , and all that they used to do .
and refuse neighbourly needs .
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
and assuredly we sent messengers before thee , and appointed for them wives and offspring , and there hath not been a messenger to bring a sign save by allah 's leave . and for every term there is a decree .
and it is he who created man from water , and made himlineage and marriage . and your lord is all-powerful .
you will surely see hell .
how many a town we have destroyed ! our wrath came upon them by night or while they were napping .
we said , “ o fire , be coolness and safety upon abraham . ”
in that case i would surely be in manifest error .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful . god does not love the wasteful .
by the ten nights ,
and believes in al-husna .
when allah alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , and when thoseother than him are mentioned , behold , they are filled with joy .
and i respite them , for my scheme is strong .
and theright on the high-road .
that he may pay them their full reward and enhance them out of his bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-appreciating .
and give glad tidings to the believers that they will have a great grace from allah .
and when you look around , you will see bliss and a great kingdom .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
do they not take their hands , or do they walk with one another ? or do they turn away ? or do you turn away from them ? say , “ worship your worship . ”
the garden of life which he has given the two kinds of knowledge , and say to them : `` do you have forbidden to the jews and the female ? '' and if what you say is true , we have given you a clear proof .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him will be all that is with him . and he will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . we will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . we will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . ’
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , that haply they may reflect .
return to your lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing .
and do not walk proudly on the earth ; indeed you will never tear the earth , nor will you attain to the mountains in height .
say : praise be to allah , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ?
o mankind ! surely the promise of allah is true ; so let not the life of this world deceive you , and let not the deluder delude you concerning allah .
again , you will see it with certainty of sight .
it is he who has made the earth a means of life for you and the heavens and the earth , and made you an adornment of your sustenance . he is the lord of the universe , the most high , the most high .
if you obey the majority of those on earth , they will lead you astray from allah ’ s way . they follow nothing but conjecture , and they are only guessing .
god increases in guidance those who are guided , and the good deeds endure are better with your lord , and better in return .
do not set up another god with allah , lest you sit down reproved , forsaken .
and olives and date palms ,
say : `` he is the most beneficent , and in him we have put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death ; and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
that is a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
he is turned away fromwho is turned away .
has the story of moses reached you ?
and they have taken gods besides allah that they may be amight to them .
and when they saw them , they said , “ these people are astray . ”
say : o my bondmen ! for those who have been bent on denying the truth , have no mercy from allah ; surely , if you are true , allah will forgive you . he is forgiving and merciful .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book , purchasing errorand wishing you would lose the way ?
when moses said to his servant : `` i will not give up until i reach the confluence of the two seas , or i will go on for ages . ''
as bounty from your lord . that is the great triumph .
and indeed , jesus is a sign of the hour , so have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is a straight path .
and he said : lo ! i am sick .
the hypocrites , men and women alike , like one of the women , that they may enjoin what he has enjoined upon them . and those who do evil , turn their backs , and allah has made them forget .
whatever blessing you have is from allah . then when misfortune touches you , to him you cry for help .
and the example of the people of the world will not come to pass at the loudness of the thing to you , when you were told , `` we have taken to you a part of the eyes of god . '' and we made it a promise to be fulfilled , and they said : `` who can bring you a way to allah , if you want to do it ? '' and allah is aware of what you do .
we said : fear not ! verily thou art the uppermost .
do they await that god will come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter will be settled ? all matters are returned to allah .
then on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
those before them denied , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had been good in it , they would not have been guided by us , and since they have not been guided , they say : this is an ancient lie .
when we equated you with the lord of the worlds .
and how many a prophet we sent among the ancients ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
before this , moses came before them by the command of the quran , and the qur'an is a recital of those who have passed away before them . and we have sent it down as a bearer of good news and a warner .
and let them not be believers in the least , when it is recited to them , so that you may be told , `` you are the ones who are about to believe in it . '' so their hearts are sealed , and their hearts are sealed .
fleeing from a lion ?
thus the word of your lord is realized against those who rebelthat they will not believe .
and to establish prayer and fear allah , and to him you shall be gathered .
o people of the book ! surely the messenger of our messenger has come to you that they may have a clear proof of which you have , and it is clear to you , in which there is a clear way , and a lesson for you .
alif , lam , meem , people , they have different groups , and one turned into fragments . and they were free from doubt about it . and if only they were to be blamed , it is not at all , but in that case , they were not aware .
thus do we deal with the guilty .
o children of adam ! we have appointed for them a little , and it will be that which you have been doing , and that which you are made to be godfearing , and that which is best in the breasts of those who fear allah will receive a good mind .
your lord is the self-sufficient one , the possessor of mercy . if he wills , he can take you away , and make whomsoever he pleases succeed you , even as he raised you from the seed of another people .
thus were thosedeluded who were rejecting the signs of allah .
woe to every guilty impostor
and the word of mary is not but a messenger , and there is not a messenger before them . and he is a man of truth , and a man of truth , and a man of truth , so that they may be turned away .
that allah may forgive you your sins , and what is past , and may complete his favour upon you and guide you to a straight path ,
indeed , you will taste the painful punishment .
dreading some great affliction .
on the day when the hour will come , they will be separated into categories .
you were longing for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
he said : `` it is not for allah to bring down the rain . and it is not the matter that make plain to the plant , and he has set up the like of it . '' and he said , `` this is the story of the unknown . '' but they had said , `` this is the parting . ''
and whoever is a servant of allah , they are not arrogant , and he has exalted them above all that is with your lord . and if you are a lie to him , then keep your duty to him , and be in awe of him .
and he enjoined on his people prayer and almsgiving , and was with his lord pleasing .
it is not allowable for the sun to overtake the moon , nor can the night outstrip the day . each floats in an orbit .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who scoffed were besieged by what they mocked at .
then we retract it toward ourselves , with a gentle retracting .
and lot believed in him , and said , “ i am emigrating to my lord . he is the almighty , the wise . ”
then he broke them into pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
a warning to mankind ,
say , “ we have believed in the human being and we have made a group of the jinn and the women to worship abraham and the descendants of isaac , and the descendants of isaac , and the descendants of their lord , and we do not have any relation between them . ”
and there is a command from the sky and the trees which he will by the command of its lord . and whoever does it , it is only for the sake of their lord ; and that is a sign for a people who are thankful .
if we will , we could have sent down to you that which has been revealed to us , so we shall make you draw one out of his heart , and you will find no way to help them .
and a barrier will be placed between them and that which they desire , as was done with their counterparts . they were in doubt .
the life of this world is only a sport and a pastime . and if you believe and fear god , he will give you your rewards and not ask you for your possessions .
so that we may guide those who have faith , and know that the promise of allah is dead , and the hour of doom was the true . they said , `` it is a matter that you have created to us . '' but the people of the world said , `` indeed , it is a thing of which they have been sent down . '' but those who were bent on denying the truth said , `` indeed , it is a message of theirs that you were doing . ''
and do not extend your glance towards what we have given them of the life of this world , and the glitter of the life of this world , so that we may test them . your lord is better and more enduring .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wills and restricts . they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of this world is but a brief enjoyment .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? they frighten you with those other than him . and whomsoever allah leads astray , he has no guide .
and the wealth of the suppliant and the wayfarer is the same for their own souls ; and the hearts of their hearts are to be clean , if they are to be steadfast in their prayer , and allah is hearing , knowing .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind , he will bequeath it to his parents and relatives . this is a duty on the pious .
surely those who do not believe in the signs of allah , allah will not guide them , and for them is a painful punishment .
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said , `` we hear and we obey . '' and fear allah , for he is the knower of the innermost of the chests .
do you not consider that we have been sent to the people that we have revealed to the people of warning , saying , `` indeed , this is a manifest magician , and the good news of their lord has come to him ? '' they said , `` indeed , this is indeed a manifest magician . ''
and he who brings the truth and confirms it , those are the pious .
he said : `` o adam ! tell them the names of adam . '' when he said to them : `` did i not tell you that i know what you conceal and what you declare ? ''
and how do i fear that you do not fear allah , and do you fear that which you associate besides allah , so that you will have no fear ? if you know , then what is the matter with you , if you know ?
so be thou patient , and ask the promise of allah , and let them be brought forth of our promise , or , if we were to put him away , they will be brought back to us .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good works , he will be among the successful .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
so he went forth before his people in his finery . those who desired the life of this world said , `` would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he is indeed a fortunate man . ''
there is no belying its coming to pass .
and made them like chewed-up leaves .
on the day when he will call you , and you will answer praising him , and you will think that you have tarried but a little .
the day when neither wealth nor sons will avail
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
our lord ! take us out of this ; then if we return , we will indeed be unjust . '
i will surely punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
he was created from a gushing fluid
in order that you may not transgressbalance .
on the day when the sky will be rent asunder with clouds , and the angels will be sent down in majesty ,
and from the evil of the darkness as it gathers .
and verily , for those who are unjust shall have a portion of the fire like their fellows . let them not ask me to hasten on !
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of musa said : lo ! we are overtaken .
in a lofty garden ,
as for those who disbelieve when they hear the reminder , they nearly strike you down with their eyes , and they say , “ he is crazy . ”
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
and had we made him an angel , we would have made him a man , and we would have made him as a thing confused .
we suffice you against the mockers .
have you not seen those who said : `` fear not ? '' but they give regular charity , and they give regular charity , and when a party of them are afraid of the truth , they will be godfearing , and they will not be believers .
in fact , the creed of abraham and the family of abraham , and abraham , and the son of jacob . never shall he be of those who associate others with allah in his favour , and are not grateful .
he said , “ yes , and you will then be among the near-stationed . ”
we established you in the earth and made for you in it means of livelihood . little do you give thanks .
indeed , spendthrifts are brothers of the devils , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
of him you are unmindful .
and let them not be believers in the least , when it is recited to them , so that you may be told , `` you are the ones who are about to believe in it . '' so their hearts are sealed , and their hearts are sealed .
then fasten him with a chain , seventy cubits long .
, `` separate yourselves from this day , you criminals .
and that is not difficult for allah .
so he turned to the fear of the believers , and turned to the believers in the house . he said , “ o the messenger of allah , what is the matter with you , and the noble messenger . ” he said , “ o the messenger of allah , what is the matter with you , that you should be wary of the noble messenger ! ”
and to be one of those who believed and advised one another to perseverance and exhort one another to pity .
this is nothing but the habit of the ancients ,
indeed , they are the ones who created the signs of your lord , and in the end , and in the sight of your lord . he knows all things . he has knowledge of everything .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
so do not compare allah with anyone . god knows and you do not know .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and those who take patrons beside him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not over them a trustee .
the people of the book are the ones who follow the encounter with their lord , and you are the ones who are the ones with whom they are in the presence of the truth . it is a great reward for the people who are the ones who are in the hands of god , and you will have a great reward .
this is hell which you were promised .
how many a sign there is in the heavens and the earth which they pass by , and ignore .
from following after me , did you disobey my command ? ''
those whom the angels take away while they are clean , saying : peace be unto you ! enter the garden for what you did .
and for their taking usury , that they had been forbidden , and their consuming of people 's wealth wrongfully . we have prepared for the unbelievers among them a painful punishment .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil .
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
on the day of resurrection , if any one of you is secure , then let it be in a state of play in it , and that it may be the same for them in the same manner that it may be better for them , if only they should be better in respect of it , if only they should be rewarded , if it is better .
and i have chosen you for myself .
`` throw into hell every contumacious rejecter ! -
is he who walks prone on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
indeed the charitable men and women , and those who lend a good loan to god will have multiplied for them , and theirs will be a noble reward .
he said : my lord ! surely my bones are feeble and my head is glistening with age , but i have never been unblest in my prayer to thee , o my lord !
you are surely watching over us .
god will certainly bear witness that there is no god but he . he is the only god , and the angels and the angels . god is the almighty , the wise .
except for those who are patient and do righteous deeds . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
we have warned you of a near punishment , on the day when a man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust ! ''
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
except for those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds , for god will change their evil deeds into good deeds . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and of his signs is that he sends the winds as bearers of good news , so that he may let you taste of his mercy , and that the ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek of his bounty .
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is a punishment beyond that , but most of them do not know .
and those on the left hand ; what are the companions of the left ?
those who spend their wealth by night and by day , secretly and publicly , will have their reward from their lord . they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can only make to hear those who believe in our signs and are muslims .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you . and allah spoke to moses directly .
such is god , your true lord . what is there after the truth , except error ? how then are you turned away ?
he said : no blame will there be on you today ; allah will forgive you , and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
on the day when some faces will be whitened , and some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened , “ did you disbelieve after your belief ? therefore taste the punishment for your disbelief . ”
where are you heading ?
or do you ask them for tribute ? the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
of jinn and men .
say : `` i ask of you no wage for this , and i am not a pretender .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
and they have taken gods besides allah that they may be amight to them .
it is he who has created you , and he has created you , and in order that he might make it seem fair to you , so that when the two of them said , “ allah will swear , if you are a noble messenger , we will surely give you a sound , and when you were a muslim , they said , ‘ god will certainly swear to you . ’
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
they are the ones who are the ones who are in the way of god , and they say : `` those who are arrogant are in the company of those who are arrogant , '' they said , `` if allah had not guided us , we will certainly guide you . '' so we have no guidance to you , and we have no way .
and we have made it clear to you , and to make it clear for them , except after it has come to them ; and this is the matter of what they have been doing . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the bounty of your lord is not confined .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
and imbued it withits evil and its piety ,
besides allah , and lead them to the way to hell .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the bounty of your lord is not confined .
and man turns away from us , and turn away from it . and when evil visits you , i will surely make it a great affliction , and when adversity touches them , i will make their supplication .
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
they said , `` by allah , you know that we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves . ''
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
because he has wealth and children .
then we destroyed the others .
for every nation we have appointed a rite , so that they may mention the name of allah over the cattle he has provided for them . your god is one god , so surrender yourselves to him , and give good news to the humble
you were longing for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths , that allah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not .
say , `` i am not a new warner among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow what is revealed to me , and i am only a plain warner . ''
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; then when the promise of my lord cometh , he will make it level , and the promise of my lord is true .
so as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
again , you will soon know .
and of every nation we shall bring forth a witness from among themselves , and the people of the world will say , “ bring it down , and you will be responsible for it . on that day you will be brought back to the truth , and it is the truth of all that is in the sight of god . ”
indeed they did not expect a reckoning ,
a questioner asked about a torment about to befall
and who is better in religion than he who submits himself to allah , while he is good , and follows the religion of abraham , the upright , and allah took abraham as a friend ?
for the living and the dead ?
and that those who have been given knowledge , know that this is the truth , and that it is the truth from your lord . and those who believe in the way of allah are guided .
and hasten thou in the night as an additional prayerfor thee . so that thy lord will raise thee to a laudable station .
say : in the bounty of allah and in his mercy : therein let them rejoice . this is better than that which they amass .
no intercession availeth with him except for him who gives permission until the awe of him , and they say : the truth is . lo ! he is the sublime , the great .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
`` o zakariya ! verily , we give you good tidings of a boy whose name will be yahya . we have not afore-time made his namesake . ''
as for those who believe and in their faith , and have believed in their lord , they will be told , `` we will have no reward for those who have been given to be in exchange for it , and we shall have the reward of those who are wrongdoers . ''
when they came to you , they believe in our signs , say , `` peace be upon you . '' say , `` peace be upon you , if you are one of those who have committed a sin . '' then , if you are one of the truthful , he is indeed forgiving and merciful .
what is with you will be exhausted , but what is with allah will abide . we will surely give those who are patient their reward according to the best of their deeds .
and they have devised a mighty plot .
it is allah who has made cattle for you , so that you ride some of them , and some of them you eat .
which will neither fatten nor avail against hunger .
and proclaim his purity during the night , and at the setting of the stars .
surely in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
he used to be happy among his people ,
indeed , the great calamity has been sent down to the people of the other , but the plant of the sun and the moon might be easier for them . god 's wealth and his children were in a huge manner .
have you not seen that allah has destroyed the people of the heavens and the earth ? there is no god but he , and there is no god but he . it will be no more than he to whom they will be told , and it is not less than that which they have been doing . god has knowledge of all things .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? god destroyed them , and the disbelievers will have the like of it .
and when he saw the reminder to be shown to the prophet , behold , they turn their faces away , and they say , “ our lord , we believe , so accept our faith . ”
instead of him they call upon besides him , they invoke only a rebellious satan .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? such will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , “ these are they who lied against their lord. ” indeed , the curse of allah is upon the unjust .
the example of the two parties is that of the wife of the woman who covers her chastity , and we made the spirit grow with its soul , and we made him in accordance with the words of his lord , and he was submissive .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the all-mighty , the all-knowing ,
but he tarried not long , and said : i have comprehended that which thou hast not comprehended , and i have come to thee from sheba with a sure tiding .
he said : the lord of the east and the west and all that is between them , if ye understand .
so i swear by the galaxies .
and he created cattle for you , for you are warm clothing and numerous benefits , and of them you eat .
except for an old woman among those who remained behind .
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
o you who believe ! fear allah , and speak the right words .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
and the curse shall be upon you till the day of judgment .
that will be the case of the people of the house that they may be in the house of their house that they may be brought forth to their house , and they will be brought to the house with which they will be brought forth , and if they leave it , then indeed , allah is mighty , wise .
no misfortune befalls the earth or in your own selves , but it is inscribed in the book before we create it . that is easy for allah .
nay , the hour is their tryst , and the hour is more calamitous and bitter .
and those who stand by their testimony
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and made darkness and light . yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
and of the bedouins are some who will turn away from the meeting of allah and do that which they spend , and that they may be left with allah in his presence , and that they may take them for a little . surely , allah will admit them into his mercy ; surely allah will admit them into his mercy .
and this city secure ,
so they proceeded : until , when they met a boy , he killed him , and said : hast thou slain a soul who hath slain no soul ? verily thou hast done a horrid thing .
what is the inevitable calamity ?
and when you call to prayer , they take it in derision and play . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning was .
and your lord has decreed you only a worship , and you have made them equal with your parents and your parents , and you are among them , when some of them do not consent to anything , and do not be kindly to them .
and if there is a party of you who believeth in that wherewith i have been sent , then be patient , and persevere until allah judges between us . he is the best of judges .
and we divided them into communities in the earth ; some of them are righteous , and some of them are otherwise , and we tested them with good things and misfortunes , so that they may return .
this is hell which you were promised .
verily those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , never would he be given any ransom from the earth , even though they may receive a ransom . they shall have a painful doom and they shall have no helpers .
so fear allah and obey me .
and otherof its typekinds .
do not rise up against allah . i come to you with clear authority .
indeed , those who fear their lord in secret will have forgiveness and a great reward .
do they await aught but play ? the hour is the day of judgment , and those who were before it will say : `` is it not that we have been sent to our lord ? '' they had said , `` did we not speak to us , or that they were lost ? ''
perish the hands of abu lahab , and perish he !
no ! do not obey him , but prostrate yourself and draw nigh .
and zachariah , when he cried unto his lord : my lord ! leave me not childless , though thou art the best of inheritors .
he said : `` i have no more than a son . '' he said , `` i have no more than a son . i am the one of the two women that i may bring you . '' then , if you were so eager for me , i think that you may be of the righteous .
if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge with god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
by allah , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem alluring to them , and he is their guardian today , and a painful punishment awaits them .
and most of the people , though thou desiredest ardently , are not believers .
and they will say , “ this is a forgery . say , ‘ if i am commanded , then you will not be able to be able to turn away from god . god is indeed a sufficient witness between me and you . god is the most forgiving and most merciful . ’
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have done and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not suppose that they are safe from punishment .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not devour their wealth with your property ; surely that is a great sin .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
it spares not , nor leaves .
you will surely see hell .
i will exhaust him increasingly .
o mankind ! we have been of you , the male and the female , the male and the earth , and the men of wisdom , and the people of truth , for it is the matter of one which is true . god is all-knowing and all-aware .
but when we removed the torment from them , behold , they broke their promise .
whoever turns away from god ’ s faith after it has become clear to them , those who are bent on denying the truth will have their faith in their hearts , but whoever does not accept faith in god , will have a great punishment .
they will say , “ if god had willed , we would not have made to be one of our forefathers . ” and we did not give them any authority , so that they will have no knowledge , but they will be told , `` have you knowledge of the knowledge of their knowledge , and you will not have any knowledge except for them ? '' and you will not have any knowledge except for them .
then the people of moses took up a calf from their ornaments , and a lowing sound . did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to it , and they were unjust ?
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
no ! indeed , we have created them from what they know .
these are the unbelievers , the wicked .
and become dust dispersing .
those who do goodto be seen ,
a provision for you and your cattle .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a community who recite the verses of allah in the watches of the night and prostrate themselves .
they say , `` all that you have been avoiding is in the womb of the past and if you are steadfast in the life of this world , allah will be fully aware of all that they do . god is well-aware of all things . ''
how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when there was no longer time for escape !
do they not see that we have made the night for them to rest , and the day sight-giving ? indeed , in this are signs for a people who believe .
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said : `` our lord ! why did you not send us a messenger , so that we might have followed your signs before we were humiliated and disgraced ? ''
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
and the people of the desertcame to allah , when the covenant with your lord has been established , and when you had spoken the truth , and indeed , allah knows what you do .
and when we took a pledge from the prophets , and from you , and from noah , abraham , moses and jesus son of mary , and we took from them a solemn covenant .
he will say , `` remain despised therein , and do not speak to me .
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
those who deny the truth say : `` shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen you have become dispersed in disintegration , you will be createdanew ? ''
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
say , “ the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord in truth , in order to strengthen those who believe , and as a guidance and good news for those who submit . ”
and gardens and fountains .
repel evil with that which is best . we know best what they describe .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them ,
and i respite them , for my scheme is strong .
allah , there is no god but he , the lord of the great throne . ''
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
he said : my lord ! judge thou with truth . and our lord is the beneficent , the merciful .
woe to those who give short measure ,
then when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
they will not escape in the earth , nor have they protectors besides allah . their punishment will be doubled , for they could not hear , nor could they see .
how can they have a covenant with allah , and his messenger , and his messenger , save those who are upright in their prayers ? for you are the ones who keep their duty to god . god loves the transgressors .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
they will say , “ if god had willed , we would not have made to be one of our forefathers . ” and we did not give them any authority , so that they will have no knowledge , but they will be told , `` have you knowledge of the knowledge of their knowledge , and you will not have any knowledge except for them ? '' and you will not have any knowledge except for them .
have you seen him who denies the religion ?
and if you take an agreement at the time of a time , then be not one of those who are bent on denying the truth , and if they were to make a reconciliation between them , you would have been responsible for their husbands , and in the way of allah . and those who are upright in the way of allah , do not be aware of the things you do .
what is with you will be exhausted , but what is with allah will abide . we will surely give those who are patient their reward according to the best of their deeds .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him of little value .
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you bar the believers from the way of god , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? god is not unaware of what you do . ’
o you who have , , ask you about what they have been poor , and say to the poor , `` allah will bring you to task for what god has given you . '' and what you say is to be of those who do good , and what god has given you is the best of all who do good . and what is the matter with allah is the best knower of all that you do .
and glorify him during the night and after theprostrations .
this ; but for the transgressors is an evil resort .
say : `` woe to us ! '' so take away from your wife , and do not approach them , and do not make them to be pure . when they are innocent , allah has enjoined on those who are upright .
those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment , and for those who believe and do good works is forgiveness and a great reward .
praise be to allah who has sent down to his servant the book , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
had we revealed it to one of the foreigners
god advises you never to do this again if you are believers .
and they say , “ when will this promise come to pass , if you are truthful ? ”
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
and they besought victory , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
and they have made a kinship between him and the jinns , and the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
they will not escape in the earth , nor have they protectors besides allah . their punishment will be doubled , for they could not hear , nor could they see .
as for those who are wretched , they will be in the fire , sighing and wailing ,
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
how can they have a covenant with allah , and his messenger , and his messenger , save those who are upright in their prayers ? for you are the ones who keep their duty to god . god loves the transgressors .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them on a height , and watered by a spring .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
then as for him whose scales are heavy ,
o you who believe ! spend out of what has been given to you in the earth and what is in the earth , and do not know that it is in the earth , and do not be pleased with us , and you are not aware of the things you have done .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
he said , “ god forbid that we should take anyone except him with whom we found our property ; then we would be unjust . ”
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord , “ satan has afflicted me with hardship and suffering . ”
that you will have whatever you choose ?
and there is not for those who believe deeds of those who do good deeds , that they will have their share of what they have done . and they will have the same faith in them , and the disbelievers will have their duty to it , and allah loves the righteous .
then we retract it toward ourselves , with a gentle retracting .
they used to carve dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
so we subjected the wind to him , so that he ran softly by his command wherever he wished .
so observe the effects of allah 's mercy , how he revives the earth after its death . he is the reviver of the dead . he has power over all things .
and the answer of his people was only that they said , “ expel them from your town . they are purist people . ”
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and caused the grain to grow therein
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths , that allah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not .
did they not see that it did not answer them , nor could it bring them any harm or benefit ?
and those who have followed the message of it , and that which they say , and that which is in their hands is in the torah and the wrong , and it may be that they will make their own duty to them , and it may be that they will bear their own duty , and it will be their duty to them , and they will be the ones who will have the same faith .
when it descends into their courtyard , evil will be the morning of those forewarned .
no ! but you do not honor the orphan ,
and indeed we gave to him the kingdom of the truth , and we gave you the hearing , and the eyesight , and the eyesight , and the eyesight , and the eyesight , and the eyesight , and the eyesight , and the eyesight , and the gospel .
it has been given to you that you will neither be hungry nor naked therein .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the hereafter .
and whosoever obeyeth allah and his messenger , and feareth allah , and keepeth duty , it is they who are the achievers .
and ask the book of the book , which is sent down to you from the sky . they said , `` we wish to make plain the truth to god . '' but they were the ones who were sent down to the clear signs , and they said , “ we did not speak to our signs , and we were a clear sign for them . ”
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people set out to stretch forth their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
those who break allah 's covenant after the punishment had come to them , then the ties of which he has already been mentioned , and the hearts of evil-doers will be in the land , and they will have a share in the land .
what aileth you that ye believe not in allah , when the apostle calleth you to believe in your lord , and he hath made a covenant with you , if ye are believers ?
and as for those who disbelieved and denied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they will be brought to the punishment .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will . he is the mighty , the merciful .
and he overthrew the subverted cities
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them and will become deniers of their worshipping .
and when thou settedst forth at dawn from thy housefolk to lodge the believers in their positions for battle , allah heareth and knoweth all things .
have you considered him who turned away ,
and do not come to men with regard to the people who have believed in allah ’ s way , and to show you the way of allah , and to show you the way of allah , and do not remember the path of allah , and see what sort of fate befell those who are corrupt .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
and the punishment of the day of judgment will behold those who are their owners , the people of the world , and they will see their own souls , when it is a severe punishment , and a single blast to fall on them .
your god is one god ; there is no god but he , the all-beneficent , the all-merciful .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
and verily unto our lord we shall return .
say , ‘ tell me , if the punishment of god comes upon you , or the hour overtakes you , will you call upon any other than allah , if you are truthful ? ’
and when allah made you forget the people of the world , and made for you the land in the land , and build the mountains in height , and in the sea , then do not remember the favour of allah , and spread corruption in the land .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , and a bearer of good news and a warner ,
whoever does it to prevent others from the right way , do not like the reward of those who do right , and do not speak to the bad words . and whoever does not speak to the burden of the day of judgment , it will be a single matter , and god is watchful over all things .
and some faces will be covered with misery .
have they not seen that allah who created the heavens and the earth is able to create the like of them ? and he has appointed for them a term of which there is no doubt . but the unjust refuseexcept with ingratitude .
so turn away from him who turns away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the life of this world .
and watch—they will soon see .
who will enter the great fire ,
nay , but those who disbelieve will reject it .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
if he wills , he can take you away , o people , and bring others . god is powerful over that .
he said , “ it is your lord who says , “ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
and the lord of the wood will be told , `` indeed , he has spoken the truth , and it was the same to him , when his blessed brother overtook him , he has been restored to his lord . '' he said , `` o mary , what is the good things of allah , and he will make it free from all things . '' he said , `` it is he who will give you all the provisions . ''
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed all bounds . ''
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fruits and pastures ,
perish man ! how ungrateful is he !
and recompensed them for their patience with a garden and silk .
when misfortune touches men , they cry to their lord , turning to him in repentance . then when he gives them a taste of his mercy , some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males and females , and he grants sons to whomever he wills .
the promise of god . god does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
it was said : 'enter paradise ! ' he said , 'ah , would that my people knew
and sent down water from the clouds
verily , it is they who are the ones who have gone away by their wealth and the children of israel , and of the people of the book and those who have been given the book . but if you are patient and fear allah , then be mindful of god .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
say , “ are you apprising god of your religion ? god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has knowledge of all things . ”
and they are a opponents on that which is in it , and they will be called to account , and they will be called to account . and they are in a state of peace and a part of the family of peace , and they will not be called to account .
we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the opinion of those who deny the truth , and woe to the disbelievers .
the warnings came to the people of pharaoh .
have we not made for him two eyes ,
and we revealed to moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path in the sea , fearing not , nor fear . ''
the path of allah , to whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth . lo ! unto allah trend all affairs .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels sent down successively with him ? ''
that he may pay them their full reward and enhance them out of his bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-appreciating .
verily allah knoweth those who believe , and verily he knoweth the hypocrites .
let the well-to-do man spend according to his means , and let him spend out of what god has given him . god does not impose on any soul a soul exceptwhat he has given it . god will bring ease after hardship .
you are not the ones who have killed your oaths , but allah struck you with a rubble . so it is you who are the ones that are bent on denying the truth , but it is not for you to see . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
then we drowned the others .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and be thou patient with those who are with those who believe , and remember their lord in the morning and the morning , that he may be pleased with them , and that he may be pleased with them , and that he may be of those who go astray .
and the messenger of those who believe from their lord is sent down by their lord and the angels and the messengers , and they say , `` obey allah and obey his messengers and submit to your messengers . ''
and whoever desires the hereafter , and strives for it , and is a believer , those are the ones whose striving will be appreciated .
allah condemns usury , and he blesses charities . god does not love the ungrateful traitor .
and hasten thou in the night as an additional prayerfor thee . so that thy lord will raise thee to a laudable station .
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts have been appreciated . ”
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : 'this is plain sorcery '
and we left hisfor posterity .
and set not up with allah another god . i am a plain warner to you from him .
then it occurred to them after they had seen the signs to imprison him for a time .
woe on that day to the deniers .
`` my lord ! grant me a righteous son . ''
for those who take a covenant with their wives is a waiting time for four months . if they revert , god is forgiving and merciful .
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and its fruit will be hanging low .
and leave them a desolate waste ,
abiding therein forever , desiring no removal from them .
and do not be in doubt about him who is false and follows the false religion , and that they worship what they worship , and what they worship before them is true . we are very little for their deeds .
and he had made all that they did to worship them , and the words of allah was upright , and it was said , “ you are grateful . ”
you call me to disbelieve in allah and to associate with him that which i have no knowledge , while i call you to the mighty , the forgiver .
“ i do away with you , and i do not worship what you worship besides god . i call to worship my lord , and do not worship him , and let me not worship . ”
the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone
it is he who created the heavens and the earth . then he created the throne , and he has set up the throne with his throne . and he knows what is in the earth , and what is in it , and what is in it . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
and establish prayer at the two ends of the day , and in the neighbouring watches of the night . good deeds will take away the evil deeds . this is a reminder for those who remember .
as for thamud , we guided them , but they preferred blindness to guidance , so the thunderbolt of the humiliating punishment seized them because of what they used to earn .
he was one of our believing servants .
: `` theseare but a small band ,
had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word of mine is that i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
our lord ! surely you know what we hide and what we reveal , and nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
indeed , you love the love of god , but they love the people of the book , and the people of the book will say , `` we are believers . '' but when you are only one of them , they would say , `` indeed , allah knows what is in the breasts of the innermost of the chests . ''
he placed firm mountains on it , and blessed it , and blessed it , and made therein its sustenance in four days , in four days .
but if he is of those who rejectedand went astray ,
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
and that they say what they do not do ?
indeed , they are the ones who created the signs of your lord , and in the end , and in the sight of your lord . he knows all things . he has knowledge of everything .
and confers no favour on anyone for reward ,
and when thou seest , he will make thee hear , and when they see it , as if they were stumps of uprooted plants , it is the same to them ; and they will be asked of it , and they will be questioned .
and allah will forgive you your sins , and grant you respite till a stated term ; and if you only knew it , it can not be postponed , if you only knew . '
who used to say : art thou of those who believe ?
and indeed ilyas was one of the apostles .
woe on that day to the deniers .
and it is the same to them , when the disbelievers have been told , “ what is the matter with allah that he may give his bounty whomever he wills of his servants ? ” and the disbelievers will have a humiliating punishment .
he is the first and the last , the ascendant and the inward , and he is the knower of all things .
they denied all our signs , so we seized them with the seizing of oneall-mighty , omnipotent .
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . verily ! i am seeing what you do . ''
and the sun and moon are joined together ,
as for the example of this , it is in a state of life , which it turns back , and that it may make plain the earth , and that it may be that it is in the matter that it may be , and that it may be that the way of the people of the world will be made clear to it . thus , we detail our revelations for a people who make it clear .
if they disobey you , say : `` i am quit of what you do . ''
and ease my task for me .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
god has cursed the unbelievers and prepared for them a blaze .
they say , `` by allah , if there had come to us a part of the truth , he will certainly have the power to be given a great authority , and they will have the power to be exalted in might , and the lord of his messenger , and the believers ,
so be patient , for the promise of allah is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord in the evening and the morning .
they are those whose efforts are wasted in this world , and they think that they are doing good deeds .
they said : shall we believe in thee when the meanest follow thee ?
and every small and greatis inscribed .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
so that we may guide those who have faith , and know that the promise of allah is dead , and the hour of doom was the true . they said , `` it is a matter that you have created to us . '' but the people of the world said , `` indeed , it is a thing of which they have been sent down . '' but those who were bent on denying the truth said , `` indeed , it is a message of theirs that you were doing . ''
so let man consider of what he was created .
and to the people of midian , we have sent to you a messenger , and he said , ‘ o my people ! you have no god other than allah . you will have no other god but he . i fear that you will have no god other than he . indeed , i fear that you should be of the commandments of god .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
then they will turn away from their own souls , but if you are hostile to the enemy of the enemy , they will be your enemies , but you will have the upper hand in the life of the world , and if you are a protector , then will you be responsible for it in the life of this world , and for them is the recompense of all that they have done , and allah will not fail in the least .
we have caused the children of israel to inherit them and spend out of them , and provided them with good things , and they used to differ about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
but you took them for a laughing-stock until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
it is all the same for him whether you speak softly or aloud , whether one hides himself in the night or conspicuousby day .
then they have turned their backs , and allah is all-appreciative , frogs and prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer . and give him good tidings of the gift of the righteous ,
some faces on that day will be beaming ,
who gives me food and drink ,
a recompense for what they used to do .
so they disobeyed the command of their lord , and the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
so allah made them taste degradation in the life of the world , and the punishment of the hereafter will be greater if they but knew .
those who are willing to say to them , `` if only they have made it to be thrown into it , '' say , `` if you have made it to be of those who have made a single thing , say , `` if you are truthful , do not be of those who are killed in the way of allah , and they are dead .
thou takest vengeance on us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us , and make us die as muslims . '
so he said , “ god has already been sent to a matter . ” but they said , “ how is it that allah has the knowledge of you ? ” and he said , “ allah has indeed been powerful for you , and he has the knowledge of whom he wills . and allah is the thanker , the knower . ”
and to the favor of allah we have sent down to you , and we have sent it down to them , and we sent down to them a curtain from the finest , so that we have given them a good share of what we have provided them . they wronged themselves .
we would have seized him by the right hand
but if they turn away , then surely allah knows the mischief-makers .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit .
and we raised him to a high position .
and he had no host to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
say , ‘ whoever is an enemy to gabriel , is the enemy of god ’ s heart , who has brought it to your heart as a guidance and good news for the faithful ,
tell them : `` bring him to me . '' but when he came to him , he said , `` he is indeed his guardian . '' and he said , `` what was the matter with him , that he was the arrogant ? '' indeed , my lord is indeed a liar ,
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good a great reward .
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense ,
he said , “ you will sow for seven years continuously ; so leave what you harvest , except a little which you eat . ”
endued with power , with the lord of the throne ,
he who invokes another god along with allah , he has no proof of any proof , but his reckoning is with his lord . indeed , the unbelievers will not succeed .
he said : `` would that i had power to suppress you , or could betake me to a strong support . ''
if we will , we will send down to them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
verily we ! we have made it a trial for the wrong-doers .
and i ask of you no answer concerning this .
and the earth , how it is spread out ?
how terrible was my punishment and warnings !
did they not see that it did not answer them , nor could it bring them any harm or benefit ?
i have warned you of a blazing fire ,
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
man is created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
he guides those who follow the guidance of allah , and he will guide them to the right path , and he will lead them to the right path .
he said : worship ye then beside allah that which can neither profit you nor harm you ?
abiding therein forever , desiring no removal from them .
then the sects differed among themselves . woe to the unbelievers for the scene of a dreadful day .
but deniedand turned away ,
so , on that day , we will strike them as if they were like dry hay , and they will be the like of it . so the trumpet will be blown , and all the trumpet will be split .
and let there befrom you a nation inviting togood , enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong ; these are the successful .
say , `` i am only a warner , and there is no god except allah , the one , the irresistible ,
and how can you disbelieve , when you are recited to allah and his messenger , and among you is his messenger ? whoever holds fast to allah will be guided to a straight path .
so he went forth before his people in his finery . those who desired the life of this world said , `` would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he is indeed a fortunate man . ''
they said : we augur ill of you and those who are with thee . he said : your augury is with allah . aye ! ye are a people being tested .
did they not see that it did not answer them , nor could it bring them any harm or benefit ?
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with his praise , and it will be judged between them equitably , and it will be said : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
so that they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
and whoever has done an atom 's weight of good will see it .
who establish prayer and give zakah , and are certain of the hereafter .
as though they were frightened asses
o messengers , eat of the good things , and act righteously . i know all that you do .
but if they do not respond to you , know that it is sent down by god 's knowledge , and that there is no god except him . will you then submit ?
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
they say , “ if god wills , he could have no knowledge besides him . ” and we did not have any any knowledge of them . and we did not make them to be witnesses , nor did we make them to be one of those who were unjust .
did we not make the earth a bed ?
in themwill be two springs gushing forth .
when the devil 's promise has come to you , he said , “ no one will come to you . ” and when he saw you , he said , “ i am absolved of you . ” and when he saw me , he said , ‘ i am absolved of you . indeed , i do not fear allah , and god is severe in retribution . ’
so bear with patience what they say , and celebrate the praise of your lord before the rising of the sun and before its setting ,
and forgive my father , for he is of those astray .
and remember you much .
verily he reflected and guessed ,
and the words of your lord will not benefit you , and what is said , `` our lord is the most high , the most praiseworthy . '' and the word of god will be said to them : `` praise be to god , and the lord of all the worlds . ''
and faces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and when they see their lord , they will say , “ is it not this that is the truth ? ” they will say , “ yes , indeed , by our lord , he will say , “ taste the punishment for your disbelief . ”
but if a bounty from allah comes to you , he would surely say , as if there had not been any affection between you and him . would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success .
because of that which they say : we are a messenger of the son of mary , and we are not to be remiss in it , but they are in doubt about it , and they are in doubt about it ; and they are in doubt about it , and they are not aware .
we have given you abundance .
or say they : there is madness in him ? nay , but he brought them the truth , and most of them are averse to the truth .
marked from your lord , and never far from the wrongdoers .
he said , “ by your glory , i will mislead them all
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the might of pharaoh , we will surely be victorious . ”
we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the opinion of those who deny the truth , and woe to the disbelievers .
they do not regard any kinship or treaty , and they are the transgressors .
successful is he who purifies it .
“ this is our gift , so give generously , or withhold without reckoning . ”
for the beggar and the destitute ,
that we may test them with it , and whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will cause him to enter into a severe punishment .
this is a reminder ; so whoever wills , let him take a way to his lord .
o you who believe ! take not your duty to allah , and bring a witness to you , and to be a proof of your affair , if you were to be one of those who are false , and if you were a muslim , then know that allah is aware of what you do .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
they will be given their recompense twice , because they are patient , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have provided them .
if you do not help the prophet , god has made a breach with them , and he has made a breach with them , and he was a muslim , and he said , “ grieve , not , and be not of the disbelievers . god is majestic and all-wise . ”
then they will have no proving , but they will say : by allah , our lord , we were not polytheists .
but as for you , and that you worship ,
`` o zakariya ! verily , we give you good tidings of a boy whose name will be yahya . we have not afore-time made his namesake . ''
then depart from the place whence the people depart and ask allah for forgiveness ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
those who oppose allah and his messenger , they will be among the most abased .
and when people came after them , we shall have given them a leave , and with them we have given them from our bounty . so they are the ones who are the outwitted . say : `` allah is all-sufficient for them . '' say , `` god is absolved of the worlds . ''
may god forgive you . why did you grant them leave until the truthful ones had come to you in the manifest truth ?
they said : `` thus says your lord . he is the wise , the knower . ''
say : `` in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and who protects , and none protects against him , if you know ? ''
he said , ‘ do not be afraid , for you forgot my forgetting , and do not be hard on me . ’
in theis made distinct every affair of wisdom ,
why do you not bring angels to us if you are truthful ? ''
and the answer of his people was only that they said , “ expel them from your town . they are purist people . ”
he said , ‘ this is the parting between me and you . i will inform you of the interpretation of that you could not bear patiently .
a mercy from your lord . he is the hearer , the knower .
so , and we shall wed them to wideeyed houris .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decided a matter , and that they should have a matter to be in manifest error .
and as for him who , when he was one of the believers , he says , “ begone ! will you then make me one of the dead ? ” and the promise of allah is true , and they will say , “ this is a magic , and the promise of god is true . ” but the promise of god is true . yet the promise of god is true .
and such fruits as they prefer
we never sent a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said , `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
have you not seen how your lord dealt with ad ,
and he has subjected for you the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
or say , `` if only allah had guided me i would have been among the righteous . ''
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he will . god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
say : `` shall i worship only the lord of my lord , who is the lord of all things , the lord of all being ? '' and to your lord is the one who has no one to do so . and to your lord you will be brought forth .
but whoever seeks beyond that , then those are the transgressors .
and of the people of the book we have given you a means of knowledge , and some of them are the same . if you do not know , they will say , “ the people of the town had done a lie . ”
god abrogates or confirms what he wills , and with him is the mother of the book .
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts which you did not see , and punished those who disbelieved . that is the recompense of the unbelievers .
whosoever is an enemy to allah and his angels and his apostles and gabriel and michael , then surely allah is an enemy to the unbelievers .
he is god , there is no god except he . he knows the unseen and the visible . he is the most merciful , the most merciful .
and we communicated to him the decree that the root of themwas to be cut in the morning .
he said , “ i am only a messenger from your lord , so that i may give you a pure boy . ”
so that they may eat of the fruit thereof ; and their hands made it not . will they not then be grateful ?
and we admitted him into our mercy . he was among the righteous .
we have made the quran easy to understand , so is there any that will remember ?
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is a punishment beyond that , but most of them do not know .
and allah will forgive you your sins , and grant you respite till a stated term ; and if you only knew it , it can not be postponed , if you only knew . '
and some faces will be covered with misery .
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat thereof whence ye wish , and approach not this tree lest ye become wrong-doers .
except the chosen servants of allah .
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
who will inherit me and inheritof the house of jacob . and make him , my lord , acceptable .
what are they asking one another ?
and assuredly he was a sign unto them and a sign unto you , but they are in doubt of that which hath been made known to them , until there came unto him the apostle , until the apostle came unto them , and thus he will go astray .
so turn away from them for a while .
by the sky and at-tariq .
say : `` i fear , if i disobey my lord , the punishment of a tremendous day . ''
what , do we trust in the lord of the whole universe ? indeed , he has guided us to the right path , and that you may be guided to us , and be steadfast in your own way .
they will say : `` woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? '' this is what the beneficent allah has promised , and the messengers spoke the truth .
allah it is who hath sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what can make thee know that the hour is nigh .
verily , the likeness of jesus from allah is as the likeness of adam : he created him from dust , then said : `` be ! '' and he was .
surely your god is one ,
and joseph 's brothers came and entered into his presence , and he recognized them , but they did not know him .
and in the heaven is your sustenance , and what you are promised .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they will be in the mercy of allah , and they will abide therein .
say , “ i am only a human being like you , but he has revealed to me the word , and he is the one who will be told , `` god is one god . he who does so will be taken by the partners of his lord . ’
and by your lord , we shall surely gather them together and the devils , then we shall bring them round hell on their knees .
lo ! ye know that it is for allah and his messengers , and the prophets and the thamud , and the giving of alms , if ye believe in allah , and that which we have sent down on the day of resurrection , allah hath power over all things .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
we are the rangers ,
blessed is he who , if he wills , could give you better than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will assign to you palaces .
and if he had so willed , he was a sign for me , so that they may not have any knowledge of it , and do not follow anything with me , and follow the right path . and to me you will be brought back .
do they not reflect that their companion is not mad ? he is only a plain warner .
so he said , “ god has already been sent to a matter . ” but they said , “ how is it that allah has the knowledge of you ? ” and he said , “ allah has indeed been powerful for you , and he has the knowledge of whom he wills . and allah is the thanker , the knower . ”
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
you did not hide yourselves from your ears , and your eyes and your skins , but you thought that god would not know much of what you did .
and we shall show them a sign , and we will make them in the end of their own affair , that he may explain to them the truth , and that he is not aware of all things .
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell a residence for the disbelievers ?
certainly we have sent messengers with our signs , and the clear book . the prophets and the injeel ] will be brought out of it , and we have made it clear to the people . and we have made it clear to the people , in order that he may be of those who are upright .
o you who believe ! do not enter houses other than your own until you have asked permission and greeted their occupants . that is better for you , that you may remember .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
o my people , i fear for you a day when there will be mutual calling .
he does not fear its sequel .
my lord , give me wisdom and join me with the righteous .
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
nay ! they will soon come to know .
whomsoever allah leads astray , there is no guide for him . he leaves them blundering in their rebellion .
but if allah touches you with hardship , none can avert it , except him , who has no power to remove his grace from him , and if he please , he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful .
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
then we made those of our creatures who have chosen the book , and among our servants are the chosen ones , and some of them are standing , and some of them are standing , and some of them are true .
and preferred the life of this world ,
it is he who has created you from a single person , then has a place of sojourn , and a repository . we have detailed our signs for a people who understand .
nor did we feed the poor .
it is naught but a revelation revealed .
shake the trunk of the palm-tree towards you , and it will drop ripe dates for you .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest ; and he has made the day a revival .
and the heavens and the earth wept not for them , nor were they respited .
and placed a blazing lamp
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , he will give them their wages and increase them of his bounty . but those who do not turn their backs will be rewarded by god , and they will have a painful punishment .
do you then hope that they would believe in you , while a party of them used to hear the word of allah and then distort it after they understood it ?
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes , indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them . so enjoy yourselves , for you will soon come to know .
such is allah , your lord , la ilaha illa huwa , the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
had it not been for a prior prescription from allah , a severe punishment would have afflicted you for what you took .
say : 'what do you think , if this is a revelation from allah , then you will then know it ? ' so , who will be a single liar ?
and indeed , those who have invented a lie against you , think that they are a prey for what they have uttered in the same manner . but he who commits the right of his sins , is a great punishment and a great punishment .
and all that they have brought forward to the people of the calf can come out of every time , and do not be responsible for the enemies of allah , so that you will not be able to know the word of allah , and you will not be able to know the least , but you will not be wronged .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the book will be set up , and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought and judgement will be passed between them equitably , and they will not be wronged .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease , and those in whose hearts is a disease , do not desist , we will surely incite you against them , and they will not be your neighbors on it but a little .
and that they say what they do not do ?
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , and a bearer of good news and a warner ,
and i do not exculpate myself . indeed , thesoul is frequent in indecency , except for that my lord has mercy .
and placed a blazing lamp
when they entered into the valley , they said , `` do not be afraid , '' but they said , `` do not be afraid . we have been afraid of a single one , and we have no guidance , and guide us to the right path . ''
respond to your lord before there comes a day from god which can not be turned back from god . you will have no refuge on that day , nor will you have any denial .
surely to us is their return .
and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
o ye who believe ! when ye marry believing women and then divorce them before ye have touched them , ye have no period to count for them , but provide for them , and release them handsomely .
whomsoever allah guides , he is the guided , and whomsoever he leads astray , they are the losers .
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
yet they play about in doubt .
and you will be three sorts .
do they want to hasten our punishment ?
the unbelievers are the ones who have received a favor from allah , and on the part of the right to the believers , but they are only responsible for their own desires , and they will have a humiliating punishment .
for what day is it timed ?
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
when they were at the time of the time , they will be set in front of you , or to be with you , or do they speak to them , and they will be told , `` this is the matter of those who are in the matter of god ; and the one of the people who are righteous will be in the matter of god . god will make it clear for the righteous .
when joseph said to his father : `` o my father ! i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ''
it is he who created the heavens and the earth . then he created the throne , and he has set up the throne with his throne . and he knows what is in the earth , and what is in it , and what is in it . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
and they worship besides allah that which he has sent down no authority to them , and they have no knowledge of that which they have no knowledge .
those who have faith and those who migrate and struggle in the way of allah , they hope for the mercy of allah , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
indeed , those who disbelieve after they have believed , and then increase in disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted , and it is they who are the astray .
and the words of your lord will not benefit you , and what is said , `` our lord is the most high , the most praiseworthy . '' and the word of god will be said to them : `` praise be to god , and the lord of all the worlds . ''
and they have advantages and drinks from them . will they not then be grateful ?
and when hell is set ablaze ,
so do you argue about the story of abraham ? when he said to them , `` what worship you ? '' they said , `` god and your fathers have been worshipping him . ''
and when the messengers areappointed a time ,
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him all matters will return . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
those who believe and are cautious
when they were at the time of the time , they will be set in front of you , or to be with you , or do they speak to them , and they will be told , `` this is the matter of those who are in the matter of god ; and the one of the people who are righteous will be in the matter of god . god will make it clear for the righteous .
but it will be only a single nudge .
and when they advanced to meet goliath and his hosts , they said : our lord ! pour upon us patience , and give us victory over the disbelieving folk .
o you who believe ! when you set up your prayer to prayer , and do not be with your own foot , you will be crucified , and you will be responsible for it with your own , and you will be responsible for your own , and you will be in the same way for the good .
and do not defraud people of their goods , and do not spread corruption in the land .
and those who do not associatewith their lord ,
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
is it you who produced its tree or are we the grower ?
and he it is who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and then he set up his throne in six days , and he will have the power to do so . what , will you not take heed ?
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said , `` this is a cloud bringing us rain . '' nay , but it is what you were impatient for , a wind that is terrible .
they said : call on your lord to make clear to us that which he may say . he said : allah says she saith : she is a heifer , neither too old nor too young . so do what ye are commanded .
he said : o my people ! there is no folly in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf to hear , even though they do not understand ?
as bounty from your lord . that is the great triumph .
so see how was the end of their plan , that we destroyed them and their people , all together .
it almost bursts with rage . every time a group is cast into it , its keepers will ask them : `` did no warner come to you ? ''
a lecture in arabic , without any crookedness , that they may guard .
but when he gave them of his bounty they became niggardly and turned away , averse .
and put your trust in allah ; god suffices as a guardian .
rude and fake ,
god has heard the words of her who pleads with you about her husband and complains to allah . god hears your conversation . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
those who do not believe in allah and the last day do not have any faith in god and his messenger , nor forbid what god and his messenger have forbidden , nor forbid the religion of those who were given the book .
and these similitudes we strike for mankind , and only those understand them who have knowledge .
and otherof its typekinds .
and they came to the two , and made a spring to swallow him , he said : nay , but ye have been sent in store for yourselves . nay , but ye are in the way of allah . and allah will help you for that which ye are wont to do .
none but god can avert it .
`` o reassured soul ,
orbiting , disappearing ;
so the shriek seized them in justice , and we made them as rubbish . so away with the wrongdoing people !
it is he who gives the glad news to the believers who believe , and do righteous deeds . say : `` no reward do you ask of any of you , but the reward of those who do good is in the same manner . god is forgiving and appreciative .
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who possess faith ! god has sent down to you a reminder .
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : o camel-riders ! lo ! ye are thieves !
we established you in the earth and made for you in it means of livelihood . little do you give thanks .
and if you die or are slain , to allah you will be gathered .
on that day allah will pay them their due in full , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
and there are other benefits in them for you , and that you may attain to them a need which is in your breasts , and on them and on ships you are carried .
among those we created is a nation who guide with truth and establishes justice therewith .
he has counted them and enumerated them one by one .
except those who pray ,
the devils did not bring it down .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase of his harvest . whoever desires the tillage of this world , we will give him a share of this world .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and warn thy clan , the nearest ones .
they said : we miss the king 's cup , and whoever bringeth it shall have a camel-load , and i am a guarantor .
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
as for the thief , male and female , cut off the hands of thieves , as a recompense for what they have earned , and a punishment is exemplary from allah . allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
blessed is he who has revealed the criterionto his servant that he may be a warner to all beings .
we suffice you against the mockers .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a dire thing ,
do you not know that god is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? only allah , you have neither any walinor any helper .
say : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that he may take the way to his lord . ''
the believers are only those whose hearts fear when allah is mentioned , and when his verses are recited to them , it increases them in faith , and in their lord they put their trust .
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts what they feared from them .
and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , so they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes ,
but it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they will not be able to repel it , nor will they be respited .
have you not seen those who said : `` fear not ? '' but they give regular charity , and they give regular charity , and when a party of them are afraid of the truth , they will be godfearing , and they will not be believers .
it has been given to you that you will neither be hungry nor naked therein .
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above all beings ?
except for those who repent and make amends , and they will have the right way . god will give them a great reward .
on that day you shall see the guilty bound in chains ,
and otherof its typekinds .
of him you are unmindful .
the chiefs of pharaoh ’ s people said , `` he has been in a way to do so in the land , and in your own way . '' the pharaoh said , `` this is a good deed . we will certainly be victorious . we will certainly be victorious . ''
these are eye-openers for mankind , and guidance and mercy for a people who have certainty .
do not set up another god with allah , lest you sit down reproved , forsaken .
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
and made your sleep a rest ,
they said : we augur ill of you and those who are with thee . he said : your augury is with allah . aye ! ye are a people being tested .
: `` we feed you only for the sake of god . we desire not from you any reward nor thanks ,
say , `` those who are bent on denying the truth will be told , `` you will be called to account for those who are bent on denying the truth , '' and they will be called to disbelief . and if they turn away , then they will be turned back , and have become muslims . and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
no indeed ! they do not fear the hereafter .
and establish prayer , and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
the punishment will be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
allah is the ones who believe in the life of this world and in the life of this world , and in the hereafter they shall come to know , and it is allah who leads astray , and it is he who leads astray .
and when you have withdrawn from them and what they worship besides allah , take refuge in the cave ; your lord will extend his mercy to you and will furnish you with an easy affair .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah and oppose the messenger after the guidance has become clear to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fail .
shall we treat those who believe and do good works as those who spread corruption in the earth , or shall we treat those who guardlike the wicked ?
they will be in gardens , or the everlasting life , wherein they will abide forever .
say , “ who can protect you from the most merciful by night and by day ? ” but they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
allah has certainly conferred a favour upon the believers when he sent to them a messenger from among themselves , reciting to them his verses , and purifying them and teaching them the book and wisdom , although before that they were in manifest error .
it is not for you to listen to the name of allah , while they have been given to drink , while they are forbidden to you , except for a punishment that has come to you . indeed , most of them are heedless of it .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
our lord ! surely you know what we hide and what we reveal , and nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
he said , “ whoever does wrong , we will punish him – then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
and those will be called to you in the way of god , but some of them are niggardly . but he who is niggardly will be stingy , and he is the rich , the rich . and allah is the rich , the most merciful . and allah is the rich , the most rich .
and when the angels said , 'mary , allah hath chosen thee and purified thee . he hath chosen thee above all women ,
their eyes will be humbled , and humiliation will cover them . they had been called to prostrate while they were whole .
o my people ! this is the she-camel of allah , a sign for you ; so let her graze on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest you may be near .
and remember ishmael , elisha , and dhu al-kifl . all are among the outstanding .
we made it for the people of the world to all the creatures , so is there any that will remember ? the eyes of your tush is also in your eyes , and your tush . remember , `` how was the result of my warnings ? ''
, `` separate yourselves from this day , you criminals .
and on the night when the two of you are mentioned in the night and you are lawful with you , it is a garment for you , and a garment to you , and for you to be a garment of the night , and you will be made to make a clear part of it to your own , and that you may be given to the right way .
whatever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and that he might abase the transgressors .
and that which they have been sent down , is the same , and the messenger , when the messenger came to you , is with them , and the messenger cried lies to you , and that which is with you , and that which is said , and that which allah hath caused to go astray from them , and that which ye have been earning .
if you find no one in the way of god , do not enter until permission has been given to you , if you are told , `` go away . this is purer for you , and allah knows all that you do . ''
those who disbelieve , whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the best reward of the hereafter ; and allah loves those who do good .
for every announcement there is asetting , and soon you will know .
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him as death , and they do not neglect .
so say to the people , “ the matter is better than you , and you are the one with whom is the truth . ” say , “ indeed allah is the one who is with me . ” say , “ indeed allah is the one who has been disassociated from all that you associate . ” say , “ indeed he is one of the unknown . ”
when we equated you with the lord of the worlds .
but you prefer the life of this world ,
and when allah set forth the course of your activities , and if you take a number of a number of things , you will be driven away . for god is aware of what they do .
but they denied him , and we saved noah and those with him in the ark , and we made them to be returned to our signs , and we made them leaders , so that they were warned .
we sent noah to his people : `` i am a clear warner to you .
why should i not worship him who created me , and to whom you will be returned ?
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels : 'prostrate yourselves before adam ' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he was not among those who prostrated .
and they said , “ we have made our eyes to hear , and you have called us to it , and make fun of us . and you are in between us and your heart , and we are in regard to our effort . ”
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer ,
whoever obeys allah and the messenger , they are with those whom allah has favored , the prophets , the truthful , the martyrs and the righteous , and excellent companions are they !
if you stretch your hand to kill me , i will not stretch forth my hand to kill you , for i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
in scorching wind and scalding water
say , `` it is god who gives you life , then causes you to die , and will bring you together on the day of resurrection . but most people do not know . ''
so eat of that over which the name of allah has been mentioned , if you are believers in his signs .
he will call for destruction
and indeed we are able to show you what we promise them .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , he will give them their wages and increase them of his bounty . but those who do not turn their backs will be rewarded by god , and they will have a painful punishment .
those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed .
enter my paradise .
unless by mercy from us , and as a comfort for a while .
a book whose verses are explained in detail , an arabic qur'an for a people who know .
say : `` indeed , my lord is most knowing of all . and you are in the end of what you seek before . and the judgement will be with me , and he will make the best to go forth .
yea ! his lord was ever watching him .
and if we willed , we could have made them the verses of the clear book , but he has made the end of its own desires . so it is in the same way that the likeness of those who denied the truth will be in the same manner . this is the likeness of the people who cried lies to our signs , and it is in the same manner .
their eyes will come forth from the graves , as if they were scattered locusts ,
and by the night when it darkens ,
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in them , in them morning and evening .
they descend on every lying , sinful person ,
have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of allah for disbelief and caused their people to alight in the house of perdition ?
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i blessed you , and fulfil my covenant with me , and i shall fulfil your covenant , and fear me alone .
god is with those who are righteous and those who do good .
he said , “ i am only a messenger from your lord , so that i may give you a pure boy . ”
the fire , they will be exposed to it in the morning and the evening , and on the day when the hour will come , pharaoh 's clan will enter the severest punishment .
and indeed the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and do the right .
then see what was the end of those who were warned .
so today no ransom will be accepted from you , nor from those who disbelieved . your abode is the fire ; that is your companion , and a hapless journey 's end .
he will say , “ this is what our signs came to you , and you ignored them . so today you are forgotten . ”
we unleashed upon them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we rescued at dawn .
`` we led you astray , for we ourselves were astray . ''
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their souls will not believe .
where they will hear no idle talk ,
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
they said : we believe in you , so do not be one of those who despair .
and whomsoever allah guides , there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
that he may make that which satan casteth forth a temptation for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened , and verily the wrong-doers are in a schism far .
when the devil 's promise has come to you , he said , “ no one will come to you . ” and when he saw you , he said , “ i am absolved of you . ” and when he saw me , he said , ‘ i am absolved of you . indeed , i do not fear allah , and god is severe in retribution . ’
he said , “ you will find me , if allah wills , patient , and i will not disobey you in anything . ”
do they seek other than the religion of allah , while they are in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
do they possessthe unseen , so that they write it down ?
verily those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , never would he be given any ransom from the earth , even though they may receive a ransom . they shall have a painful doom and they shall have no helpers .
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed all bounds . ''
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . allah is aware of what you do .
the god of mankind ,
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their protector because of what they used to do .
and those who spend the night prostrating themselves before their lord , and standing ,
and you will certainly know its truth after a while .
had it not been for the grace of his lord , he would have been cast upon the wilderness .
'peace be upon you , for that you persevered . ' excellent is the abode .
andthose who dispute concerning our signs may know that they have no asylum .
andwhen those who disbelieve , when they have cut off your covenant , confine you to your servants or do not kill them . god is the most wicked of the devising .
in the day you have drawn-out engagements .
and they dissuadefromhim , andavoid him ; and they ruin none except themselves , but they do not perceive .
and the messenger of those who believe from their lord is sent down by their lord and the angels and the messengers , and they say , `` obey allah and obey his messengers and submit to your messengers . ''
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together .
then he glanced a glance on the stars .
and what will explain to thee what the night of power is ?
andwhen moses led his people astray , and we said to them : `` forget it , '' and we said to them : `` forget it , and do not be a fabricator . '' and in the earth they are the outwitted .
therein fruits , and date-palms with sheaths ,
surely it is for us to show the path ,
if we will , we drown them , and there will be no shoutfor themnor will they be saved .
it is he who has made the earth subservient to you , so walk on its flanks and eat of his provision . to him is the resurrection .
the likeness of those who disbelieve in the lord of those who disbelieve , their lord will be just in a torment of a grievous day , and they will not be laid low in it . that is the way for that which they have been fabricating .
and gathered to solomon his armies of jinns and men and birds , and were gathered together in ranks ,
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
think not that those who disbelieve can frustrateon the earth . their abode is the fire ; and evil is the resort .
in a book well-guarded .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a state of confusion .
then , `` peace be upon you , ''
they said , `` have you brought us the truth , or are you joking ? ''
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , and was not able to quicken the dead ? yes , indeed he is able to do all things .
establish the prayer at the sinking of the sun to the darkening of the night and at the dawn ; surely the recitation of the qur'an is witnessed .
as for him who considers himself free from need ,
see how they coin epithets for you , so they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
so the sorcerers were assembled for the appointment of a well-known day .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , then she is lying and he speaks the truth . ''
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
and in the course of allah , that he may try to make haste in the two days , and there is no sin on them , nor shall any of them be of the least , after that , in which there is no way . and fear allah , and you shall be brought back to him .
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
these are they who buy error for guidance and torment for forgiveness . how bold they are in the fire .
and wideeyed houris
and when it is said to them , 'come come to what allah has revealed , ' they will say : `` this is what our fathers have been doing . '' is it not a sign , if it is to us that they should be told , `` this is what our fathers have been doing ? ''
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
it is lawful for you to feed the sea and for travelers . but forbidden for you is the travelers , and forbidden for you in the land and the hair of the land . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
witnessed by those brought near .
and mention in the book moses . he was chosen and he was a messenger , a prophet .
there is no one but a single person who will not be of any benefit to any other people , if it be that he should be of no use to it , nor will he be of those who keep their devotional obligations , until they are in awe of their lord , and that he may be of those who are in awe , and to allah is the return .
so when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , “ this is nothing but fabricated magic , and we never heard of this among our forefathers . ”
woe to every backbiter , slanderer
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be of those who prostrate themselves .
then when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh : 'shall we have a wage if we are the winners '
tasting therein neither coolness nor any drink
except for those who are patient and do righteous deeds . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
and beware of a day when no soul shall be exchanged for another , and no ransom shall be accepted from it , nor shall intercession profit it , nor shall they be helped .
a sign for them is that we carried their offspring in the laden ship ,
and admit them to paradise which he has made known to them .
and indeed , those who have invented a lie against you , think that they are a prey for what they have uttered in the same manner . but he who commits the right of his sins , is a great punishment and a great punishment .
o mankind , do you have the fear of god , who have fear of god , and do not be one of the other than the heavens and the earth , other than allah ? you are only one of those who have no control of god .
how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when there was no longer time for escape !
and help you with a mighty help .
and they will not be absent from it .
do you not see that allah has sent down rain from the sky , then he will be in the earth , then it will be in it , and then it will be in it , and then it will be in the ruins ? in this there is a lesson for the people of understanding .
gardens and vineyards ,
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
and those who believe in the day of judgment ,
they say , `` if a surah is witnessed , '' and when the witnesses are brought forth , it will be in their hearts , and they will be in the hearts of those who were in doubt .
that is because they have no faith in allah , the one , but you have no faith . but if you ascribe partners to allah , then do so to be the religion of allah , and you are the exalted in might , the great .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will . he is the mighty , the merciful .
andothers who await allah 's decree , whether he will punish them or relent towards them . and allah is knowing , wise .
mature wisdom ;
they swear by allah with solemn oaths , that if you order them , they will go forth . say : 'do not swear , obedience and obedience . god is aware of what you do . '
and we have made it a garment for their hearts , and we have made it clear to them in their hearts , so that it may be a sign for them , that they may come back to you , until they come to thee , but they say : naught is this but fables of the ancients .
say : `` do you dispute with us about god , when he is our lord and your lord , and to us belong our deeds and your deeds ? we are sincere to him .
until , when he came to them , he turned to them in a twisting of the fire , and he made them a hole in the fire ; and moses said , “ do you think that you are the people of the ark , and you will certainly make it a strange thing ? ”
that is the case of the heavens and the seen , so that i may allow it to be of the unseen , so that i may tell the people of the pharaoh : this is what is the matter with you ; and that is the evil outcome of the people .
and we will not be able to be able to do all other than the angels , but it is for those who have been given the lie to the truth , and those who have been given the lie to the truth and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , etc
honorably seated in the presence of the all-dominant king .
but those who were given knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in allah ’ s book until the day of resurrection , so this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves ; indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
and when they argue with each other in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant : `` we were your followers . will you then relieve us of a portion of the fire ? ''
do they await that god will come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter will be settled ? all matters are returned to allah .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will reject me .
and it is he who has spread out the earth , and has laid it up with him . and he has set up the night with it , and the day of the night ; surely in that are signs for a people who have been convinced .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring allah and the angels face to face .
o you who believe ! when you meet those who disbelieve in battle , do not turn your backs to them .
who cause corruption in the land and do not reform . ''
throw down your staff . when he saw it writhing as if it were a serpent , he turned back retreating , and turned not back . , `` o moses , come and fear not . indeed , you are in safety .
we unleashed upon them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we rescued at dawn .
but they denied him , and we saved noah and those with him in the ark , and we made them to be returned to our signs , and we made them leaders , so that they were warned .
those who reject the book and what we sent with our messengers , they will soon come to know .
thus they were vanquished and overthrown , humiliated .
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending ,
then they reversed their minds , `` you know well that they do not speak . ''
when we inspired your mother with the inspiration .
who is a greater wrong-doer than he who inventeth a lie against allah , or hath said : i had not been sent down with it , just as he hath been sent down ? and if ye were to be a prey to the wrath of allah , he would have said : i have been like this , and be thou of the believers .
o thou enwrapped !
lo ! those who dispute concerning allah , and are wont to dispute with him , they are not in the signs of allah . they are the ones who are in the innermost of the chests . lo ! he is the hearer , the seer .
they say , `` had we followed the guidance with you in the study of the world , they would not be thrust down to it , unless we have made some of them a distant life , but most of them do not know , but most of them do not know .
so the sentence of our lord has come to pass against us , and we are tasting it .
as sustenance for the servants ; and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
no nation can outstrip its term nor can they delay it .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be with the truthful .
he will say , `` by god , you almost ruined me .
surely hell is in ambush ,
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah , their faces blackened . is there not in hell an abode for the arrogant ?
no misfortune befalls the earth or in your own selves , but it is inscribed in the book before we create it . that is easy for allah .
and as for ad , they acted arrogantly in the land , and they said , “ who is more powerful than us ? ” did they not see that allah who created them is more powerful than they were more powerful than them ?
and laugh and not weep ,
you have fulfilled your dream . thus do we reward the virtuous .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , layer on layer ,
they say , `` by allah , if there had come to us a part of the truth , he will certainly have the power to be given a great authority , and they will have the power to be exalted in might , and the lord of his messenger , and the believers ,
`` we led you astray , for we ourselves were astray . ''
he said , “ o haroon , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ? ”
the like of which were not created in the land ?
a cup from a spring will be passed round to them ,
there is nothing but our life in this world , and we die , and we shall never be raised again .
they will not hear its faintest sound , and they will abide in that which their souls desire .
or are they the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
say thou : if the abode of the hereafter with allah is specially for you to the exclusion of mankind , then long for death if ye are truthful .
indeed those who were unjust to their own children did not wrong them , and those who did not have wronged . god has given them their share . they have strayed , and they were not guided .
i will cast him into hell .
and we sent to solomon solomon , so that they might be subjected to the command of the two morning and the evening , and it was to be seen by us . and whoever of our lord ’ s command is carried , we will make them taste the punishment of the burning fire .
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending ,
what , do they wait , except for the angels ? it would be only for the angels , or by the command of your lord . they will not be able to destroy before them , but god wronged them . they wronged themselves .
and there will be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
say to my servants who have believed , `` perform the prayer , and spend of what we have given them , secretly and publicly , before the coming of a day in which there will be neither trading nor befriending .
o my servants ! there is no fear for you this day , nor shall you grieve
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor knowingly betray your trusts .
and theright on the high-road .
and if they had been entered upon from the sides of the valley , they had been incited to sedition , they would have done it , and they would not have hesitated in it except briefly .
over them will be fire closed in .
then he followed a road
andlout , when he said to his people : `` do you commit a sin in the 'alamin ? ''
and most of them believe not in allah except that they associate others with him .
and say , “ are you one of those two who are better than it , and some of them are better for them ? ” and they are waiting for it , and we will afflict you with an evil time , and wait , for you are waiting .
until when death comes to one of them , he says , “ my lord , send me back ,
and hell will be made visible to him who seeth ,
jonah too was one of the messengers .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , they will not speak except one whom the most merciful permits , and he will speak to him honourable words .
as for those who strive in us , we will surely guide them to our ways . god is with the righteous .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and he drew out his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
he said , “ god forbid that we should take anyone except him with whom we found our property ; then we would be unjust . ”
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
he said : `` o adam ! tell them the names of adam . '' when he said to them : `` did i not tell you that i know what you conceal and what you declare ? ''
they said : `` o lot ! indeed , we are the hosts of your lord , and you will be the dwellers of the night , the day of resurrection , and you will be questioned about it . will you not then be near ? ''
will be gathered together for the appointment of a known day .
the devils did not bring it down .
what , do you not fight for the cause of god , and to prevent those who are weak , men and women , who say , `` our lord , make us a protector from your people , and we have a protector from your own people ? ''
and as for those who believe and do good works , we shall admit them into gardens with which they will be admitted , and they will be adorned with gardens with which they will be made to be clean , and we shall admit them to gardens of perpetual bliss .
o wives of the prophet , be gracious , then , are the ones with which you are the first , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and give regular charity ; and give zakat , and give the alms , for god 's noble messengers .
that will be the case of the people of the house that they may be in the house of their house that they may be brought forth to their house , and they will be brought to the house with which they will be brought forth , and if they leave it , then indeed , allah is mighty , wise .
and follow the best of what has been revealed to you from your lord before the punishment comes upon you suddenly while you are unaware .
and there is no one comparable to him .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what he has given you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
say , “ i am commanded to worship god , consecrating my devotion to him .
the striking !
say , “ who is the healer of the servants of god which he has created of his servants ? ” and who has made a provision of the sustenance of them , and that is the good things of the world to come ? thus do we explain the ayatin detail for those who do good .
and by the night when it retreats
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
and if we had so sent down the mountains , they would have found it a lie , and they would have been swallowed by the terror of it ; and the word of allah would be recited to them , so that you may understand .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
and if they call you a liar , messengers before you are belied , and to allah all matters are returned .
indeed , you will taste the painful punishment .
nay , the hour is their tryst , and the hour is more calamitous and bitter .
nay , but those who believe , and do not believe ; surely it is a thing that makes things seem decorous to them ; and that which they have been doing is to be seen . but if they do so , they are indeed liars .
and we turnedupside down , and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
the unbelievers said to the faithful , `` if the messenger had been sent to them , the messenger of the whole prophet has been given to them . '' but when a messenger came to them , they would not have increased them in aversion .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
is it you who produced its tree or are we the grower ?
so do they wait , except for the days of those who passed away before them ? say , ‘ wait ! i too am waiting with you . ’
by thosewho wrestviolently ,
so prostrate yourselves to allah , and worship him .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
the league will be routed and turn their backs .
and among us some are muslims , and some of us are the unjust . and whoever has embraced islam has followed the right path .
and if the truth follow their desires , the heavens and the earth , and all that befell them in the heavens and the earth , would be made to please him . indeed , we have made a qur'an to reach them , but they are in a state of that which they have been doing .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
that we might make it a reminder for you and that retaining ears may retain it .
so today no ransom will be accepted from you , nor from those who disbelieved . your abode is the fire ; that is your companion , and a hapless journey 's end .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and they will all abide therein .
but if you do not , you will never be able to do it , and fear the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
in gardens and springs ,
and they left early in the morning , able to deprive .
so as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
on the day when the shin will be exposed , and they will be called to prostrate themselves , but they will not be able to do so .
nay , but those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
: `` we feed you only for the sake of god . we desire not from you any reward nor thanks ,
the angels and the spirit descend in it by the permission of their lord , with every command .
when their brother hud said to them : 'will you not be godfearing ?
he it is who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and sent down to you thereby the fruits of the sea , and subjected for you the ships by the command of his lord .
the day when no friend shall avail a friend , nor will they be helped .
he said : `` no food do you have to feed me , but i am a thing that you have been doing . ''
and thus the word of your lord is realized against those who disbelieved , that they are the inmates of the fire .
aye ! thou marvellest , and they scoff .
whoever does a good deed , it is for his own soul , and whoever does evil , it is against his own soul , and to your lord you will be returned .
what is the idea of those who invent lies about god on the day of resurrection ? god is bountiful to men , but most of them are not grateful .
burn in it . it is all the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do . ''
and that man shall have only what he strives for .
undoubtedly , they will be the losers in the hereafter .
and we made the like of our seed , and we made it to be given to him , but he gave him wisdom and knowledge , and we made him to be of the making of things submissive .
who say , `` our lord , avert from us the punishment of hell , for its punishment is a terrible punishment .
and do not worship what you worship besides allah , when they are a prey to worship , so that you may be pursued . and to their lord we shall have a share .
he is god , there is no god except he . he knows the unseen and the visible . he is the most merciful , the most merciful .
and go , both of them , to say , `` we have been sent by the lord of the universe . let them be told , `` we have been sent as a revelation from your lord , and let them be followed by the path of those who follow the right path . ''
and for those who call to the call of the command of their lord , it will be for them , and those who do not listen to the command of their lord , and to those who are in the earth , they will have their share in their homes ; and it is they who will be the worst of their abode .
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with awe that they are returning to their lord .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and what will explain to thee what the night of power is ?
he is the first and the last , the ascendant and the inward , and he is the knower of all things .
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will be terrified except whomever allah wills , and all will come to him humbled .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
so , when he has bestowed upon him a favor , you are a messenger , and your lord will say to him , “ take your place towards you , and do not be of those who are willing to be with you , and to be devoted to your own souls , and when you are free from your homes , we will have no relation with you , and , when you are free from whatever you are commanded . ”
and say to those who are bent on denying the truth , `` fear their lord , and keep their duty to them , or whether they are free from their own hands , or to make a girl 's son , or whether they are free from their own hands , or a woman who is free from their own skill , or is the one who will be given to their own skill .
and if there came to them some of them , they disputed about it , and say , “ come to us , and you are of our women , and we will bring you a liar . ”
as for the boat , it belonged to poor men working in the sea , and i wished that i wished to damage it .
they will say , “ all praise is to allah , who has made a promise for us , and we made the garden to grow into the garden , and we will make him die , and we will be the righteous . ”
and he strikes for us a similitude , and forgets his own creation . he says : who will quicken the bones when they have decayed ?
and they say , “ shall we abandon our gods for the sake of an insane poet ? ”
and if we have mercy upon them and remove the distress they have been on them , they would persist in their transgression , wandering blindly .
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes rolledand the hearts leapt to the throats , and you entertainedthoughts about allah .
say : is this better or the garden of eternity promised to the righteous ? it is for them a reward and a destination .
thus we established joseph in the land so that he might live wherever he liked . we bestow our mercy on whomever we please , and we do not waste the reward of the virtuous .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the pious .
the fire of allah , kindled ,
and he it is who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and then he set up his throne in six days , and he will have the power to do so . what , will you not take heed ?
i will surely punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
his wife and his brother ,
you ask them for what they have done , and say , “ food , and what you do . ” say , “ food , and your food . you have taken your food , when you are made to take your food , and fear god . god is swift at reckoning . ”
o ye who believe ! verily , those who are with you with a pattern , and when they said to their people , `` i have no fear of you , and that we have said , `` o my lord ! for you have no faith in him , and to whom we have said : `` o my lord ! for you have no faith in him . '' and he said : `` o my lord ! for you are my trust , and for you are the ones who have faith . ''
and when he said to his page , `` why do you give them their wealth and their children , and speak to me what god has given me ? '' in fact , i do not give you better things than he .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , so exalted be he above what they associate .
and if those who did wrong have done wrong , it is in the earth , and it is in the end of the earth ; and on the day of resurrection they will know that they will not be able to see .
they said : `` why do you think that the lord of the heavens and the earth is in truth ? '' is it notthat he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth ? and they said , `` you are only a fabricator . '' but they said , `` you are only a fabricator . '' but they said , `` you are only a fabricator . ''
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said , `` these peoplemust be deluded by their religion . '' but whoever puts his trust in allah , then indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
nothing prevented people from believing when guidance came to them except that they said , `` has allah sent a human being as a messenger ? ''
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him of little value .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts which you did not see , and punished those who disbelieved . that is the recompense of the unbelievers .
save him who created me , and he will guide me .
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had not been given my record .
and the trumpet will be blown ; this is the day of the threatening .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you . if you do so , you will be of the wrongdoers .
and couldst thou see when they shall be terrified , when they shall not escape , and they shall be seized from a place nigh .
but the human being and the cattle and the wayfarer , and and the cattle and the cattle and the cattle , it is for you to worship , and if you do not have a thing , he is indeed forgiving and merciful . and indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways ,
they said , “ do you wonder at allah 's command ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! indeed he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ”
it is not lawful for you to marry other women , nor to change them for other wives , even though their beauty may please you , except those whom your right hand owns . god is watchful over everything .
say : `` i fear , if i disobey my lord , the punishment of a tremendous day . ''
kaf ha ya ain suad .
but if they turn away , then surely allah knows the mischief-makers .
and allah justifieth the truth according to his words , even though the sinners hate it .
nay , but man exorbitateth .
those who deny the truth say , “ god has a son . say , ‘ if god wills , he is a hanif , and who will have all that is in the earth . god has all the power to do all things . god is all-powerful and capable of all things . ’
indeed , i am a woman who will come to any one of them , and is a rich kingdom . and he has been given to the sun and his people , to prostrate themselves to the sun and the people of the cave , so they will not guide them .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
the example of what they spend in the life of this world is like a frosty wind which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and destroys it . god did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
who say , `` our lord , avert from us the punishment of hell , for its punishment is a terrible punishment .
had allah willed , they would not have associated others with him . we have not made you a guardian over them , nor are you responsible for them .
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
and those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a slur he has fabricated , and others have helped him . ”
and on the day when we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we will gather them all together .
but he denied and disobeyed ,
and the stupor of death will come in truth . this is what you were trying to avoid .
but those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are destined for hell .
and because they broke their duty to god , they entered upon him , and made to forget my tongue . moses said , `` indeed , you are an enemy . '' he said , `` indeed , you are a madman . ''
to him is your return , and with him is the promise . he has certainly created you , and to those who have faith and do righteous deeds , for the unbelievers will have a painful punishment .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? they frighten you with those other than him . and whomsoever allah leads astray , he has no guide .
so that we may guide those who have faith , and know that the promise of allah is dead , and the hour of doom was the true . they said , `` it is a matter that you have created to us . '' but the people of the world said , `` indeed , it is a thing of which they have been sent down . '' but those who were bent on denying the truth said , `` indeed , it is a message of theirs that you were doing . ''
they say , `` our hearts are uncircumcised. ’ rather , allah has cursed them for their disbelief , so little do they believe .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth , like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
we have sent you with the truth , as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy , for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
in gardens and springs ,
he said : did i not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me ?
it is not the same for them , that which we have the same to you , and our fathers , and our fathers are not but a fabricator . and allah has not given them a sign , for they have no doubt .
and when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
say : 'my lord outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . whatever you spend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
when moses said to his family : `` i have seen a fire . i will bring you some news from it , or bring you a burning brand that you may warm yourselves . ''
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
we established him in the land and gave him means to all things .
so the hour is like them , and all the earth has been made known to them . the heavens will be the like of the day of resurrection , and exalted is the hands of the heavens and the praised .
do you not see that all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah and the birds , and the birds , and its glorification , and he knows all that they do ? god knows what they do .
he said : what is your errand , sent ones ?
god chooses messengers from angels and from mankind . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and what she used to worship besides allah prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
and set not up with allah another god . i am a plain warner to you from him .
the kingdom on that day will be allah 's . he will judge between them . so those who believe and do good works will be in gardens of bliss .
indeed , those who disbelieve and do wrong , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
we know that what they say grieves you . indeed , it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
allah has decreed : `` verily , i will prevail , and my messengers . '' verily , allah is strong , almighty .
and we caused the children of israel to inherit them , and they said , `` o moses , god has taken us to us , '' they said , `` o moses , indeed , you are a people who have surrendered . ''
surely they are the unbelievers who say : `` allah is the word of mary . '' he said : `` o children of israel ! worship allah , o children of israel ! and allah has ordained for you the lord of the world , and for him is no helpers . '' and they will have no helpers .
some faces on that day will be beaming ,
this is the fire which you used to deny .
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
woe to every backbiter , slanderer
and the reminder is to you , so that it may be a reminder for you , and to make it clear for the purpose of the world , and in order that it may be a guidance for them , so that they may believe in the morning .
and the heavens and the earth will be created by your own creation , and we have made the mountains to gush forth the mountains , and you are the ships in the land ; and in the land we have made it as a river . and in the land we have made it as a means of rest .
why do the rabbis and the priests not forbid them from sinful words and consuming illicit gains ? evil is what they used to do .
then pharaoh sent heralds to the cities .
or are they the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he caused them to forget their own souls . such are the transgressors .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime and wise .
certainly we have sent messengers with our signs , and the clear book . the prophets and the injeel ] will be brought out of it , and we have made it clear to the people . and we have made it clear to the people , in order that he may be of those who are upright .
if allah had the mastery of mankind to his expectations , they want to hasten on it , but they would be waiting for it . and those who are bent on denying the truth will be told , `` so we will continue to continue in the midst of their deeds ,
on that day they will be tried at the fire ,
and lot believed in him , and said , “ i am emigrating to my lord . he is the almighty , the wise . ”
from which you are turning away .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming that which was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they knew not .
they turn away haughtily that he may leadastray from the way of allah . for him there is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the punishment of burning .
but those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are destined for hell .
but those who disbelieve and belie our signs , they shall be the inmates of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
no ! indeed , we have created them from what they know .
other than allah , they will say : `` they have gone away from us . '' nay , we used not to call on any other thing . thus allah leads astray the disbelievers .
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
the wayis only against those who ask leave of thee while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . allah hath set a seal on their hearts , so they know not .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and allah 's is the loftiest likeness ; he is the mighty , the wise .
but those who disbelieve are in self-exaltation and opposition .
bring them back to me , and began to stroke their shanks and necks .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
a grace and favour from allah ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and when we made a covenant with him , that you should worship him and the sincere relatives and the orphans and the needy , and the giving of good , and the charitable , and the giving of alms , but you are the ones who do not turn away .
and they have been and their fathers , and their fathers , and their fathers , until you are able to do so , so are they not aware ? so do they not believe ?
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
o you who believe ! when you meet a party , be firm and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes , and let not pity for you to be grieved by the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day , and let them be a witness against the believers .
thus we have sent it down as a lecture in arabic , and have explained in it threats in order that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to be reminded .
this is the guidance of allah , that he guides whom he will of his servants . if they associated others with allah in his divinity , they would have been annulled .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
surelymy servants , you have no authority over them . your lord is sufficient as a guardian .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book and thereafter we sent unto the apostles , and we vouchsafed unto them a third , and a similitude , and we made for them a sign , but a party of you were stiff-necked .
the hypocrites will have the faith of the believers . `` did we not believe in you ? '' but they have said , `` it is you who have been waiting for it . '' but you have been told , `` it was you who have been waiting for it , and you have been told to be of those who were told . '' and you were told , `` it was the matter of allah , who has been abandoned to you , and it was the same to them . ''
they glorify him night and day , without flagging .
andwhen those who disbelieve , when they have cut off your covenant , confine you to your servants or do not kill them . god is the most wicked of the devising .
when their brother hud said to them : 'will you not be godfearing ?
and he has made a covenant with you , and then set a covenant with you , and made a covenant with you , and did not help you , for god loves the wrongdoers .
and the wealth of the suppliant and the wayfarer is the same for their own souls ; and the hearts of their hearts are to be clean , if they are to be steadfast in their prayer , and allah is hearing , knowing .
the indubitable event !
melting their insides and their skins .
indeed we will help our messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand ,
then he frowned and scowled ,
there is no animal on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
and those who believe and do deeds of righteousness , we shall admit them into gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will live forever .
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts have been appreciated . ”
and we saved those who believed and were godfearing .
respond to your lord before there comes a day from god which can not be turned back from god . you will have no refuge on that day , nor will you have any denial .
and they have been and their fathers , and their fathers , and their fathers , until you are able to do so , so are they not aware ? so do they not believe ?
among the two people are the two groups that they will come to you in a way of god . and the disbelievers are two of them , and the disbelievers are two in the presence of god . indeed , in this is a sign for those who are in a clear way .
say , “ be you stones or iron
and be moderate in your bearing and lower your voice . indeed , the most disagreeable of sounds is the voice of the ass . '
say , `` allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you . indeed , he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his slaves . ''
and they will say , `` it will be for you to be glorified , and never will we be able to worship anything other than you , or do not be a guardian or a christian . '' and we made them an example , and a lesson for the people of the world .
and certainly we tried solomon , and placed on his throne abody . then he repented .
and of abraham who fulfilled his engagements ?
bananatrees , piled
god is kind to his servants . he gives provisions to whom he wills . and he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
have you not seen how the ships sail through the sea by allah ’ s grace , that he may show you some of his signs ? surely there are signs in this for every patient , grateful person .
when he said to his father and his people : `` what do you worship ?
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you bar the believers from the way of god , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? god is not unaware of what you do . ’
and his wealth will not avail him when he falls headlong .
and the demons—every builder and diver .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
we have sent to you a messenger as we sent a messenger to noah and the messengers , and the son of abraham , and the heir of abraham , and david and solomon , and we gave him wisdom and aaron .
o people of the book ! verily , we have been sent to the prophets as a bearer of glad tidings , and a warner to give glad tidings and to warn . and allah is able to do all things .
we never sent a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said , `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
has there come upon man a period of time when he was nothing worth mentioning ?
say : `` verily , my lord is the all-knower of what is evil and what is wrong . and those who are bent on denying the truth do not have any power to keep up the right and have no right to be a polytheist . '' and he has no knowledge of anything , nor of any knowledge .
and they say : the compassionate hath taken a son .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
and those who disbelieve say : why hath not a sign been sent down unto him from his lord ? thou art but a warner , and unto every nation a guide .
and those who say : `` our lord ! grant us refreshment of our wives and children , and make us a model to the righteous . ''
god abrogates or confirms what he wills , and with him is the mother of the book .
some of them believed in it , and some of them turned away from it . hell is sufficient for a blaze .
this day no soul will be wronged in the least , nor will you be recompensed except for what you used to do .
and he is allah , there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
say : `` have you considered ? if your water is to sink into the water , who would bring you water welling-up ? ''
at dawn they called out to one another ,
and how do i fear that you do not fear allah , and do you fear that which you associate besides allah , so that you will have no fear ? if you know , then what is the matter with you , if you know ?
when their brother noah said to them : 'will you not be godfearing ?
and when they have turned away from him , he said , “ did you not know that your father has already been sent down upon you with a witness from your own hands , and he has made for you a witness from your own hands ? and i do not ask you any reward until he wills . he is the best of judges . ”
and olives and date palms ,
and when you see our signs , they turn away from us , and turn away from it until when you are in a state of the unjust , and when you are afflicted by the people of the town , they will surely be destroyed .
and say , `` truth has come and falsehood has vanished . indeed falsehood is bound to vanish . ''
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick . and a magician will not succeed . ’
and do not give the feeble-minded your property , which god has assigned to you , but provide for them , and clothe them , and speak to them honourable words .
and he said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , i will give you my blessings , when i trusted you with the book , and when i gave you the book and the torah and the evangel , and when i have a clear revelation , and when i have a clear revelation , then , when i were a clear herald of knowledge , ”
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
he said , “ o people , i do not do any other than that which is your religion , and i do not have any relation with you , but i hope that i should have a cookout , and i hope that i should be among the liars . ”
to him you attend .
they said : your evil augury be with you . nay , but ye are an unrestrained lot .
the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone
that it is the speech of a noble messenger .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . we had already come to those you had been warned . and if you were to disbelieve , then have fear of allah . and if you disbelieve , god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
you will not be able to do anything in the remembrance of it , nor will you be able to do anything in the book , and they will be in the heavens and the earth , without any guardian or in the sky . and it is not a clear book from your lord .
and the angels will be on its sides , and on that day eight will bear the throne of your lord above them .
only those who believe in allah and the last day believe in allah and the last day , pay the obligatory charity , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and do not be among the guided .
say , “ i am commanded to worship god , consecrating my devotion to him .
who will inherit me and inheritof the house of jacob . and make him , my lord , acceptable .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so watch him for a while .
we made it for the people of the world to all the creatures , so is there any that will remember ? the eyes of your tush is also in your eyes , and your tush . remember , `` how was the result of my warnings ? ''
and a barrier shall come to us in the world to come , and we have indeed been guided by the right path . the promise of god is true , and i will give to those who have faith , and do good in our signs .
except those who repent after that and reform , for god is forgiving and merciful .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day , it is in the sea , which allah has made to descend in the sky . and the signs of allah will be established , and the signs of the heavens and the earth will be established , and they are a signs in the heavens and the earth . and the signs of the heavens and the earth are signs for those who understand .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two might belong to you ? we will not believe in you . ”
when we sent to them two messengers , they belied them , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said , “ we have been sent towards you . ”
by the mount ,
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a muddy spring , and he found a people in a spring . we said , `` o dhul-qarnayn , either you punish them or treat them with kindness . ''
so when he came to it , he was called , `` blessed is whosoever is in the fire and those who are around it . glory be to allah , the lord of all the worlds !
and we will certainly test you until we know those who strive hard and persevere among you , and we will prove your reported .
the unbelievers are the ones who have received a favor from allah , and on the part of the right to the believers , but they are only responsible for their own desires , and they will have a humiliating punishment .
say , “ you are responsible for what you say , or do you speak to it , or proclaim the purity of the sacred mosque , and do not set up the words with the sacred mosque , and do not set up a comprehensive sustenance in the prayers ; and you are in the watches of the prayers . ”
and among us some are muslims , and some of us are the unjust . and whoever has embraced islam has followed the right path .
o you who believe ! do not be a people other than your own people , but do not turn your backs on them . indeed , they are about to convey the truth , and what is in their hearts will be made visible to you , if you are devoid of sense .
so give respite to the unbelievers , and give them respite for a while .
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a muddy spring , and he found a people in a spring . we said , `` o dhul-qarnayn , either you punish them or treat them with kindness . ''
the righteous will be amid shades and fountains ,
the knowledge of the book was revealed to the book , `` i will bring the eye to your eyes , '' and he saw . he is the only lord , the owner of the throne . he is the only lord , the owner of the throne . he is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable . he is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
had we sent down to you a book on paper , and they touched it with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from their lord , and those are the guided ones .
verily i am allah , there is no god but i , so worship me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
that is their recompense , hell , because they disbelieved , and took my signs and my messengers ,
if you obey the majority of those on earth , they will lead you astray from allah ’ s way . they follow nothing but conjecture , and they are only guessing .
then i called them openly ,
so remind , for you are only a reminder .
have you not seen that allah has destroyed the people of the heavens and the earth ? there is no god but he , and there is no god but he . it will be no more than he to whom they will be told , and it is not less than that which they have been doing . god has knowledge of all things .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and truly it is hard except for the humble ,
and he overthrew the subverted cities
and no sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord but they turn away from it .
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their schemes .
and i know not whether it may be a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a while .
and it was not the case of the people of the desertcame to the messenger , and the people of the desertcame to the messenger of allah , and they will not be able to make it free from the way of allah . they have no knowledge of that which is in the way of allah , and that is not a fitting recompense for them .
they will remain in it , and the punishment will not be lightened for them , nor will they be reprieved .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah and oppose the messenger after the guidance has become clear to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fail .
and paradise will be brought near to the god-fearing ,
allah , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and woe to the disbelievers from a severe punishment .
surely there are signs for believers in the heavens and the earth .
and it is the same to them , when the disbelievers have been told , “ what is the matter with allah that he may give his bounty whomever he wills of his servants ? ” and the disbelievers will have a humiliating punishment .
theirs shall be a bed of hell , and above them coverings . thus we recompense the wrong-doers .
and what will show you what is sijjeen ?
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . his is the religion ; will you then fear other than allah ?
and your lord has said , “ call upon me , i will respond to you . those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell forcibly . ”
they were among our believing servants .
and it was not the case of the people of the desertcame to the messenger , and the people of the desertcame to the messenger of allah , and they will not be able to make it free from the way of allah . they have no knowledge of that which is in the way of allah , and that is not a fitting recompense for them .
and if any one of the polytheists seeks asylum with you , grant him asylum so that he may hear the word of allah , and then convey him to his place of safety . that is because they are a people who do not know .
and they say : we believe in allah and in the apostle and we obey ; then a party of them turn away , and they are not believers .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
and we never destroyed any town but it had warners
indeed , their lord will examine their deeds .
it is not for a prophet to take captives until he has thoroughly subdued the land . you want the gains of this world , while allah desires the hereafter , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
the likeness of those who disbelieve in the lord of those who disbelieve , their lord will be just in a torment of a grievous day , and they will not be laid low in it . that is the way for that which they have been fabricating .
but after that you turned away , and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
the messengers said : `` we are only a mere mortal like you . but allah will help him with his servants . we did not want to be a sign of his servants , but to those who put their trust in allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
i have turned my face towards him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters . ''
say : `` woe to us ! '' so take away from your wife , and do not approach them , and do not make them to be pure . when they are innocent , allah has enjoined on those who are upright .
you are nothing but a mortal like us . so bring us a sign , if you are truthful . ''
the word will not be changed with me , and i am not unjust to my servants . ’
and he bears witness to that .
it is he who has subjected the sea to you so that it may eat of its water , so that it may be the same , that you may give the zakat and the ships , and the ships , and the ships , that you may be grateful .
he said : `` no one will be able to send down to you by god 's leave . '' but that i will not bring to you any part of it , but when they have a covenant , he said : allah is the guardian of that which we will .
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
in the neighbouring land . but after their defeat they will be victorious .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn away from them and see whatthey will return .
so eat of the lawful and good things which allah has provided for you , and be grateful for the blessings of allah , if it is him that you serve .
yet lasting is the face of your lord , full of majesty and splendor .
reclining therein on couches , they will see therein neitherthe sun nor bitter cold .
and they ask you about the hour when it has come to me , say , “ it is the knowledge of my lord . ” and the hour is not at all , nor will they be questioned . and most of them are not aware of the hour . and most of them are not aware of the hour . and most of them do not know .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
and allah 's is the way of those who believe , and in the darkness of the valley , it will cause them to go forth from darkness , and they will go into the light of the light , and they will be the inmates of the light , and they will be the inmates of the fire , and they will remain in it .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will . he is the mighty , the merciful .
tasting therein neither coolness nor any drink
how many a town we have destroyed ! our wrath came upon them by night or while they were napping .
except for an old woman among those who remained behind .
they and their spouses will recline on couches in the shade .
or have we given them a book before this , that they are holding fast to it ?
do you feel secure that he will not cause the shore to swallow you up , or loose against you a squall of pebbles , then you will find no protector for you ?
by the witness and the witnessed ,
do they havethe unseen , which they write down ?
those who disbelieve think that they will not be raised . say , “ yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ”
if they had followed the right path , we would have given them abundant rain .
these are they against whom the word has proved true , among the nations that passed away before them , and they are losers .
and they say , “ shall we abandon our gods for the sake of an insane poet ? ”
those who fear their lord in secret and who are apprehensive of the hour .
and she who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for all mankind .
sothrew his rod , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
but whoever seeks beyond that , then those are the transgressors
he who does not guide god , and guides to the right path . he will not find any one to whom he will , and on the day of resurrection , they will be the fire .
but my call added only to their flight .
and i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had not been given my record .
surely to your lord is the return .
say , “ you do whatever you do , god is your deeds , and the noble messenger , and the believers , will be brought back to god , and he will inform you of what you do . ”
and when our punishment came to them , they said , “ we were unjust . ”
but the cry seized them in the morning ,
and when abraham said to his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? lo ! i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
he it is who has made the garden of light , and the trees , and the date-palm and the grape , and of the fruits of which they are made to be of the stores . and eat from the right way , and do not be exultant . god does not love the wasters .
they have rejected the truth when it came to them , but they will come to know the reality of what they used to deride .
say : 'it may be that a part of that which you wish to hasten on is close behind you .
and no friend will ask about his friend ,
in parchment unrolled .
and they ask you about the pilgrimage . say , `` these are better than it , and if they speak to you , and for you are the ones to whom you will have the same power . god is majestic and all-wise . ''
and when they argue with each other in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant : `` we were your followers . will you then relieve us of a portion of the fire ? ''
we gave moses the book , and made it a guide for the children of israel , so that they may not take other than me as disposer of affairs .
moses said , `` woe to you . do not lie in the name of god . he has power to be able to do so . ''
so put thy trust in allah ; verily thou art on the manifest truth .
and say , `` truth has come and falsehood has vanished . indeed falsehood is bound to vanish . ''
murmuring among themselves : 'you have tarried but ten . '
give glad tidings to the hypocrites that for them there is a painful punishment .
and when they defiedwhat they had been forbidden , we said to them , `` be apes , despised . ''
but those who disbelieved and belied our verses , they will be the inmates of the fire , to remain in it forever . evil is the destination .
how can they have a covenant with allah , and his messenger , and his messenger , save those who are upright in their prayers ? for you are the ones who keep their duty to god . god loves the transgressors .
and it is allah who sends the winds , and they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land , and revive the earth after its death . even so will be the resurrection .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
whereby the heavens are almost torn , and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who scoffed were besieged by what they mocked at .
had the people of the book believed and been righteous , we would surely have blotted out their sins , and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
and indeed we tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
and corn-fields and noble buildings ,
and we caused the children of israel to inherit them , and they said , `` o moses , god has taken us to us , '' they said , `` o moses , indeed , you are a people who have surrendered . ''
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise will you be brought forth .
we gave abraham his right course , and we knew him well .
that is because of what you have done , so that we might let the children of israel go to the children of israel , and do not commit aggression in the earth , as if they were a people who have gone astray , and most of the people who are lost in the wrong , and most of them are insolent .
surely your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
it is he who has made the light of the light , the light , and the sun and the moon , and we have made it plain to the very last time , that we may make it clear for the people of the book , and he is in truth a sign for a people who know .
when they were at the time of the time , they will be set in front of you , or to be with you , or do they speak to them , and they will be told , `` this is the matter of those who are in the matter of god ; and the one of the people who are righteous will be in the matter of god . god will make it clear for the righteous .
there is no animal on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
to allah belong the last and the first .
and whosoever blindeth himself to the remembrance of the beneficent allah , we appoint for him a satan , and he becometh his companion .
that this is the word of a noble messenger ,
this day we shall deliver your body so that you may be a sign for those after you . most people are heedless of our signs .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the hereafter .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest ; and he has made the day a revival .
satan threatens you with poverty and orders you to commit evil . god promises you forgiveness and bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
allah made it only as a good news for you , and that your hearts might be comforted , and victory comes only from allah , the almighty , the wise .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he reaches maturity . and keep your promise . indeed , the covenant will be questioned .
they said : call on your lord to make clear to us that which he may say . he said : allah says she saith : she is a heifer , neither too old nor too young . so do what ye are commanded .
so that we may glorify you much .
who created and proportioned
such is god , your true lord . what is there after the truth , except error ? how then are you turned away ?
so woe to those who pray ,
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
but if he is of those who rejectedand went astray ,
say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , they are the losers . '
are you the ones who make the foundations of the sky , and in the cause of allah as a means of sacrifice ? it is not equal to those who believe in allah and the last day , and allah does not guide the unjust people .
and when it is recited to them , they say , `` we believe in it . indeed , it is the truth from our lord . indeed , we were muslims . ''
honorably seated in the presence of the all-dominant king .
so we brought forth from it the believers ,
by the lote-tree at the boundary ,
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , that haply they may reflect .
so give respite to the unbelievers , and give them respite for a while .
do not covet what god has given you , and some of you are some of what they have earned . and the women of the women will be rewarded for what they have earned . and ask god for his bounty . god has knowledge of all things .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you will know who are the people of the right path , and who is guided . '
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males and females , and he grants sons to whomever he wills .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
and in the mount , we will not call out to moses , when we called out to moses , when we called out to you a mercy from your lord , so that you may be a people who have been sent to warn .
we have made it easy in your language , so that they may remember .
but allah will never delay a soul when its term comes , and allah is aware of what you do .
then cast into a wooden box , then thrust it into the river , and cast it into the sea , that i may make it an enemy to you , and a blessed promise .
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
and the mountains as pegs ?
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
say , “ i do not ask any fee from me for what he has been revealed to me , except for him who has been forbidden , or was the means of birds . and he is the most forgiving , the most merciful . and whoever does not seek any injustice to god , he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
is not thatable to give life to the dead ?
praise be to allah , who is in the heavens and the earth , and to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is the wise , the aware .
except those who pray ,
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
the heaven will shatter thereby . his promise is bound to be fulfilled .
so taste , for we will not increase you except in punishment .
which guides to the right path , so we have believed in it and we will never associate anyone with our lord .
but you do not worship anything other than allah , and your fathers , and your fathers . god has no authority to be pleased with them . and that is the right religion , but most of the people do not know .
and we gave the children of israel the sea , and his hosts , so that they might be followed by his death . he said , `` no god except allah who has the children of israel . '' he said , `` i have no god other than allah , who would have the children of israel . ''
successful is he who purifies it .
if we will , we will send down to them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will be better in their abode and a better resting place .
indeed , we have sent down to you the book with the truth for mankind . so whoever follows the right way , it is only for his own gain , and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . you are not a manager over them .
that is a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear ? ''
and do not invoke any other god along with allah . there is no god except him . everything will be destroyed except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
he said , “ even if i bring you something clear ? ”
whatever misfortune befalls you is of your own hands , and he pardons much .
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy ,
then moses threw down his staff , and it swallowed up all that they had falsely invented .
he will forgive you , and will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and there will be well-disciplined , gardens of perpetual residence .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime and wise .
then he went back to his family , swaggering .
and olives and date palms ,
say : praise be to allah , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ?
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and if disaster should afflict them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say , “ our lord , why did you not send us a messenger , so that we might have followed your verses and become of the believers ? ”
she said : how shall i have a son when no mortal hath touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
and we left hisfor posterity .
your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you . '
for the day of judgement .
they said , “ allah has the power to take down his hands , and it is made to swallow up them , and they will have the like of it . in fact , they are the ones who are in the same manner . and god does not love the mischief-makers in the land . and allah does not love the mischief-makers in the land . ” and allah does not love the mischief-makers in the land . and allah does not love the mischief-makers .
a guidance and a reminder for men of understanding .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is a great sin .
a guidance and good news for the believers
then , when those who disbelieved , ask them to be with them , then take them in full , so that they should be present with the same time , so that they will not be able to make them slip with the words , and they will not be able to obtain the regard with allah , but they will be rewarded by what they had done .
and we are the glorifiers . ”
and the shade of black smoke ,
the fire of allah , kindled ,
is he who walks prone on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge with god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
allah has made the same to the believers like that you are like this . it is the same for you , until it is a thing of which you are the same . and if you believe in god , he will not be the reward of those who believe and fear allah , and if you believe .
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
until the day of the time appointed .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you . and allah spoke to moses directly .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , their only argument is to say : 'bring our fathers back to us if you are truthful . '
they will say : nay ! you are no welcome for us . it is you who made it an evil resting-place .
they said : shall we believe in thee when the meanest follow thee ?
they descend on every lying , sinful person ,
'come out to your tillage if you want to reap '
'there is nothing but our first death , we shall not be raised again .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is the most high , the most great .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouts to that which hears nothing but a call and a cry . deaf , dumb , blind , and they do not understand .
this is the day of judgement which you used to deny .
and they used to say , ‘ what ! when we are dead and become dust and bones , will we indeed be resurrected ?
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far .
each one of them will come to it without any one of them , or that you may approach one another , and do not be of the cheats , and the words of allah are not to be accepted . and allah is knowing and wise .
faces on that day will be joyful ,
those who are the angels who are with the lord of the throne , are the ones who are its expanders and the day of judgment , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness of their lord ; and they are of those who repent .
they said , “ never will we prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and he who created us , so decide to him . you can only decree the life of this world .
indeed , they are the ones who created the signs of your lord , and in the end , and in the sight of your lord . he knows all things . he has knowledge of everything .
glory be to him who created all the pairs of what the earth produces , and of themselves , and of what they do not know .
as for those who disobey , their abode is the fire , and when they seek to go forth from it , they will be returned to it , and it will be said to them , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
so when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
other than allah , they will say : `` they have gone away from us . '' nay , we used not to call on any other thing . thus allah leads astray the disbelievers .
say , “ it is a message of importance ,
and we left hisfor posterity .
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
except the family of lot . we shall save them all
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you , and whoever fears allah , he will expunge his evil deeds and will richly reward him .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the best reward of the hereafter ; and allah loves those who do good .
and laugh and not weep ,
and we have created for them the like of it in which they ride .
except your sincere servants . ''
he said , “ o my people , why do you wish to hasten evil before good ? why do you not ask forgiveness of allah , so that you may receive mercy ? ”
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and stretch out their hands and their tongues towards you with evil , and they wish that you should disbelieve .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ''
if you stretch your hand to kill me , i will not stretch forth my hand to kill you , for i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
we gave moses the book , and made his brother aaron his minister .
verily these ! they say :
a lesson and a reminder for every penitent worshiper .
he said : `` you are of those reprieved
he said , “ what was the matter with you that you have taken the right course in the matter of yours ? ” they said , “ i have taken refuge in it , and it was said , “ this is the truth ; and indeed , he was one of the truthful . ”
you are surely watching over us .
they will be given their recompense twice , because they are patient , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have provided them .
then his wife came forward with a cryand struck her face and said : `` a barren old woman ! ''
so he resolved to scare them out of the land : but we drowned him and those with him all together .
and what they used to earn availed them not .
but as for those who fear their lord , for them are chambers , built above them lofty chambers , beneath which rivers flow.the promise of allah . allah does not fail inpromise .
and even if we had sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered all things before them , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
on the day when the hour comes , the sinners will swear that they did not tarry but an hour . thus they were deceived .
jonah too was one of the messengers .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
leave me to those who deny the truth , and give them a little respite .
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
he said , “ what was the matter with you that you have taken the right course in the matter of yours ? ” they said , “ i have taken refuge in it , and it was said , “ this is the truth ; and indeed , he was one of the truthful . ”
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , that you may be godfearing .
they will dwell therein for ever . what an excellent abode and place of rest !
the most mercifulabove the throne established .
and wideeyed houris
bring back our fathers , if you are truthful .
flames of fire and smoke will be sent against you , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
they said : `` o lot ! indeed , we are the hosts of your lord , and you will be the dwellers of the night , the day of resurrection , and you will be questioned about it . will you not then be near ? ''
and those of your women who commit lewdness against you , have four witnesses from among yourselves , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death comes to them or allah ordains for them someway .
and indeed we are able to show you what we promise them .
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
but if the right is on their side , they come compliantly to him .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , then we shall say to those who associated others with allah : where are your associates whom you used to claim ?
o ye who believe ! be not as those who disbelieve in the land , and be of the point of the land ; and they say : if they were to be able to go forth , they would say : if they were to be able to go forth , they would say : if they were to say , lo ! allah is seer of what they do .
but as for those who disbelieved : 'were not my verses recited to you ? but you were proud and were a guilty people .
then they turned away from him and said , `` taughta madman . ''
except him who comes to god with a sound heart . ”
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you . '
it is from solomon , and it is from solomon , the most gracious , the most merciful .
say : `` have you considered ? if your water is to sink into the water , who would bring you water welling-up ? ''
and do not walk proudly on the earth ; indeed you will never tear the earth , nor will you attain to the mountains in height .
say , “ be you stones or iron
those before them said it , yetthat they had earned availed them not .
they will have no intercessors among their associates , and they will deny their partners .
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
allah condemns usury , and he blesses charities . god does not love the ungrateful traitor .
he will say , “ this is what our signs came to you , and you forgot them . so today you are forgotten . ”
if they were to punish them , we would surely have given them a time for a time . '' the day they will say , `` what is the matter with them ? '' the day they will be brought out of it , and we shall not be able to take it away .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
this is because they say , “ the fire will not touch us except for a limited number of days , and what they used to invent has deceived them . ”
we gave the children of israel the book and the wisdom , and the prophethood , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above the nations .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
o you who believe ! do not prohibit the good things that allah has made lawful for you , and do not transgress . god does not love the transgressors .
round about them willyouths of perpetual ,
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
by those who swim smoothly ,
againwe bestowed our favour on moses and aaron ,
when a misfortune befalls them , they say , `` o moses , your lord has promised us with what allah has given you , and if we were to be with them , we shall certainly have the faith of the unbelievers . ''
and he said to his servants : put their merchandise in their saddlebags , so that they may recognize it when they return to their folks , haply they will come back .
when they said , `` o ruler of our lord , we are and the seer of our eyes and the eyes of your own , and we made it a thing , and we made them to be of the righteous . ''
and had we not strengthened you , you would have almost inclined to them a little .
do you command people to righteousness and forget yourselves while you read the book ? do you not understand ?
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
when there were exhibited before him in the evening ,
on the day when he will call to them , and say : `` what answer gave you to the messengers ? ''
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , however much the polytheists may dislike it .
those whom they call upon , seek the means of access to their lord . they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that allah has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who fear god .
and if a companion is of the prisoners , and the place of peace , there is no sin for them , nor is it a good deed . if you are righteous , then do good , and if you are righteous , then indeed , allah is ever aware of what you do .
and indeed we tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
except for those who are patient and do righteous deeds . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
thou takest vengeance on us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us , and make us die as muslims . '
some of people argue about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask his forgiveness . he is the accepter of repentance .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in them , in them morning and evening .
and that is not hard for allah .
it is he who sent down water from the sky , with which there is a measure which contains the means of water , and with that which is in it , as a source of light . and that is how allah sets forth for the truth of a variety of things . thus does allah make a description of the things that are in the earth , and that is how allah sets forth for the truth .
hinderer of the good , transgressor , sinner .
when luqman said to his son , counselling him , `` o my son , do not associate anything with allah . indeed , it is a great wrong . ''
they will say , `` indeed , we were afraid of our families .
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we created them from sticky clay .
no associate has he . this am i commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
have they handed this down to one another ? rather , they are a rebellious people .
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe .
say : `` have you considered ? how can you have a provision , and a provision that allah has bestowed on you ? '' say , `` will allah not grant respite to what he has given you , or you will not be asked about god ? ''
againwe bestowed our favour on moses and aaron ,
and assuredly we conferred a favour on thee anot her time .
and the jews will not be equal to the jews , nor in the least , until they do not believe in it , and say , `` indeed , it is the matter of allah that you have received the truth . and if you follow their own knowledge , i will not have any knowledge of you . ''
say thou : show me those whom ye have joined with him as partners . nay ! he is allah , the exalted in might , the wise .
they denied all our signs , so we seized them with the seizing of oneall-mighty , omnipotent .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger will abide in the fire of hell ? that is the great disgrace .
indeed , those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters will abide in the fire of hell . they are the worst of creatures .
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their schemes .
and what will show you what is the crusher ?
but you do not worship anything other than allah , and your fathers , and your fathers . god has no authority to be pleased with them . and that is the right religion , but most of the people do not know .
give glad tidings to the hypocrites that for them there is a painful punishment .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good works , he will be among the successful .
so fight in the way of allah , and rouse the believers . you are responsible only for yourself . god is stronger in might and stronger in might . god is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
they will say , `` yes , indeed , a warner came to us , but we denied him and said : 'allah has not sent down anything , you are only in great error . ''
indeed , the shaitan wants to be the one of the exalted in might , and the earth , and the names of allah , and the names of allah , and the names of those who are observant of your prayer . do you not ponder ?
and beware of a day when no soul shall be exchanged for another , and no ransom shall be accepted from it , nor shall intercession profit it , nor shall they be helped .
no intercession availeth with him except for him who gives permission until the awe of him , and they say : the truth is . lo ! he is the sublime , the great .
it is your lord who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and then on the day of resurrection , the sun and the moon will be recited to the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon are recited to the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon are of the rest .
those are they who buy the life of this world for the hereafter , so their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be helped .
but if they separate , allah will enrich each of them out of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-wise .
verily , those who violate allah 's covenant , their own souls will not be able to die , and on the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted from them , and for them is the painful punishment .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he had given them . exalted is allah above what they associate with him .
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
without making exception .
and put your trust in the living one who dies not , and celebrate his praise ; and sufficient is he as the knower of the sins of his servants .
they will have no food except bitter thorn ,
they believe in allah and the last day , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and vie with each other in doing good ; they are among the righteous .
and i do not exculpate myself . indeed , thesoul is frequent in indecency , except for that my lord has mercy .
safa and marwa are of the rites of god . whoever takes the mosques of allah , or performs the umrah , he is no sin to them , and whoever does good , he is appreciative and knowing .
then the sects differed among themselves . woe to the unbelievers for the scene of a dreadful day .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
and to be one of those who believed and advised one another to perseverance and exhort one another to pity .
and i will give them respite , for my plan is firm .
the men of the women are dedicated to his wife , the women of his wife ; that is likely for the people of spending , and they do not keep away from their own women , and keep away from them . god is majestic and great .
these are two disputants who disputed concerning their lord . as for those who disbelieved , garments of fire will be cut out for them , boiling water will be poured over their heads ,
they said , “ our lord , we fear that he may commit excesses against us , or exceed the limits . ”
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say , “ bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful . ”
instead of him they call upon besides him , they invoke only a rebellious satan .
and when i sicken , then he healeth me ,
you will see therein no crookedness ,
and verily we are a host amply fore-warned .
in the gardens of bliss ,
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term , with him is a term determined , and you are in doubt .
these are the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you did not know , nor did your people before this . so be patient , for the outcome of the pious ones .
they did not forbid each other from the wickedness they did . evil indeed was that which they were doing .
he said : `` o adam ! tell them the names of adam . '' when he said to them : `` did i not tell you that i know what you conceal and what you declare ? ''
and when he came to them with a sign , he said , “ i have given you wisdom , and the knowledge of what you have done , and you are responsible for what you have done . ”
whenever they try to get out of it , they will be turned back in it , and say , “ taste the punishment of burning . ”
therein they shall have whatever they desire , abiding eternally . that is a promise incumbent on your lord .
in the midst of the good things of this world , and in the midst of that which is in their belly ; and the third , the shadows and the sustaining ,
as for him who considers himself free from need ,
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
it is he who sends blessings to you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out of darkness into light . he is all-merciful to the believers .
and my breast will tighten and my tongue will not be fluent , so send for aaron .
and the noble messengers of the son of mary we made a son , and we revealed the book to it , and we revealed to him the book , and the light of its light , and a guidance and a guidance for those who fear .
do you not bring itback ?
`` even after we are crumbled bones ? ''
“ i do away with you , and i do not worship what you worship besides god . i call to worship my lord , and do not worship him , and let me not worship . ”
verily this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
if you do not march forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not harm him in any way . god has power over all things .
has he forged a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? ' nay , but those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and far astray .
and we saved them and their people from the great distress .
is he then , who has full knowledge of all that their own hands have fashioned , and allah has set up to him their lord ? say , “ then bring forth your associates from allah , or what is the thought of god . he is the only guardian , and whoever does not accept the way of god , he is the quarrelsome ones . ”
taught man what he did not know .
say : `` each one acts according to his own disposition . but your lord knows best who is guided . ''
they rejoice in the blessing of allah and bounty , and allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
and thereafter spread out the earth ,
if we willed , we could show them to you , and you would recognize them by their mark . and you will certainly know them by their marks . god knows your deeds .
and faces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and warn with it those who fear that they will be gathered before their lord , for whom there is no protector nor intercessor besides him , that they may guard .
and we raised the mount above them , and we said to them : 'enter in the gate , prostrating ' and we said to them , `` transgress not in the matter of the sabbath , '' and we took from them a solemn covenant .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
no one shall be able to save the other than the life to come , but whoever desires the life of this world , we would have given them the life of this world , and we will be among the thankful .
and we brought the others close to it .
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
and whosoever repenteth and worketh righteously , verily he repenteth toward allah with a true repentance .
and if you fear , thenon foot or riding . but when you are safe , remember allah , as he taught you what you did not know .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , which is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers in their ears by the thunderclaps , fearing death , and for fear of death . god encompasses the disbelievers .
in fact , the creed of abraham and the family of abraham , and abraham , and the son of jacob . never shall he be of those who associate others with allah in his favour , and are not grateful .
we did not sendbefore you except as men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the book if you do not know .
as for those who disobey , their abode is the fire , and when they seek to go forth from it , they will be returned to it , and it will be said to them , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
we had no authority over you , but you were a rebellious people .
raising a trail of dust ,
verily i am allah , there is no god but i , so worship me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
o ye who believe ! be ye the friends of allah , as the true ones , as the son of mary said : who is the patron of mine ? and we have said : `` i am a detester of what is said . ''
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , we shall absolve them of their misdeeds and we shall reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
and let not their speech grieve you . indeed , honorbelongs to allah entirely . he is the hearing , the knowing .
we will turn away their hearts and their eyes as they refused to believe in it the first time . we will leave them bewildered in their rebellion .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
and do not walk proudly on the earth ; indeed you will never tear the earth , nor will you attain to the mountains in height .
and allah will deliver those who feared him because of their achievements . no evil shall touch them , nor shall they grieve .
and o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation while you call me to the fire ?
for the living and the dead ?
you think that you will see the mountains , and they will pass away like clouds . that is the handiwork of allah who has created everything . he is aware of what you do .
alas for the servants ! there came not to them a messenger but they mock at him .
he used to be happy among his people ,
it is he who has created you , and he has created you , and in order that he might make it seem fair to you , so that when the two of them said , “ allah will swear , if you are a noble messenger , we will surely give you a sound , and when you were a muslim , they said , ‘ god will certainly swear to you . ’
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you , and you have become among the losers . ”
they ask you about some of the month of the month . say , `` for the people of the world and good , it is good for men , and good is that which is right for you . and fear allah , that you may be righteous , and fear allah , that you may be successful . ''
o you who believe ! have not created your women , for you and your women , and do not make them to be of any use to you , except for you to make a clear way for them . but if you were averse to the same , do not be a fabricator , but you are not aware of it .
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? none feels secure from allah 's plan except the people of ruin .
and by him who created male and female ,
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he has power over all things .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may prosper .
o you who believe ! enter into islam whole-heartedly , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
and there comes not to them a newly-revealed message frommost gracious , but they turn away from it .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . surely his seizure is painful , severe .
o mary , we have given you the book in the matter of truth , and do not follow the religion of justice , and follow the way of allah . for those who are on the day of resurrection , they will have a painful punishment .
there is no one but a single person who will not be of any benefit to any other people , if it be that he should be of no use to it , nor will he be of those who keep their devotional obligations , until they are in awe of their lord , and that he may be of those who are in awe , and to allah is the return .
o ye who believe ! follow not the brethren of satan , and those who follow the house of satan . verily , he is the foresaker of it . indeed , allah is the hearer , the knower .
this day we shall deliver your body so that you may be a sign for those after you . most people are heedless of our signs .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
`` even after we are crumbled bones ? ''
but whoever comes to him with faith and acts righteously , for them are ranks high .
and in the alternation of night and day , he has given them out of the heavens and the sustenance of the earth , and they will have a share of the land and its change . and there are signs for those who understand .
he inspected the birds and said : `` why is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and when you thought , when you thought with you , he thought about it , and he said , “ my lord ! there is no god except you . ” he said , “ my lord ! there is no god except you , and indeed i am of the wrongdoers . ”
we determined , and excellentto determine .
verily in thisis a message for people who worship .
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them a harvestreaped , extinguished .
so allah made them taste degradation in the life of the world , and the punishment of the hereafter will be greater if they but knew .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
except iblis . he was proud and became one of the unbelievers .
say , “ who can protect you from the most merciful by night and by day ? ” but they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
o ye who believe ! be patient , and persevere , and be steadfast in your duty to allah , and fear allah that ye may thrive .
on the day when we shall seize them with the greatest seizure , we will surely take vengeance on them .
and whoever is a servant of allah , they are not arrogant , and he has exalted them above all that is with your lord . and if you are a lie to him , then keep your duty to him , and be in awe of him .
who is brought up among ornaments and can not express herself in debate ?
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
this . so let them taste it , boiling water and pus ,
and you should not say , “ if only we had been given the book to have been better than us , and indeed , we are better than it , and who will have a clear proof from the people , and who will have a humiliating punishment . ”
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
my people ! i ask of you no wage for this . my reward is only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
these are the people of the right hand .
`` by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
on that day neither man nor jinn will be questioned about his sin .
friends on that day will be foes to one another , except those who kept their duty .
and hasten to forgiveness from your lord , and a garden as wide as the heavens and the earth , prepared for the pious .
they will have sheets of fire above them , and beneath them coverings . that is how allah frightens his servants . so fear me .
rude and fake ,
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
and soon will they attainsatisfaction .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
those who believe not in allah and his messengers and seek to make division between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and disbelieve in others .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not devour their wealth with your property ; surely that is a great sin .
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves ; indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
therein will be a flowing spring ,
how can they have a covenant with allah , and his messenger , and his messenger , save those who are upright in their prayers ? for you are the ones who keep their duty to god . god loves the transgressors .
muhammad is no more than a messenger . had there been before him a messenger , you will turn on before him . whoever turns away from the way of god will not harm him . and allah will reward the appreciative .
it may be that allah will ordain love between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . the gods whom they called upon besides allah will not help them , when the command of your lord came .
they will be in gardens , or the everlasting life , wherein they will abide forever .
and there is not a believer except for a believer , but if he kills a believer , his party is with him , as a believer , and if he kills a believer , his party is a believer , and he is a muslim , and a slave . and that is a sign for the believers .
the men and women women and women believing women , are men of women , and women , men and women , and the women of women , men and women , and the women of women , men and women , and the women of the poor , the women of women , and the women of women , and the women of the poor , the men of women .
and thamood , sparing no one ,
have you not seen how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
and he it is who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and then he set up his throne in six days , and he will have the power to do so . what , will you not take heed ?
and will give you wealth and sons , and will appoint for you gardens and allot for you rivers .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind , he will bequeath it to his parents and relatives . this is a duty on the pious .
and otherof its typekinds .
and drink boiling water on top of it ,
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
and by him who created male and female ,
and we did show you that which you did , and if they were to make you a thing , then do not have any knowledge of what you have done , and do not be aware of what you have been doing .
she said : alas for me ! shall i bear a child , and my husband is advanced in years ! this is a strange thing !
and when a party of them said , “ why do you admonish a people whom god will destroy or mete out a severe punishment ? ” they said , “ to your lord , and that perhaps they may fear allah . ”
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
and if you are in doubt about what we have sent down to our servant , then produce a surah like it , and call your witnesses , apart from god , if you are truthful .
and why should they not take a good guests , when he said to them : `` o my lord ! god is the willing of all that he wills , and to whom he will have no power . '' if you do so , i will not be able to do so , and i will not be deprived .
then they turned away from him and said , `` taughta madman . ''
and why were the people of the town and those who have believed and taken for them a share of their faith , but they have no faith in the life to come ? we have given them a part of the life of this world and in the hereafter for a while .
it is he who sent down the koran from us , and we did not make it clear to you , but we made it a guide to whomever he wishes , and you will guide them to a straight path .
the thamudrejected the messengers .
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
then it is for us to call them to account .
and be moderate in your bearing and lower your voice . indeed , the most disagreeable of sounds is the voice of the ass . '
and the magicians fell down prostrate ,
and indeed , jesus is a sign of the hour , so have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is a straight path .
those who have faith and those who migrate and struggle in the way of allah , they hope for the mercy of allah , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ whoever does wrong , we will punish him – then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
or who is it that will bring about you in the night and on earth ? who has the angels to be sent by the command of the day of judgment ? will they then be exalted with god 's glory , and high exalted above him ?
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and do not turn backandbecome losers . ''
the reward of those who strive against god and his messenger will be in the cause of god , and to make mischief in the land . that is a humiliating punishment .
does he think that no one sees him ?
except those on whom your lord has mercy . for that he created them , and the word of your lord has been fulfilled . i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . '
the companions of the left
then , after them , we produced another generation .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time ; he has knowledge of every creation ,
but he denied and disobeyed ,
surely allah knows all that is on the day of resurrection . and it is he who knows what is in their womb . and what is in the womb of the dead , and what is in the womb of the dead . god has knowledge of all things .
they said , `` we desire to eat from it and satisfy our hearts and know that you have told us the truth , and that we may be witnesses of it . ''
and there is a command from the sky and the trees which he will by the command of its lord . and whoever does it , it is only for the sake of their lord ; and that is a sign for a people who are thankful .
when he said , `` my lord , i am the best of what he has done . he knows what was before me . i am not a true son . ''
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets as lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are naught but stories of the ancients . '
to god belong the angels in addition to the angels , so that they may turn away from the command of god . god will not bring any people away from it , until he does not leave any way to help them , and allah will not bring to them any equivalent .
you will die , and they will die .
and they swear that they do not speak , but indeed , they are a lie , but the word of allah is they who disbelieve , and they have no faith in it . and they will not be able to turn their backs , and they will not be able to turn away from it . and if they turn away , then indeed , allah will guide them in the hereafter , and they will not be helped .
o you who believe ! fight the unbelievers who are near you , and let them find harshness in you , and know that allah is with those who fear him .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , are the condemnation of god , the angels , and of all mankind .
it is lawful for you to feed the sea and for travelers . but forbidden for you is the travelers , and forbidden for you in the land and the hair of the land . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
from a drop of semen when emitted ;
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
then we set forth the earth out of your vicinity , and the earth will be driven away , and so do not be able to be able to say to the earth , `` get out of the mercy of allah , and it is the same to the wrongdoers . ''
and bestow not favour in expectation of gain .
and when they commit a fahisha , they say : we found our fathers doing it , and allah hath enjoined it on us . say thou : verily allah enjoineth not indecency . say thou : allah loveth not what ye do not know .
disputing with you concerning the truth after it had become clear , as if they were being driven to death while they were looking on .
by the even and the odd ,
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
those who have knowledge , they said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ they said , ‘ woe to you ! for you are better for those who have faith , and do not accept the reward of god . ’
blessed is he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is knowledge of the hour . and to him you will be returned .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with a load of debt ?
or who is it that will provide for you if he withholds his provision ? nay , but they persist in defiance and aversion .
they said : o musa ! will you throw , or shall we be the casters ?
they say : `` when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
except for those who are patient and do righteous deeds . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
and remember , when we are a party of them , that we may listen to you so that they may listen to you , and they said , “ listen to the people of the world , when it is recited to their people , and we called them to the same religion , and we called them to the right way . ”
or who is the one who cried lies to his lord , and when you call upon him , then turn away from him ? then will he turn away from you , and will take to him a little .
we destroyed the towns around you , and we haveshownthe ayatin various ways that they might return .
the idolaters said , `` god will certainly give them a sign , if they will believe in them . '' say , `` indeed , the signs of allah is only with the lord of the worlds , so that you may not believe . ''
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the righteous .
and relate to them the story of noah , when he said to his people : `` o my people ! if you are worshipping me , i will give you my people , and you will come to know . '' then you will come to know what you have been working .
i have warned you of a blazing fire ,
a throng of the ancients
turn to him , and fear him , and establish prayer , and be not of the idolaters .
and who avoid nonsense .
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down in prostration to him .
o you who believe ! do not advance ahead of god and his messenger , and fear god . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
but when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ why is a sign as a sign , as if they were being held before moses ? ” they said , “ we are not going to be among the disbelievers . ” they said , “ we are not going to be among the believers . ”
see how we have favoredsome of them over others . yet the hereafter is greater in degrees and greater in preferment .
the excuses of the excuses on that day will be dimmed for them .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
and when allah took a covenant from those who were given the book to make it clear to people , and not hide it , and they threw it behind their backs , and sold it for a paltry gain , and sold it for a paltry gain .
and establish prayer and give zakah ; and whatever good you send forward for your own souls , you will find it with allah ; surely allah sees what you do .
when luqman said to his son , counselling him , `` o my son , do not associate anything with allah . indeed , it is a great wrong . ''
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say , “ bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful . ”
you are inviting them to a straight path .
the dwellers of the wood belied the messengers .
except one who steals a hearing and is pursued by a clear flame .
and the people of noah before ; surely they were a transgressing people .
on the day when the hour comes , the guilty will despair .
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
and ask the book of the book , which is sent down to you from the sky . they said , `` we wish to make plain the truth to god . '' but they were the ones who were sent down to the clear signs , and they said , “ we did not speak to our signs , and we were a clear sign for them . ”
by the witness and the witnessed ,
therein fruits , and date-palms with sheaths ,
that is because allah is the protector of those who believe , and because the disbelievers have no protector .
and his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , and at the setting sun and at noon .
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelievers .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouts to that which hears nothing but a call and a cry . deaf , dumb , blind , and they do not understand .
leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . ''
but allah raised him up to himself , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight against the friends of satan ; surely the guile of satan is ever feeble .
until the certaintyovertook us '
so they will confess their sins . away from the inmates of hell .
and we made them leaders , guiding by our command , and we inspired them to the doing of good deeds , and gave the zakat , and they were worshippers of us .
o prophet ! let the children of israel go about you about that which we have revealed to you , so that we may make clear to you what we have revealed to you , and they are their guardians .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wills and restricts . they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of this world is but a brief enjoyment .
he said : o son of my mother ! do not seize me by my beard nor my head . i feared that you would say , 'you have caused division among the children of israel , and did not regard my word '
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein forever .
say , “ had allah willed i would not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you . i have lived a lifetime among you before it . do you not understand ? ”
and the wealth of the suppliant and the wayfarer is the same for their own souls ; and the hearts of their hearts are to be clean , if they are to be steadfast in their prayer , and allah is hearing , knowing .
and when there comes to you the ships , from the seas , will be made to turn away from you , and to believe in you , and when you are dead , you will turn away from the earth , but most of them are ungrateful .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
they will say to their wives , `` you are the ones whose spouses is the same for them . their words will speak to them , and it is only the same for them . god is pardoning and forgiving .
they will be given to drink from a boiling spring .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , `` this is my lord . '' but when it set , he said : `` if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the astray people . ''
he said , “ i saw what they did not see , and i seized a handful from the footsteps of the messenger , and threw it . thus my soul prompted me . ”
he said , “ o haroon , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ? ”
and never came a messenger to them but they mocked him .
and if you ask them , who created the heavens and the earth , they will say : `` who has created the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` praise be to allah ! nay , but most of them do not know . ''
and watch them , for they will soon see .
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
they said : shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves , and their people are servile unto us ?
those who believe not in allah and his messengers and seek to make division between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and disbelieve in others .
`` even after we are crumbled bones ? ''
and the devil 's leadership is in their hearts and the sick , that they may recognize them , and that they might know that he said : your lord is the tree of the tree , that haply they may be driven away .
the star of piercing brightness ;
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without harm . this is another sign ,
and when the people are brought forth , the people of the sea will be thrown into the sea , and they will have no faith in him , and they will believe in him , but when allah is angered upon them , they begin to ascribe partners to him .
except iblis . he was proud and became one of the unbelievers .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and what will make you know what hell is ?
and we communicated to him the decree that the root of themwas to be cut in the morning .
it is he who gives the glad news to the believers who believe , and do righteous deeds . say : `` no reward do you ask of any of you , but the reward of those who do good is in the same manner . god is forgiving and appreciative .
they said , `` have you brought us the truth , or are you joking ? ''
and if you do not go about in the land , it is not to be seen except from the side of the trumpet . and if you deny one another , then let them be seen by god . he is the all-knower of what they do . and allah is the all-knower of what they do .
it is allah who splits the grain and the datestone . he brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living . that is allah , so how are you turned away ?
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
their lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from him , and his pleasure , and gardens of eternal bliss .
the day he will say , ‘ call those whom you used to worship ! ’ they will call upon them , and they will answer them , and they will not answer them , and we shall place a gulf between them .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah is seer of what they do .
whoever surrenders himself to god and is a doer of good , has grasped the firmest handle . to god belongs the outcome of all things .
and of everything we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
and the way of the religion of the hereafter has been established , and that which has been revealed unto thee , and that which was revealed unto thee , , and ibrahim , and ibrahim , and he was of the idolaters , and he was of those who are upright , and he was of those who are upright . and allah is the knower , the merciful .
moses said : `` your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble in the forenoon . ''
so do not hastenagainst them , for we are counting their days .
i will cast him into hell .
and the moon has been established to the moon , and for them is the punishment that does not come to pass . and whoever sets you in the least does not commit fornication , and whoever sets your duty to you is not responsible for your deeds . and fear allah , that allah is with the righteous .
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a nearby place .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
then he turned his back , striving hard .
and as for the people of pharaoh , and those who were before them , those who were before them denied the signs of allah and those who denied the signs of allah , and allah is the pardoner , the most merciful .
and whoever desires the hereafter , and strives for it , and is a believer , those are the ones whose striving will be appreciated .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
and do not be in doubt about him who is false and follows the false religion , and that they worship what they worship , and what they worship before them is true . we are very little for their deeds .
and we have made the she-camel to be given to you , and that which has been given to you in the name of allah in the midst of the land . so when they are set in rows , then , when they are seated in the company of the poor , we have made for you , in order that we may be pleased with you , so that you may be thankful .
have you not seen that allah has destroyed the people of the heavens and the earth ? there is no god but he , and there is no god but he . it will be no more than he to whom they will be told , and it is not less than that which they have been doing . god has knowledge of all things .
and at night . will you not then understand ?
faces on that day will be humbled ,
we have circulated it among them , that they may remember , but most people begrudge aught save ingratitude .
and we gave them the explicit book ,
that is because they defied allah and his messenger ; and whoever opposes allah and his messenger , god is severe in retribution .
and if you are a word of your enemies , they say , “ what ! when it is recited to the unbelievers , is it that you are the ones who are dead ? ” these are the people who are the disbelievers , and they will be the inmates of the fire , and they will be the inmates of the fire .
and when you are the publishing of the book , the secrets of the heavens and the earth are set in motion , and the caravan in which they were responsible , and the caravan are set at all , and if you were on the part of the law , they will be among the ignorant . and allah is the hearer , the knower .
and on the day when he will gather them all together , they will recognise each other , and they will recognise each other . they will recognize those who denied the meeting with allah , and were not guided .
then indeed your lord is forgiving and merciful to those who migrated after they were persecuted , and remained steadfast .
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaks over them , that they may be recognized , so that they will not be wronged . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts which you did not see , and punished those who disbelieved . that is the recompense of the unbelievers .
`` we have been penalised !
and whoever commits evil , commits it only for his cause , and whoever does the right of the sins of his own soul , it is the same to him who is the believer , and the women of the hereafter , and they will be among the righteous .
therein are thrones raised high ,
and they denied them , though their souls were convinced thereof , and they were convinced thereof . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
that this is the word of a noble messenger ,
leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . ''
and the good deed and the evil deed are not equal ; repelwith that which is better , and you will see that he will be as a bosom friend .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? god destroyed them , and the disbelievers will have the like of it .
then lodged it in a secure place
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the crawling things he has dispersed in them . he is able to gather them when he wills .
on that day you will be exposed , no secret of yours will remain hidden .
except to an apostle he approves of . then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him ,
and thus we try some of them by others that they may say : are these those whom allah has favoured among us ? is allah not aware of the thankful ?
say , “ o people , the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided is guided only for his own benefit ; and whoever goes astray , goes astray against himself . ”
and we left for themamong generationsin later times :
hinderer of the good , transgressor , sinner .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
she said , “ i take refuge in the most gracious from you , if you are righteous . ”
or have they taken for themselves protectors other than him ? but allah is the protector , and he quickeneth the dead , and he is over everything potent .
and whoever has passed away with our signs , the signs of allah , they said , “ these are the ones whom we have sent down . ” they said , “ as for us , what is the matter with us ? god is the rich , the owner of all praise , and he is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable . ”
surely allah is one of that which is spoken on the day of resurrection , when it is recited to you , when it is recited to you , so that you will not be able to have your trust , and then you will have no faith .
they were guided to purity of speech . they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
o you who believe ! be conscious of the fire , and be wary of the fire , and it is the fire of hell , and the angels will be secure , and the angels will not be secure from that which they have been commanded .
so have patience . the promise of god is true . let not those who do not believe make you unsteady .
and allah gives the glory to the people , as well as the people of the world , and the like of it . that is what they do , and that is what is in the earth . that is what is in the earth , and allah knows all things .
they are those whose efforts are wasted in this world , and they think that they are doing good deeds .
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
and some of the bedouins are those who spend what they spend for the cause of god , and wait for some misfortune to befall you . upon them is the evil cycle of misfortune . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
are they but waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ?
and your lord inspired the bee : `` make your homes in the mountains and in the trees , and in what they erect .
they make you a favour on the muslims , and they have surrendered themselves . say : `` do not be a favour on me . rather , allah has favoured you by guiding you by guiding you to faith if you are truthful . ''
and for every nation we have appointed a purpose , so let it be the same for you , to speak about you , and to speak about the same religion , and to your lord is a straight path .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will reject me .
it will engulf them .
and anumber from those of later times .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
has he forged a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? ' nay , but those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and far astray .
we have not sent you except as a mercy to the worlds .
your lord is bountiful to mankind , but most of them do not give thanks .
say , ‘ the truth is from your lord , so whoever wills , he will have faith in it , and whoever wishes to believe in it , and gives the lie to the truth , it will be as a means of bitter fire , and what a wretched destination . what a wretched destination !
whether we show you some of what we have promised them , or cause you to die , your duty is only to convey the message .
hecast lots , and he was among the losers .
and when you look around , you will see bliss and a great kingdom .
as for those who believe and do good works , we will have prepared for them gardens of paradise ,
they said , “ we will solicit him from his father ; we will surely do . ”
if he should ask you for it and press you , you would be niggardly , and he would expose your unwillingness .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer ,
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the possessor of strength . he was penitent .
we hope that our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers . ''
has he taken for himself daughters from what he creates and favored you with sons ?
say , `` the truth has come , and falsehood can neither originate nor recreate anything . ''
those who have believed and emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their possessions and their lives are higher in rank with god . they are the successful .
say , “ i worship only my lord , and i do not associate anyone with him . ”
they said , 'nay , but we have brought thee that concerning which they were doubting .
and to the favor of allah we have sent down to you , and we have sent it down to them , and we sent down to them a curtain from the finest , so that we have given them a good share of what we have provided them . they wronged themselves .
they said : nay , but we found our fathers doing so .
and when he saw the sun rising , he said , “ this is my lord . this is greater , ” and when it set , he said , “ o my people ! indeed i am quit of what you associate ,
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
and indeed , for you is a reward uninterrupted .
and they say : `` what is the matter with you that if his lord has sent down a sign from his lord , then say : `` there is a sign in the presence of allah , and i am only a clear warner '
it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
by the dipersing winds that disperse .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
they will be in gardens , or the everlasting life , wherein they will abide forever .
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
and thus do we try our vision , and we raised them up in order that he may say : `` unless your lord is longer than a day . '' and the one of you said , `` it is only for your lord who will give you a part of the day . '' so the one of you said , `` this is what your lord has ordained for you , and you will have no share . ''
these are onguidance from their lord , and these are the successful .
save him who has done wrong and then substitutes good after evil , and i am forgiving , merciful .
we have sent down to you a book in which is your remembrance . do you not understand ?
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds ,
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bounties .
worship allah , and worship not , nor associate with him any partners , and the relatives and the pagan . god does not love the proud and the people of the vainglorious . indeed , allah does not like the arrogant .
and the mother of the throne will be raised up for his throne , and they made obeisance to him . he said : `` o my father ! this is the matter of my father , and he is the one to whom i have said : `` o my father ! this is the matter of my lord , and indeed , he is the all-knower , the most merciful . ''
on the day when we shall roll up the heaven like the rolling up of a scroll rolled up for writings , as we began the first creation , we will repeat it . indeed , we will do it .
and a tongue of the book is only for the people of the book , except for the best of those who have done wrong , and they have been wronged before , and we have been commanded , and we are only one of those who submit .
and verily , he is a near access to us and a happy journey 's end .
so we made it an exemplary punishment for the present and the succeeding , and a lesson for the pious .
for those who do good is better and more lasting , neither dust nor abasement shall cover their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
or do they follow that which is spoken in the name of allah , and they are pleased to be with them , and if allah is pleased with him , it would have been given to the end of a painful punishment ? and for the unjust is a painful punishment .
whatever alms you spend or vow , allah knows it . and the unjust will have no helpers .
and when it is said to them , `` believe as the peoplehave believed , '' they say , `` shall we believe as fools believe ? '' unquestionably , it is they who are the fools , but they do not know .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , they will not speak except one whom the most merciful permits , and he will speak to him honourable words .
and follow the best of what has been revealed to you from your lord before the punishment comes upon you suddenly while you are unaware .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees what you do .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has recorded it while they have forgotten it . god is witness over everything .
and the women of the woman 's women will be given four days , and be not lawful to them ; and be not of the things that allah has created for them . and if they were to keep up a part of the truth , allah has created them for a number of things , and the women of the whole world are a thousand of the women , and the women of the whole world is a great triumph .
other than allah , they will say : `` they have gone away from us . '' nay , we used not to call on any other thing . thus allah leads astray the disbelievers .
so if you meet them in war , deal with them in war as to those who are behind them , so that they may remember .
it is allah who created you , then he will make you die , and then he will have the same knowledge of the same time . and it is the matter of which he has knowledge of all things . and indeed , allah is all-knowing , all-powerful .
aye ! thou marvellest , and they scoff .
said he , 'then go thou forth hence ; thou art accursed .
those who have received a share of the book are made to have a share of it . and some of them have been sent down to you . say : `` i am commanded to be of those who have been sent down to you . '' say : `` i am commanded to be of those who have been brought back to god . ''
o you who believe ! take your precautions , then go forth in small groups or go forth all together .
it is he who gives the glad news to the believers who believe , and do righteous deeds . say : `` no reward do you ask of any of you , but the reward of those who do good is in the same manner . god is forgiving and appreciative .
and all those who are on the earth , so that it might deliver him .
he said : my lord ! surely i have control over naught but myself and my brother , so distinguish between us and the transgressing people .
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and a few from the later generations .
the descendants of those whom we carriedwith noah . indeed , he was a grateful servant .
devotedand of equal age ,
when joseph said to his father : `` o my father ! i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ''
that he may warn him who is alive , and that the word may be justified against the unbelievers .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and they will all abide therein .
i have turned my face towards him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters . ''
do you think that you would enter paradise while allah has not yet ascertained those of you who foughtandtests those who are steadfast ?
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning will come to pass .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled , ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is aware of what you do .
and warn thy clan , the nearest ones .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with a bad deed . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
verily , those who guardare in a secure place ,
the day when mankind will be like scattered moths ,
and nuh cried unto his lord and said : my lord ! lo ! my son is of my family , and thy promise is the truth , and thou art the justest of judges .
“ when god ’ s favour is given to you , he will be given you , and if any are patient , they will vanquish two hundred , and they will vanquish two hundred ; and god is with as-sabirin . ”
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
the one who believed said , `` my people , i fear for you the like of the day of the confederates ,
and if you fear disobedience to the murder of their father , then are two of them , and are two of them , and are two of them , whether you fear that which they are promised , or are two of them , whether you fear that which they are promised , or be of the poor .
if you give charity openly , it is good ; but if you conceal it , and give them to the poor , it will be better for you , and it will atone for some of your misdeeds . god is aware of what you do .
then hell will be his abode .
and they have no knowledge of this , but we said to them , “ it is not sent down to the earth . ” we said , “ it is not sent down to the earth , and you will have a share of the land , and they will have some good advice . ”
your endeavors are indeed diverse .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is a punishment beyond that , but most of them do not know .
and he drew out his hand , and it appearedwhite to the beholders .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good a great reward .
on the day when the hour comes , the guilty will despair .
know that allah is severe in retribution , and that allah is forgiving , merciful .
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for disbelievers ?
and they said , “ whatever sign you may bring us to bewitch us , we will not believe you . ”
dead , not living , and they know not when they will be raised .
so we will certainly bring you magic like it , so appoint a meeting between us and you , which neither we nor you shall fail to break ,
i ask of you no wage for this ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
and made the night a covering ,
say , `` if what you seek to hasten is with me , the matter would have been settled between you and me . god knows best the wrongdoers . ''
thus they were vanquished and overthrown , humiliated .
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am one of the muslims ? ”
we have created man , and we know what his soul whispers to him , and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
and the true promise will come near , and behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , crying : woe to us ! we have been heedless of this . aye ! we were wrong-doers .
and approach your women , while you follow it , and you will be one of the cheats , and you will be among the righteous . and bear with your duty to allah , and be dutiful to the believers .
but when the messenger came to them with the truth , they have been with them , who had believed in it , and made fun of them of their knowledge . the promise of god came to them , and that they were mocking .
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
so we saved him and all his people ,
so if you meet them in war , deal with them in war as to those who are behind them , so that they may remember .
whoever desires the reward of this world , with allah is the reward of this world and the next . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
indeed , they are the ones who are in the fire , so that they may be condemned by their messenger . god knows what they conceal and what they disclose . indeed , allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal .
say , `` flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will not be allowed to enjoy yourselves but a little . ''
and as for the unbelievers , they would have cut off the end of their own hands , and the chief of them is a set of silver , and if it is a thing to be seen , he would have made for you a part of it . and if only he should be of the unbelievers , he would have made your duty to be a qarinto you . and if you were to be of the unbelievers , it would be a great triumph .
in the gardens of bliss .
say : 'it may be that a part of that which you wish to hasten on is close behind you .
said : `` even if i bring you a better guidance than that which you found your fathers following ? '' they said , `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
and we will not be punished . ''
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , and they will think that they are on something . indeed , they are the liars .
then , after them , we produced another generation .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe , and seek forgiveness for the polytheists , even though they are near kin , after it has become clear to them that they are the people of hell .
when the help of allah comes with victory ,
why should we not believe in allah and the truth which has come to us , and hope that our lord will admit us to the righteous people ? ''
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
and to us belong the last and the first .
who has fed them against hunger , and has secured them against fear .
a throng of the ancients
and they have advantages and drinks from them . will they not then be grateful ?
so do not obey the disbelievers , but strive against them mightily .
they ask you to be asked of what it gives you . say , “ whatever good you may spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; and for you is the thing you do not know . ”
he said : take hold of it and fear not , we shall restore it to its former state .
bewailing when evil befalls him ,
instead of him they call upon besides him , they invoke only a rebellious satan .
whenever a chapter is revealed , some of them say : `` which of you has it increased in faith ? '' as for those who believe , it has increased them in faith , and they rejoice .
go , you and your brother , with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
except an old woman among those who remained behind .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees what you do .
no associate has he . this am i commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
and of the two , it is two , and one of the two . say , “ did you have an immunityin the male or the female ? ” say , “ what ! do you have a measure of god or what is the matter with you ? god does not guide the unjust people . ”
they and their spouses will recline on couches in the shade .
does he not know that god sees ?
has there come to you the story of the hosts
and as for the people of pharaoh , and those who were before them , those who were before them denied the signs of allah and those who denied the signs of allah , and allah is the pardoner , the most merciful .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear ? ''
and allah 's example is the example of the unbelievers , and the two women of the two women , who were two women , and we have been two of them , and we have made them equal to the two of them , and the prophet is said , `` enter the fire . ''
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the good things , and it is they who are the successful .
say , “ had allah willed i would not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you . i have lived a lifetime among you before it . do you not understand ? ”
we believe in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic to which you compelled us . god is better and more lasting . ''
“ this is my brother , and he has ninety-nine ewes and i have only one ewe ; and he says , ‘ entrust it to me . ’
then they turned to one another , blaming each other .
the gardens of eden , which they will enter , and those who were righteous among their fathers , their spouses , and their offspring will come to them from every gate .
so we exacted retribution from them , and see how was the end of the deniers .
nay , but they will deny their worship of them , and become opponents to them .
what ! will you then believe in it when it has come to you ? now , when you have hastened to it , will you believe ? '
and my curse will be upon you till the day of judgment . ”
say , “ the most gracious is most gracious , and the most gracious has given you , until when they see it , or the punishment of the world to come , they will know who is the most disputatious of people . ”
as accommodation from aforgiving and merciful . ''
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession ; and the unbelievers are the wrongdoers .
and verily , those who disbelieve , and say : allah is one of the two , and there is no god except allah . and if allah is not one of the disbelievers , there shall be no god except him , and for them is a painful doom .
they said , “ our lord , continue to go away from us , and we are oblivious of them . ” but in that case , they are the ones who are in ruins , and there is a sign in that for a people who are patient .
when shu'eyb said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
then after him we sent messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had denied before . thus we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
verily i am allah , there is no god but i , so worship me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
do not think that allah is unaware of what the wrongdoers do . he only gives them respite till the day when the eyes will stare fixedly in horror .
and has placed the moon in them as a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
and as for the unbelievers , they would have cut off the end of their own hands , and the chief of them is a set of silver , and if it is a thing to be seen , he would have made for you a part of it . and if only he should be of the unbelievers , he would have made your duty to be a qarinto you . and if you were to be of the unbelievers , it would be a great triumph .
say , `` i am not a new warner among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow what is revealed to me , and i am only a plain warner . ''
but my call added only to their flight .
if allah had willed , he would have made you one community , but he leads astray whom he will and guides whom he wills . and you will surely be questioned about what you used to do .
and they were witnesses of what they did to the believers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
peace be upon abraham .
a registerinscribed ,
they have taken their oaths as a cover , and they avertedfrom the way of allah . indeed , it was evil that they are doing .
verily those who have the remembrance of allah are the ones who have been given the book in their book , and make a little of them , and it is they who are in the fire , and on the day of resurrection , it is only for them a painful punishment .
so fear allah and obey me .
leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . ''
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors besides allah , and then you will not be helped .
it is not a revelation that they could not be composed by god . it confirms what was before it , and the clear book is revealed to it . there is no doubt in it from the lord of the universe .
we hope that our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers . ''
has the story of moses reached you ?
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from whence they perceive not ?
surely those who say , `` our lord is god , '' and remain firm , nor shall they grieve .
no ! but you do not honor the orphan ,
and do not be like those who left their homes boastfully to be seen of men , and to be seen of men , and allah encompasses all that they do .
where are you heading ?
and to us belong the last and the first .
and thoseapportioningmatter ,
but as for the sake of allah , there is no one but he . and he does not have any power to fail in his own way , and we have made a covenant with him ; and our lord is the one who has made for us a share in the manner of the truth . and we have made a covenant with him , and we have made for him a share in the manner of the truth .
and we raised him to a high position .
surely your god is one ,
so we exacted retribution from them , and drowned them in the sea , because they denied our signs and were heedless of them .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
except those who repent and mend their ways , and make clear to them the truth , and i am the acceptor of repentance , the merciful .
guide us to the straight path ,
you are receiving the quran from one all-wise and all-knowing .
these are the towns which we recount to you . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they were not believers in what they had denied before . thus does allah seal the hearts of those who deny the truth .
and allah created every creature from water . some of them walk on two legs , and some others walk on four . god creates whatever he wills . god has power over all things .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate to the sun or the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if you are to worship him .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
or be reminded , and the reminder might profit him .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is cognizant of what is in the breasts .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition ,
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
and what is that in your right hand , o moses ?
on the day when the recompense shall come to pass , that will be the recompense of what it has earned , and the like of it has been made to pass between them . and allah will give you a criterion , and allah will give you all away from his servants .
and said : `` to be the end of the life to come . '' he said , `` it is not the same to you that you will not be told . '' and to make it a thing to be fulfilled . and we will make him to enter , and to make it clear .
this is what you were promised , for every returnerand penitent .
he said : `` would that i had power to suppress you , or could betake me to a strong support . ''
o you who believe ! when you are seated to be seated in the presence of the truth , you will be told , `` you are the like of the one who speaks . if you can bring god to the best of what you have done , you will have the best reward . and if you bring allah to those who have been given you out of it , then indeed , allah is aware of what you do .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ this is indeed clear magic . ”
and indeed , the messengers , before you , are not waiting for them . and they will not be able to help them until they have come to know the truth of god . and indeed , allah has already come to you with a messenger and a noble messenger .
and who is better in religion than he who submits himself to allah , while he is good , and follows the religion of abraham , the upright , and allah took abraham as a friend ?
who deny the day of recompense .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear ? ''
those who deny the truth say : `` shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen you have become dispersed in disintegration , you will be createdanew ? ''
and do not rebuke the beggar .
we never sent a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said , `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
the likeness of the garden is that which is in the presence of the righteous , and that which is with them is its abode , and the rivers will be brought forth with it , and in the midst of it there was a source of water to flow . in the midst of the fire there was a sign for those who are in the midst of the fire , and they will be in the midst of the fire .
o mankind ! fear your lord , and fear him on the day of judgment , and do not be a muslim . the promise of god is true . so let them not go to the way of allah , and do not be among the skeptics .
they said , “ have you come to us that we should worship god alone and abandon what our ancestors worshipped ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed for them , and said , “ this is a tough day . ”
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will . he is the mighty , the merciful .
and if they belie you , say , “ for me is my work ; you are your deeds . you are quit of what i do , and i am quit of what you do . ”
and indeed it is a reminder to you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
`` o my son ! if it beequal to the weight of a mustard seed , and in the heavens or on earth , or in the heavens or in the earth , allah will bring it forth . verily , allah is subtle , acquainted .
it is said to them , `` it is not for me to be wronged , except for what god has given you . but only the one who has taken god 's face for a term has already been fulfilled , and you are not one of the heirs . ''
so when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ this is indeed clear magic . ”
and they will be given to drink of a cup whose mixture is ginger ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity so that they may return .
we gave david grace from us , saying : `` o mountains , sing the praises of god with him ! '' and we made iron soft for him .
the hypocrites will have the faith of the believers . `` did we not believe in you ? '' but they have said , `` it is you who have been waiting for it . '' but you have been told , `` it was you who have been waiting for it , and you have been told to be of those who were told . '' and you were told , `` it was the matter of allah , who has been abandoned to you , and it was the same to them . ''
it may be that my lord will give me a garden better than your garden , and send upon it a thunderbolt from the sky , and it will become a barren waste .
he said , “ you are strangers . ”
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ,
and those will be called to you in the way of god , but some of them are niggardly . but he who is niggardly will be stingy , and he is the rich , the rich . and allah is the rich , the most merciful . and allah is the rich , the most rich .
evil is the speech of satan , in order that he may cause grief to those who believe , and he can not harm them except with allah 's permission . in god let the believers put their trust .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
and we used to deny the day of judgment .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
and the lord of the wood will be told , `` indeed , he has spoken the truth , and it was the same to him , when his blessed brother overtook him , he has been restored to his lord . '' he said , `` o mary , what is the good things of allah , and he will make it free from all things . '' he said , `` it is he who will give you all the provisions . ''
those who had surrendered themselves to allah , and they were not to be told . they said , `` we will not follow you . '' they said , `` we have no power to follow you . '' but they said , `` we have no power to follow you . '' but they have no power to say , `` it is god who will not be given a great punishment . ''
gardens of eden , beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . this is the reward of those who purify themselves .
ha . mim .
the league will be routed and turn their backs .
indeed , with hardshipease .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . these are the fuel of the fire .
those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from their lord , and those are the guided ones .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
there is not a messenger before you that we sent a messenger before you , and to the people of the world . but when he has made it to be done to the devil , he has taken to his own being a share of what he has given them . god is knowledgeable and wise .
when two groups among you almost faltered , but allah was their protector . in god let the believers put their trust .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
they said : we augur ill of you and those who are with thee . he said : your augury is with allah . aye ! ye are a people being tested .
do not think that god will break his promise to his messengers . god is majestic and revengeful .
which will neither fatten nor avail against hunger .
or do they follow that which is spoken in the name of allah , and they are pleased to be with them , and if allah is pleased with him , it would have been given to the end of a painful punishment ? and for the unjust is a painful punishment .
he said : o chiefs ! which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me in submission ?
allah knows what every female bears , and what the wombs loseor exceed . and everything with him is inproportion .
and there has come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
who believe in what has been sent down to you and what was revealed before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
on the day when he will call to them and say : `` where are my 'partners ' ? whom you imagined ? ''
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
o mankind ! we have been of you , the male and the female , the male and the earth , and the men of wisdom , and the people of truth , for it is the matter of one which is true . god is all-knowing and all-aware .
a party of the people of the book would lead you astray , and they lead you astray , and they perceive not .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
surely man was created restless .
and abundant fruit ,
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , and they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pure .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the good things , and it is they who are the successful .
those who have purchased disbelief for faith will not harm allah at all , and theirs will be a painful punishment .
then the first of them will say to the last of them : you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou wilt give to whomsoever thou wilt .
and we divided them into communities in the earth ; some of them are righteous , and some of them are otherwise , and we tested them with good things and misfortunes , so that they may return .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and allah 's is the loftiest likeness ; he is the mighty , the wise .
and we did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in play .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
he said , “ yes , and you will then be among the near-stationed . ”
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
so proclaim what you are commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
and we have sent down the book with the truth and the truth , and the example of those who have passed away in the matter of their own hands . and you are the ones who have been sent by what allah has sent down , and you will be among those who have passed away . and you will be told to be of those who have passed away . and you are to be of those who do good .
until , when we opened the gate of a severe punishment , then lo ! they are in despair .
there is no moving creature on earth but it is for god to provide its sustenance , and he knows its lodging-place and its repository . all is in a clear book .
the elite of his people who were proud said , `` o shu'aib , you have believed in allah and those who believe in your own selves , or do you return to our religion . ''
say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , they are the losers . '
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees what you do .
what remains with allah is better for you , if you are believers . i am not a keeper over you .
she screened herself away from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and we sent to her our spirit .
verily the god-fearing shall be amidst gardens and rivers ,
and those who regulate the affair .
the example of what they spend in the life of this world is like a frosty wind which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and destroys it . god did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
go , you and your brother , with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
those whose hearts tremble when allah is mentioned , and those who patiently endure whatever befalls them , and those who establish prayer and spend of what we have provided them ,
have you considered him who turned away ,
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you over the world .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and man is the most disputatious of things .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decided a matter , and that they should have a matter to be in manifest error .
our lord ! surely you will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . indeed , allah does not break his promise .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
he showed him the greatest sign ,
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors besides allah , and then you will not be helped .
as for the people of the pharaoh , as to the people of pharaoh , the people of pharaoh , and those who lived before them , the signs of pharaoh and those who were before them will be punished . god is severe in punishment .
nay , but the way of your votaries , and you will not come to the believers . but you will not be brought back to their own people , and you are the ones who are in the same manner .
verily those who have the remembrance of allah are the ones who have been given the book in their book , and make a little of them , and it is they who are in the fire , and on the day of resurrection , it is only for them a painful punishment .
and we delivered moses and all those who were with him .
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , and that allah is kind and merciful .
then what makes you deny the recompense ?
all of them all will be brought before us .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , and was not able to quicken the dead ? yes , indeed he is able to do all things .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
verily , those who believe and do good works , allah will admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow ; and those who disbelieve will eat as cattle eat . and the fire will be their abode .
andlot when he said to his people : `` you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you init in the 'alamin . ''
no one led us astray except the guilty .
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you ,
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak , “ did we turn you away from guidance after it had come to you ? no , you were guilty . ”
andlout , when he said to his people : `` do you commit a sin in the 'alamin ? ''
o ye who believe ! whosoever of you is upright in religion , then verily , allah is a man of great mercy , and he is the owner of the throne , the lord of the whole universe . and they will be secure from the way of allah to whom he will . and fear allah , for he is the embracer , the knower .
the gates of heaven will not be opened for those who have rejected our revelations and are arrogant until the gates of heaven will not be opened for them until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we reward the guilty .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say , “ my lord ! have mercy on them , as they raised me up , just as they nurtured me . ”
it may be that our lord will give us better than this , and we turn to our lord . ''
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
glory be to him who carried his servant by night from the sacred mosque to the farthest mosque from the sacred mosque that we blessed , that we may show him some of our signs . he is all-hearing and all-seeing .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , and the people of pharaoh took the right punishment .
on that day you shall see the guilty bound in chains ,
by those who swim smoothly ,
nay , we have been deprived . ''
say : ' o people , i am only a plain warner to you .
so enter the gates of hell , to abide therein . evil is the abode of the arrogant .
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing and left joseph with our things , so the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
eat of the lawful and good things that we have provided for you , and do not be responsible for his evil deeds , that you may have no power to be able to do so , and that is the matter of what i have been forging .
there is nothing but our life in this world , and we die , and we shall never be raised again .
you have no authority over my servants except those who follow you , who follow you ,
then as for him whose scales are heavy ,
verily , those who violate allah 's covenant , their own souls will not be able to die , and on the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted from them , and for them is the painful punishment .
a recompense for what they used to do .
then they will have no proving , but they will say : by allah , our lord , we were not polytheists .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife , who was of those who remained behind .
whether we show you some of what we promise them , or we cause you to die , then to us is their return , and allah is witness to what they do .
and hasten thou in the night as an additional prayerfor thee . so that thy lord will raise thee to a laudable station .
and recite to them the story of abraham .
god is my lord and your lord . so worship him . this is a straight path . ''
surely man is in loss ,
so i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on the day of friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off buying and selling ; that is better for you if you but knew .
and the angels will be on its sides , and on that day eight will bear the throne of your lord above them .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my faults on the day of judgment .
when the earth is shaken with its shaking ,
and whosoever blindeth himself to the remembrance of the beneficent allah , we appoint for him a satan , and he becometh his companion .
they said , “ burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do . ”
so they turned away from him , and went away .
and never came a messenger to them but they mocked him .
it was said , `` o noah , have come and have been sent down from the great land , and the highest of the great land , and to be brought forth from us with a great punishment . ''
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : worship allah , and behold , they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
when he said to his people , 'will you not be godfearing ?
abiding therein forever , desiring no removal from them .
we have sent to you a messenger as we sent a messenger to noah and the messengers , and the son of abraham , and the heir of abraham , and david and solomon , and we gave him wisdom and aaron .
he said : my lord ! surely my bones are feeble and my head is glistening with age , but i have never been unblest in my prayer to thee , o my lord !
indeed , with hardshipease .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came against you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not , and allah is seer of what ye do .
but whoever fears partiality or sin on the part of the testator , and makes reconciliation between the parties , there is no sin for him . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
like those who tasted the evil consequences of their conduct before them , and they will have a painful punishment .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be recompensed for what it has done .
it was revealed to noah : `` none of your people will believe except those who have already believed , so do not grieve over what they have done . ''
surely allah knows all that is on the day of resurrection . and it is he who knows what is in their womb . and what is in the womb of the dead , and what is in the womb of the dead . god has knowledge of all things .
the hypocrites , men and women alike , like one of the women , that they may enjoin what he has enjoined upon them . and those who do evil , turn their backs , and allah has made them forget .
`` and what made you hasten from your people , o moses ? ''
alif lam ra . this is a book whose verses are perfected , and then explained in detail from the wise , the aware .
see how they coin epithets for you , so they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
say : `` he is the most beneficent , and in him we have put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
they will say , `` glory be to you ! you are our benefactor not them . nay , but they worshipped the jinn . ''
have you not heard the news of those who disbelieved before you , and tasted the evil consequences of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
it is he who created you , and one of you is a believer , and some of you are disbelievers . god sees what you do .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not frustrate allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said , `` these peoplemust be deluded by their religion . '' but whoever puts his trust in allah , then indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and those who take patrons beside him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not over them a trustee .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
not allah has begotten a son . he has no god in any case , but he will be able to take up his creation . god is too glorious to be aware of what they do .
who is brought up among ornaments and can not express herself in debate ?
and we have made for them a people who make their past and their actions seem decorous to them , and the word has been realized against them , and the word of jinn is fulfilled before them .
with clear proofs and writings ; and we have sent down to you the reminder that you may make clear to mankind what has been sent down to them , and that they may reflect .
but they have no knowledge of it . they follow nothing but surmise , and surmise avails nothing against truth .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of gloom seized them . indeed , it was the punishment of a great day .
gardens and vineyards ,
they said , `` o moses , we will never enter it as long as they are in it . go and your lord and fight . we will stay here . ''
they set out . when he said to his people , “ o my people , why do you not give up the land , whereas you know that i have been sent as a messenger from allah ? and when they have turned away from him , god has made a lot of a people who are iniquitous . ”
they will say , `` indeed , we were afraid of our families .
and when you are not aware of the , then remember allah , as you forgot the remembrance of their lord , and they are more likely to say : `` our lord ! bestow on us a sustenance in this world , and in the hereafter they will be the fabricators . ''
a warning to mankind ,
so that they may eat of the fruit thereof ; and their hands made it not . will they not then be grateful ?
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ,
and gave a little , then stopped ?
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
and has placed the moon in them as a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
abiding therein forever . evil will be the burden for them on the day of resurrection .
then he became a clot . and he created him , and formed him .
say to those who do not believe , `` act according to your condition . we too are acting .
we have sent you with the truth , as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
they said , “ call on your lord to make us to make plain to us the cow . he said , ‘ he says , ‘ the cow is yellow , pleasing to the onlookers . ’
the day when they will be pitched into the fire of hell ,
and do not defraud people of their goods , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say , “ bring the proof of the witness that they testify to the witness that god has spoken the truth . and if you give them witness to our signs , do not follow those who do not believe in our signs , and do not follow the people who do not believe in our signs . ”
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will never fail his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning .
except one of them who speaks with one another , and no one has any partner with us , nor speaks with his worship . say , `` we are obedient to his lord . ''
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail on it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
the indubitable event !
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
“ when god ’ s favour is given to you , he will be given you , and if any are patient , they will vanquish two hundred , and they will vanquish two hundred ; and god is with as-sabirin . ”
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
but if they turn away , say : 'god is sufficient for me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust , and he is the lord of the mighty throne . '
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
and there are other benefits in them for you , and that you may attain to them a need which is in your breasts , and on them and on ships you are carried .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what lies within the hearts .
and indeed it is the truth of certainty .
allah is the ones who believe in the life of this world and in the life of this world , and in the hereafter they shall come to know , and it is allah who leads astray , and it is he who leads astray .
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and we give drink of cattle and men as drink .
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
it is we who bring the dead to life , and write down what they have forwarded and what they leave behind . we have recorded everything in a clear book .
and if you do not , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger , and if you repent , you will have your capital sums , `` you will not be wronged . ''
those who believe , and those who are jews and those who are jews , are the angels , the angels , and the hearts of those who were with them . god will judge between them on the day of resurrection . god is witness over all things .
when the people from allah had given them a book , they will say : `` this is the case of those whom they have done . '' the disbelievers will have the upper hand . so they rejected the messenger of allah , and when they came to the disbelievers , they will be rejected .
and marry those among you who are single among your male and female slaves and your slave , and if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
have they taken other gods apart from god ? say , “ your proof is only for you , and the qur ’ an is a guide for those who are true . ” but the people of the truth are in truth , and most of them do not accept faith .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy , for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and if what you have in the heavens and the earth belongs to god , he will turn you away from it , or he will punish whomever he wills . god has power over all things .
he said , “ i am only a messenger from your lord , so that i may give you a pure boy . ”
o my father ! lo ! there hath come unto me of knowledge that which hath not come unto thee ; therefore follow me , and i will guide thee to a straight path .
do not rise up against allah . i come to you with clear authority .
and made them like chewed-up leaves .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending ,
he said : worship ye then beside allah that which can neither profit you nor harm you ?
or do you ask them for tribute ? the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
they will be in gardens , or the everlasting life , wherein they will abide forever .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
and say , `` glory be to our lord ! the promise of our lord has been fulfilled . ''
they will be given their recompense twice , because they are patient , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have provided them .
there is no city but that we will destroy it before the day of resurrection , or punish it with a severe punishment . in this book is written .
anda'ad and thamud , and the people of ar-rass , and many generations in between .
they said , “ our lord , continue to go away from us , and we are oblivious of them . ” but in that case , they are the ones who are in ruins , and there is a sign in that for a people who are patient .
and persisted in the great sin ,
he said : my lord ! surely i have control over naught but myself and my brother , so distinguish between us and the transgressing people .
and we did not make them bodies not eating food , nor were they immortal .
your lord knows best who strays from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
the day when he will gather the messengers , and he will say , “ will you not be brought back to my people ? ” they said , “ we do not know what you have been doing . ” they said , “ we do not know anything of this . indeed , allah is the all-knower of the unseen . ”
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but keep a mediumbetween those ;
in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day , it is in the sea , which allah has made to descend in the sky . and the signs of allah will be established , and the signs of the heavens and the earth will be established , and they are a signs in the heavens and the earth . and the signs of the heavens and the earth are signs for those who understand .
and enjoin your family in prayer , and be constant in it . we do not ask you any sustenance . we provide you for the sustenance of it ; and the final end is for piety .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
for the day of judgement .
among the two people are the two groups that they will come to you in a way of god . and the disbelievers are two of them , and the disbelievers are two in the presence of god . indeed , in this is a sign for those who are in a clear way .
it is he who originates the creation , then repeats it , and that is easier for him . his is the loftiest description in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent spreaderare we !
so let the people of the book know that the quran is recited to our signs and the mercy of allah . and know that allah is the owner of mercy , and the owner of mercy .
by the promised day ,
he inspected the birds and said : `` why is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and assembledand proclaimed ,
and they swear that they do not speak , but indeed , they are a lie , but the word of allah is they who disbelieve , and they have no faith in it . and they will not be able to turn their backs , and they will not be able to turn away from it . and if they turn away , then indeed , allah will guide them in the hereafter , and they will not be helped .
by the soul and him who proportioned it .
so he came out to his people from the sanctuary , and signaled to them to exaltin the morning and evening .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn away from them and see whatthey will return .
and when allah has made them feel secure , they instantly become a prey to the earth , o people who are in the earth . you will surely be responsible for your own souls . and to us you will be recompensed , and to us you will be returned .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
he said , “ my lord knows what is spoken in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing . ”
this is hell which you were promised .
said he , 'then go thou forth hence ; thou art accursed .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and to allah all matters are returned .
they said , `` call on your lord to make clear to us that which is well known to us . indeed , it is the same to them that most of them are a true purpose . indeed , we will guide them , if god wills . ''
he it is who has created seven heavens , and the command of allah . and it is the command of allah that they may know the command of allah , and that they may know that allah has encompassed everything . god has knowledge of all things .
and if we will , we could have blotted out their eyes , then they would struggle for the way , but how could they see ?
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we have given them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , allah is severe in punishment .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what he has given you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
so we brought forth from it the believers ,
he said : my lord ! appoint for me a sign , and he said : thy lord is the reality of thy speech , so that thou mayst mention thee to the day of judgment , and celebrate the praises of thy lord in the evening and the evenings .
worship allah , and worship not , nor associate with him any partners , and the relatives and the pagan . god does not love the proud and the people of the vainglorious . indeed , allah does not like the arrogant .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
if he gives you a victory , then allah will bring you better than you , and have no faith in allah , and the people who are upright , and are of those who are upright .
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am one of the muslims ? ”
say , `` tell me , if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the wrongdoers ? ''
and it is the record of every soul , but the guilty are going to be in their hearts . and the hearts of those whose hearts are wasted , and they will say : `` woe to us ! indeed , your lord does not wrong , nor do you .
indeedmessengers were mocked before you , but those who scoffed were overwhelmed by what they mocked at .
those who are the angels who are with the lord of the throne , are the ones who are its expanders and the day of judgment , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness of their lord ; and they are of those who repent .
this is a clear statement for mankind , a guidance and an admonition to those who guard .
and we sent noah and abraham , and placed the prophethood and the book , among their seed , and some of them are guided . but many of them are transgressors .
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were stronger in valour than they , and they searched the land ? could they find any refuge ?
this is the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
about the guilty .
we would have been allah ’ s exclusive servants . ’
those who disbelieve , whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
some of them believed in it , and some of them turned away from it . hell is sufficient for a blaze .
and when our messengers came to them with a revelation , the revelation of the truth is said : `` if only our lord will guide me , then indeed , our lord will not guide me , and indeed , we are not going to believe in him . ''
and believes in al-husna .
upon your heart , that you may be one of the warners .
and leave them a desolate waste ,
indeed , those who make you a covenant with allah , so do not take the mithaq , and whoever holds fast to allah will be in his hands , and whoever holds fast to him , he is the almighty , the great .
soon your lord will give youyou will be pleased .
so fear allah and obey me .
then winnow them thoroughly ,
she screened herself away from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and we sent to her our spirit .
a sign for them is that we carried their offspring in the laden ship ,
he it is who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and sent down to you thereby the fruits of the sea , and subjected for you the ships by the command of his lord .
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise .
on that day no intercession will avail , except for him who has received the sanction of the merciful and whose word is acceptable to him .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then will you not fear ? ''
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , will not be denied his efforts . we are congnisant of it .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful . god does not love the wasteful .
is thatbetter entertainment or the tree of zaqqum ?
if you obey the majority of those on earth , they will lead you astray from allah ’ s way . they follow nothing but conjecture , and they are only guessing .
have you not seen those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he will , and they will not be wronged a whit .
though they will be in sight of each other , and the guilty would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by his children .
and in your hearts is the good things of which you are patient , and do not cause any loss to you , and cause you to grow in the midst of your fortunes . and you will find no provision for you .
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like of it . whoever brings the like of it will be recompensed except for the like of it . they will not be wronged .
and assuredly we have sent a messenger , and we have said : worship allah , and keep your duty to him , and that he may be of those who have been minded to make the people of the land , and see the nature of the consequence for the muslims .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not ?
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city which he has made sacred , and to him belong all things . and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
he who does not respond to the caller of allah will not escape on earth , and he has no protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
and it sailed along with them amid waves like mountains , and noah called out to his son who was standing apart , `` o my son ! embark with us , and do not be with the unbelievers . ''
that you will surely be exhausted from stage to stage .
and when you are the publishing of the book , the secrets of the heavens and the earth are set in motion , and the caravan in which they were responsible , and the caravan are set at all , and if you were on the part of the law , they will be among the ignorant . and allah is the hearer , the knower .
each soul will know what it has sent ahead and what he left behind .
the tribe of thamud rejected the warnings .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day giving sight . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils of war belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and keep your duty to you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
and that which you give in usury , that it may increase in the sight of men , will not increase with allah . and that which you give in charity , desiring god 's countenance , they will increase manifold .
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him ; indeed they were a transgressing people .
do not grieve for those who rush towards disbelief . they will not harm god in the least . god desires to give them no share in the hereafter , and for them is a great punishment .
allah will not call you to account for a slip in your oaths , but he will take you to task for what your hearts have earned ; and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
so if you are about to say a group of me , then there is a group of them that is about to be of you , so that you will be told , `` i will not be able to fight with you , and you will not be able to fight with me . you are always waiting for those who do so . ''
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them ? enter paradise , neither shall you grieve for them , nor shall you grieve . ''
the one that will not be asked of the two of the two , and the two of the two months will be decreed , and whoever does it , it is for them to be seen ; and whoever does not accept the truth , it is for them to be a severe punishment .
allah is the only lord , the lord of all the worlds . he is the lord of peace and the protection of peace . he is majestic and all-merciful .
will you not remember ?
and exalted be the majesty of our lord , he has taken neither a wife nor son .
and besides these two , there are two other gardens .
then cast him into hell ,
we have adorned the lower heaven with lamps , and we have made them missiles against the devils , and we have prepared for them the punishment of the blaze .
and what is the matter with them that allah should not punish them when they obstruct people from the holy mosque , and they are not its guardians ? its guardians are only the pious , but most of them do not know .
and we will certainly test you until we know those who strive hard and persevere among you , and we will prove your reported .
then he made his progeny from an extract of an insignificant fluid .
he said : fear not , verily i am with you , hearing and seeing .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
but as for him whose scales are light ,
and others who have not yet joined them , and he is the mighty , the wise .
he said : we shall see whether thou hast spoken the truth or whether thou art of the liars .
so give to the kinsman his due , and to the needy , and to the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek god 's countenance . they are the successful .
the companions of the left
and those who movegently ,
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them in whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs . will they not then hear ?
say : allah knows that which is in the cave for a number of years , and to allah is the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . what is the matter with allah that he is not one of those who have taken the truth , and he is not one of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
do you command people to righteousness and forget yourselves while you read the book ? do you not understand ?
and placed therein high mountains and given you sweet water to drink ?
and we created you in pairs ,
she said : alas for me ! shall i bear a child , and my husband is advanced in years ! this is a strange thing !
if they dispute with you , say : allah knows best what you do .
a recompense from your lord , a fitting gift ,
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
`` what led you into hell ? ''
say : tell me , if allah were to make the night perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than allah will bring you light ? will you not hear ?
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day giving sight . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
god knows what is in their hearts . so turn away from them , and admonish them , and speak to them a far-reaching word .
and they will have no allies to help them besides allah . and whomsoever allah sends astray , there will be no way for him .
allah is the only lord , the lord of all the worlds . he is the lord of peace and the protection of peace . he is majestic and all-merciful .
then , after that , he has removed from them a place of return , and a party of them , a party of you , : `` if only we have been sent to be of the things of your own hands , they would surely have been told , `` even if it were the matter of allah that you have been given , they would surely have been told , `` even if it were the matter of god that you have been promised , and that they will be told , `` indeed , it is
and he will remove the anger of their hearts ; and allah will relent toward whomsoever he will . and allah is knowing , wise .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , and barred others from the way of allah . there is a humiliating punishment for them .
they said , “ have you come to us that we should worship god alone and abandon what our ancestors worshipped ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
no ! do not obey him , but prostrate yourself and draw nigh .
say : `` he is the most beneficent , and in him we have put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
when the caravan departed , their father said : `` i smell the scent of joseph , though you will not think me . ''
and we have spread out the earth , and set on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow therein of every well-balanced thing .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
or like a rainstorm from the sky , which is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers in their ears by the thunderclaps , fearing death , and for fear of death . god encompasses the disbelievers .
allah ! there is no god but he , the living , the self-subsisting , eternal .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has gone astray from the right path .
those who had surrendered themselves to allah , and they were not to be told . they said , `` we will not follow you . '' they said , `` we have no power to follow you . '' but they said , `` we have no power to follow you . '' but they have no power to say , `` it is god who will not be given a great punishment . ''
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and be patient , for your patience is only from allah . and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed because of their plots .
on that day they will see the evening of the sun and the poor , and the eyes of the sun and the women of the sun , and you will see the like of it . indeed , the punishment of allah is severe .
and obey allah and the messenger , that you may obtain mercy .
if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge with god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and those who disbelieve say to allah , “ why do you not bring us a sign ? ” and there is no other group except those before them ; they are the ones who are in the same manner , and we have made it clear to a people who are upright .
he said : `` it was she who sought to seduce me . '' and a witness of her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she is speaking the truth , and he is one of the liars .
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves .
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
they will say , `` glory be to you ! you are our benefactor not them . nay , but they worshipped the jinn . ''
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said , `` this is your god and the god of moses . ''
besides allah , and lead them to the way to hell .
and man saith : what aileth her ?
but if they turn away , then know that allah is your protector , andan excellent helper !
had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word of mine is that i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
and let them not be believers in the least , when it is recited to them , so that you may be told , `` you are the ones who are about to believe in it . '' so their hearts are sealed , and their hearts are sealed .
and indeed it will be aregret for the faithless .
it is naught but an admonition unto the worlds .
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
it is you who are your male male or female daughters , and you will be responsible for them . if you repent , you will be forgiven them , and if you repent , you will surely be forgiven . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
they used to carve dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
those who do goodto be seen ,
and assuredly we conferred a favour on thee anot her time .
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , and he sent down tranquillity to them , and rewarded them with a victory near at hand .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two might belong to you ? we will not believe in you . ”
and what she used to worship besides allah prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and reformed not .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then will you not fear ? ''
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ,
let the children of israel go with us . ''
and in 'aad , when we sent against them the barren wind .
it is the likeness of those who gave the book in order that it may be that they may be left behind , and then it is a thing , which is a place to which they have fabricated , and the example of those who had rejected allah 's revelations will not be guided . god does not guide the wrongdoers .
they said : we miss the king 's cup , and whoever bringeth it shall have a camel-load , and i am a guarantor .
they say , `` god has fabricated it . '' if he wills , he forged a seal on it ; and allah knows what is in the hearts . god knows all that is in the hearts .
by thosewho wrestviolently ,
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion of allah . but if they desist , allah is indeed seer of what they do .
and among the people of moses there is a community who leadwith truth and do justice thereby .
say : `` is there a guide for you from the right path ? '' say : `` allah has guided the truth . '' is there not a guide for you , or is it that you are guided ?
except one of them who speaks with one another , and no one has any partner with us , nor speaks with his worship . say , `` we are obedient to his lord . ''
and we did not make them bodies not eating food , nor were they immortal .
at dawn they called out to one another ,
verily he reflected and guessed ,
those who have purchased disbelief for faith will not harm allah at all , and theirs will be a painful punishment .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , he will give them their wages and increase them of his bounty . but those who do not turn their backs will be rewarded by god , and they will have a painful punishment .
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
and he has created for him a portion of what allah has created for them , and they say , “ this is what god has given them to be . ” and whoever of them has turned to their own souls , then they will be told , “ this is the matter of god ; and what is the matter with them that you do so ? ”
yet they play about in doubt .
and at night . will you not then understand ?
and if our verses were clear to them , they say , “ this is a sign ; and they say , “ this is a way of you that you have fabricated . ” and those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a manifest magic . ”
not allah has begotten a son . he has no god in any case , but he will be able to take up his creation . god is too glorious to be aware of what they do .
say , “ allah delivers you from them and from every agony , then you ascribe partners to him . ”
and we have made the sky a well-protected roof . yet they turn away from its signs .
and i do not ask you for it the speech of allah , and i do not know the speech of it . indeed , i am the messenger of allah , and allah is not aware of the harmdoers . and allah is not aware of the harmdoers .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good works , he will be among the successful .
and ask the book of the book , which is sent down to you from the sky . they said , `` we wish to make plain the truth to god . '' but they were the ones who were sent down to the clear signs , and they said , “ we did not speak to our signs , and we were a clear sign for them . ”
this is the guidance of allah , that he guides whom he will of his servants . if they associated others with allah in his divinity , they would have been annulled .
as for those who disbelieve when they hear the reminder , they nearly strike you down with their eyes , and they say , “ he is crazy . ”
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is incumbent on us to save the believers .
he said , “ by allah , indeed you did not oppress him , and you will not be able to make the one to be able to make its foothold , but those who do good , and do good , they will be among the believers , and they will be asked of his lord , and he was one of the neglectful .
surely your lord is the mighty , the merciful .
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and allah is not unjust to his servants .
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
wherein he will neither die nor live .
and if you fear , thenon foot or riding . but when you are safe , remember allah , as he taught you what you did not know .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
but allah bears witness to that which he has sent down to you . he has sent it down with his knowledge , and the angels are witness .
he only commandeth you to evil and indecency , and that ye should speak against allah that which ye know not .
so fear allah , and obey me .
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
so fight in the way of allah , and rouse the believers . you are responsible only for yourself . god is stronger in might and stronger in might . god is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
those before them denied , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
we sent noah to his people : `` i am a clear warner to you .
they ask , `` when will be the day of recompense ? ''
if they could find a refuge , or caves , or a place of concealment , they would turn stampeding to it .
on the day when the earth is changed into other than the earth , and the heavens , and they will come before allah , the one , the irresistible .
when they were at the time of the time , they will be set in front of you , or to be with you , or do they speak to them , and they will be told , `` this is the matter of those who are in the matter of god ; and the one of the people who are righteous will be in the matter of god . god will make it clear for the righteous .
a fitting recompense .
and we perpetuatedto him among the later generations .
by the snorting runners ,
these are the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you did not know , nor did your people before this . so be patient , for the outcome of the pious ones .
and they will not be absent from it .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , however much the polytheists may dislike it .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
why do you not bring angels to us if you are truthful ? ''
the truth is from your lord , so be not of those who doubt .
you can not guide whomever you love , but allah guides whom he wills , and he knows best those who are guided .
gardens of eden , which they will enter , wearing therein bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be silk .
before this , moses came before them by the command of the quran , and the qur'an is a recital of those who have passed away before them . and we have sent it down as a bearer of good news and a warner .
he whom allah leads astray , there is no protector apart from him . you will see the wrongdoers , when they see the punishment , saying , `` is there any way to return ? ''
but those among them who did wrong changed the word that had been said to them , so we sent upon them a punishment from the sky for their injustice .
and by your lord , we shall surely gather them together and the devils , then we shall bring them round hell on their knees .
and be thou patient with those who are with those who believe , and remember their lord in the morning and the morning , that he may be pleased with them , and that he may be pleased with them , and that he may be of those who go astray .
say , “ i am the un-wanting . ” and it is he who has brought it down , and i do not know what you have been doing . say , “ will you not take heed ? ”
when the help of allah comes with victory ,
if you had a good deed , they would have become afraid of it , and will grieve them , and what is with them . if you are patient , then indeed , if you are patient , then indeed , allah is devising what they do .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot .
and it sailed along with them amid waves like mountains , and noah called out to his son who was standing apart , `` o my son ! embark with us , and do not be with the unbelievers . ''
permission is given to those who are fought against , because they are oppressed , and allah is able to give them victory .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they will be in the mercy of allah , and they will abide therein .
he guides those who follow the guidance of allah , and he will guide them to the right path , and he will lead them to the right path .
and put thy hand into thy bosom , it will come forth white without evil-among nine signs unto fir'awn and his people . lo ! they are a transgressing people .
to god belong the angels in addition to the angels , so that they may turn away from the command of god . god will not bring any people away from it , until he does not leave any way to help them , and allah will not bring to them any equivalent .
is there a garden of palms and vines that will be made to gush forth with them , and some of them is a retinue of gold ? and it is a sign for him who is a penitent and a child . in that case , he is a sign to you , so that he may make it clear .
as for those whose scale is light , they are those who lose their souls because they disbelieved in our verses .
let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the cause of god . whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or achieves victory , we will bestow upon him a great reward .
and whoever earns a fault or a sin , then blames it on an innocent person , has burdened himself with falsehood and a flagrant sin .
they said , ‘ we are great and valor . you are the commander , so consider what you will command . ’
and whoever avenges himself after he has been wronged - there is no blame upon them .
our lord ! surely you will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . indeed , allah does not break his promise .
and i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
surely those who believe and do good works shall be a reward unfailing .
peace—a word from a merciful lord .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together .
all in the heavens and the earth entreat him . every day he exercisethpower .
and he has made for you a portion of the cattle , that he has ordered them to bring his staff , and they do not know . so eat of that which allah has provided you . so eat of that which allah has provided you . indeed , he is a manifest foe to you .
on thrones encrusted ,
striking sparks of fire ,
and pharaoh of the stakes ?
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is all-thankful , all-clement ,
they said : `` why do you think that the lord of the heavens and the earth is in truth ? '' is it notthat he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth ? and they said , `` you are only a fabricator . '' but they said , `` you are only a fabricator . '' but they said , `` you are only a fabricator . ''
that you should worship none but allah . i am to you from him a warner and a bringer of good tidings .
say : 'what do you think , what is the matter with you , if it is sent down by allah , and you are the ones who deny the truth ? ' and it is the people who are the witnesses of the book , and it is the people who are the people of the book ; and allah is the guide of the evildoers .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together .
and you diddeed of yours which you did , and you are one of the ungrateful .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
and a few from the later generations .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the supreme triumph .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to those who did wrong from the punishment of a painful day .
you have fulfilled your dream . thus do we reward the virtuous .
allah has begotten . indeed , they are liars .
then he fashioned him and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sight and hearts . little thanks you give !
but those who were given knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in allah ’ s book until the day of resurrection , so this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he settled on the throne . he is the most merciful , the knower .
have you not seen how your lord dealt with ad ,
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had not been given my record .
surely your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
know they not that allah enlargeth the provision for whomsoever he will , and straiteneth it ? verily there are signs in this for those who believe .
and they left early in the morning , able to deprive .
and they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them , and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
and we have made the covenant with them , and we have made it firm , and they have set up , and they turn away from them . say : `` obey you , if you are believers . '' and they cried out to it , `` have faith in you , if you are believers . ''
so are we not going to die ,
and heaped therein mischief .
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and whosoever enters my house as a believer , and the believing men and believing women , and do not increase the wrongdoers except in destruction .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and there is not a thing but with us are its stores , and we send it down only in precise measure .
and when you are the publishing of the book , the secrets of the heavens and the earth are set in motion , and the caravan in which they were responsible , and the caravan are set at all , and if you were on the part of the law , they will be among the ignorant . and allah is the hearer , the knower .
the jews say , `` the christians follow nothing , and the christians follow nothing . '' they are the ones who are readers of the book , and they are readers of the book . and allah will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they differ .
when we inspired your mother with the inspiration .
had those who disbelieve fought against you , they would have turned their backs , and then they would not find any protector or helper .
we know well what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , “ you are only following a man bewitched . ”
so when we recite it , follow its recitation .
if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge with god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
know they not that allah enlargeth the provision for whomsoever he will , and straiteneth it ? verily there are signs in this for those who believe .
and establish prayer , and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
so call upon allah , making religion pure for him , though the disbelievers dislike it .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return it . god keeps count of everything .
o you who believe ! spend out of what has been given to you in the earth and what is in the earth , and do not know that it is in the earth , and do not be pleased with us , and you are not aware of the things you have done .
those before them denied , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and persisted in the great sin ,
and assuredly he saw him in another descent
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
they will hear therein no babble nor falsehood ,
and they say : fables of the ancients which he hath written down , and they are dictated unto him morning and evening .
then we sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years .
and he has subjected for you the sun and the moon , and he has made subservient to you the night and the day .
on that day they will submit themselves to allah and all that they forged will forsake them .
and heaped therein mischief .
he taught distinctness .
o you who believe ! when you are seated to be seated in the presence of the truth , you will be told , `` you are the like of the one who speaks . if you can bring god to the best of what you have done , you will have the best reward . and if you bring allah to those who have been given you out of it , then indeed , allah is aware of what you do .
for what sin she was killed ,
when he came to it , he was called : `` o moses ,
if allah helps you , no one can overcome you , but if he forsakes you , who is there who can help you ? in god let the believers put their trust .
and we shall show them a sign , and we will make them in the end of their own affair , that he may explain to them the truth , and that he is not aware of all things .
and in your hearts is the good things of which you are patient , and do not cause any loss to you , and cause you to grow in the midst of your fortunes . and you will find no provision for you .
no ! if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock ,
alif , lam , meem , people , they have different groups , and one turned into fragments . and they were free from doubt about it . and if only they were to be blamed , it is not at all , but in that case , they were not aware .
why do you not bring angels to us if you are truthful ? ''
verily this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth glad tidings to the believers who do good deeds that they shall have a great reward .
so leave them alone , and make the life of this world as well as the life of this world and the life to come . and they will have a share of it , and they will have a share of it , and they will have a share of it . they will have a share of it , and they will have a share of it .
and do not worship what you worship besides allah , when they are a prey to worship , so that you may be pursued . and to their lord we shall have a share .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has recorded it while they have forgotten it . god is witness over everything .
and indeed we are able to show you what we promise them .
wherever you may be , let the people of the ark follow it , and let them be told , `` this is the result of allah , and if you are trying to go forth , they will say , `` this is the result of god , if you do not know . ''
do they not see that we have made a sanctuary secure , while all around them are snatched away ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
say : who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the mighty throne ?
believers , obey allah and obey the messenger , and do not invalidate your deeds .
o thou enwrapped !
and if they turn away , then they will not be able to turn you away from it . indeed , it is a great thing for you , but if they have an evil deed , it is indeed a consequence of it ; and if any misfortune befalls them , allah will surely bring you a gentle thing .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and they will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
honourablel scribes .
is he then , who has full knowledge of all that their own hands have fashioned , and allah has set up to him their lord ? say , “ then bring forth your associates from allah , or what is the thought of god . he is the only guardian , and whoever does not accept the way of god , he is the quarrelsome ones . ”
he said , “ did you turn away from my gods , o abraham ? if you do not desist , i will stone you , and leave me alone for a while . ”
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the all-beneficent , '' they say , `` what is the most merciful ? shall we prostrate ourselves to what you command us ? '' and it increases them in aversion .
but we wanted to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders , and to make them inheritors ,
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
so be steadfast in what you say , and proclaim the praise of your lord before the sun and the moon , and recite it to sing the praise of your lord .
do they not take their hands , or do they walk with one another ? or do they turn away ? or do you turn away from them ? say , “ worship your worship . ”
he said : nay ! go both of you with our signs . we shall be with you , listening .
those who believe and are cautious
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him as death , and they do not neglect .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
he said , “ you believed in him before i have given you permission . this is the magic which you have taught me . you will soon know , and you will soon come to know . ”
and say to those who are bent on denying the truth , `` fear their lord , and keep their duty to them , or whether they are free from their own hands , or to make a girl 's son , or whether they are free from their own hands , or a woman who is free from their own skill , or is the one who will be given to their own skill .
while allah has created you and what you make ? ”
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
this is the guidance of allah , that he guides whom he will of his servants . if they associated others with allah in his divinity , they would have been annulled .
they say : `` spend of those who spend their wealth in the messenger of god , '' so that they may be a source of access to allah . and all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to allah , but they are in the midst of the worlds .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
or the giving of food in a day of hunger
and when your lord declared that he would send against them the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with the punishment of the day of resurrection . surely your lord is swift in retribution .
he does not fear its sequel .
and on the day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
and he turned away from them and said , `` alas for joseph ! '' and his eyes turned white with grief , and he became depressed .
and you will not be compensated except for your deeds .
our lord ! surely we have heard the day of judgment , and we called us to believe in your lord , and we have said , `` our lord ! forgive us , our lord , and make us as a prey to us . '' and we shall not be punished .
but when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
and they left early in the morning , able to deprive .
did you think that we created you in vain , and that you would not be brought back to us ?
by the much-frequented house ,
and there are other benefits in them for you , and that you may attain to them a need which is in your breasts , and on them and on ships you are carried .
and do not be like those who left their homes boastfully to be seen of men , and to be seen of men , and allah encompasses all that they do .
they will say , `` submit ! '' but when they are present with you , they will say , “ when you are in the night and the day , it is you who are in the night , and the day when you are set in the night , and god is the guardian of you . ”
it is allah who has made a part of the truth to be of what he has given you . you have no power to be able to precede the horses . he is the guardian of all things . god has the power to do all things .
pharaoh said , `` do you believe in it before i have given you permission ? indeed , he is the one who has been given you , and it is the same to you . and he is the one who has brought you into destruction , and we will certainly make them a prisoner . ''
and let not those who disbelieve think that our respite is for them . we give them respite for their good deeds , so that they may increase a humiliating chastisement .
on the day when he will call to them and say : `` where are my 'partners ' ? whom you imagined ? ''
have they not pondered over the word , or has anythingcome to them that did not come to their forefathers ?
then he drew near , and hovered around .
he said , ‘ do not be afraid , for you forgot my forgetting , and do not be hard on me . ’
they will not hear therein any vain talk or sinful speech .
so your lord poured upon them a scourge of punishment .
this is indeed the supreme triumph .
thus do we explain the signs in detail , so that the way of the sinners may become clear .
say , “ it is a message of importance ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their homes .
forcing their feet into the center collectively ,
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and to allah all matters are returned .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
he said , “ go down from it , all of you , and some of you are enemies to one another . if you are guided to me , whoever follows my guidance will not go astray , nor will he go astray .
exalted in rank , lord of the throne . he sends down the spirit by his command to whomever he wills of his servants , that he may warnof the day of meeting .
do they not ponder the quran ? or are there locks on their hearts ?
say , “ we have believed in the human being and we have made a group of the jinn and the women to worship abraham and the descendants of isaac , and the descendants of isaac , and the descendants of their lord , and we do not have any relation between them . ”
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be careful ofhim , and every soul is informed of what he has done . for every soul is ever aware of what you do .
`` we led you astray , for we ourselves were astray . ''
the blind and the seeing are not alike ,
say : 'to allah belongs intercession altogether . his is the dominion of the heavens and the earth ; then to him you will be returned . '
and wait ! we too are waiting .
praise be to allah , who has given me in old age ishmael and isaac . indeed my lord is the hearer of prayer .
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
such is allah , your lord , la ilaha illa huwa , the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
it was revealed to noah : `` none of your people will believe except those who have already believed , so do not grieve over what they have done . ''
on the day when the recompense shall come to pass , that will be the recompense of what it has earned , and the like of it has been made to pass between them . and allah will give you a criterion , and allah will give you all away from his servants .
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . and who is truer in statement than allah ?
he will say , `` would that i had sent aheadfor my life . ''
o you who believe ! eat of the good things we have provided for you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
allah alternates the night and the day . in that is a lesson for those who have eyes .
do they not see that which allah has created , and the shadows on the right and the left , prostrating themselves before allah in humility ?
they say , `` if a surah is witnessed , '' and when the witnesses are brought forth , it will be in their hearts , and they will be in the hearts of those who were in doubt .
abiding therein forever . evil will be the burden for them on the day of resurrection .
he said , “ do you know what you did with joseph and his brother , when you were ignorant ? ”
so how was it that you have been commanded to be received by the command of allah , and leave the command with you , and those who are with you , and turn to allah in repentance ? indeed , he is the all-seer of what they do .
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
they will say : nay ! you are no welcome for us . it is you who made it an evil resting-place .
ha mim .
or enjoins piety ?
and indeed we know that they say , ‘ it is only a human being who teaches him . ’ the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , and this is clear arabic .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say , `` then bring a surah like it , and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ''
do you see any survivor among them ?
and those who are bent on blaspheming against your own servants are only the ones of your own sins , and if they do not speak , they are waiting for the same time , and those who are waiting for the same time , and those who are waiting for them , and that they may be of the same age . and those who are conscious of allah will have the measure .
there is no blame on the prophet regarding what allah has ordained for him . this was the tradition of allah with those who passed before . and the command of allah is a decree determined .
and on the earth are signs for those who have conviction ,
as for him who is sent down to his lord , he has sent down to them a book from his lord . and those who have been sent before it was sent down by his command , and the people of the book are the ones who have been sent down by the command of your lord , but most of them do not believe .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and when he turns away , he hastens about the earth to cause mischief in the land and to destroy crops and cattle . god does not love corruption .
so that they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
i swear by the lord of the easts and the wests that we are able
every one has a direction to which he turns . so vie with each other in good works . wherever you may be , allah will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
and allah encompasses them from behind .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
a party of the people of the book would lead you astray , and they lead you astray , and they perceive not .
this is a clear statement for mankind , a guidance and an admonition to those who guard .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself , then implores allah for forgiveness , will find god forgiving and merciful .
and if your women were in divorce , it would be as a matter for them , and when you are not equal to them , it will be the same for them , but they will not be able to do so , except for the cause of god . they will be the victims of the innermost of the chests .
they are those whose efforts are wasted in this world , and they think that they are doing good deeds .
he was created from a gushing fluid
their prayer at the house was nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
enjoyment for you and your cattle .
the believers are those who believe in god and his messenger and then have not doubted , and struggle with their wealth and their lives in the way of allah . these are the truthful ones .
the people of the book are the ones who follow the encounter with their lord , and you are the ones who are the ones with whom they are in the presence of the truth . it is a great reward for the people who are the ones who are in the hands of god , and you will have a great reward .
it is he who has spread out the earth for you , and made the sky a resting-place for you . and we have made a spring to gush forth from the sky , so that you may have a share of the sky , so that you may have a share of it .
the day when their guile will not avail them at all , nor will they be helped .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
accursed be the conjecturers
none but god can avert it .
so do not compare allah with anyone . god knows and you do not know .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the guardian over all things .
say to my servants who have believed , `` perform the prayer , and spend of what we have given them , secretly and publicly , before the coming of a day in which there will be neither trading nor befriending .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , that you may be godfearing .
he said : my lord ! because thou hast favoured me , i shall never be a partisan of the guilty .
but he tarried not long , and said : i have comprehended that which thou hast not comprehended , and i have come to thee from sheba with a sure tiding .
he is only a man who invents a lie against allah , and we are not going to believe in him .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if only they knew !
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they swore to harvest the morning in the morning .
it yields its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . god presents the parables for people that they may take heed .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came against you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not , and allah is seer of what ye do .
o you who believe ! spend out of what has been given to you in the earth and what is in the earth , and do not know that it is in the earth , and do not be pleased with us , and you are not aware of the things you have done .
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth . he is the wise , the knower .
and it is he who has sent a noble messenger among them , reciting to them the verses of their lord , and he gives them to make clear to them the book and the judgement . they are indeed quarrelsome .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah , their faces blackened . is there not in hell an abode for the arrogant ?
and by the night when it departeth ,
and you diddeed of yours which you did , and you are one of the ungrateful .
and they worship besides allah that which he has sent down no authority to them , and they have no knowledge of that which they have no knowledge .
because he has wealth and children .
we made the covenant that they should say , `` we have been sent down by what they had done . '' but it was said , `` we have been sent as a witness between you and the day of resurrection , and we will be told . '' and allah is the all-seer of what they do .
woe to you , and woe to you !
a surah which we have sent down and made obligatory , and we have sent down clear verses in it , so that you may take heed .
no ! if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock ,
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
that we may send down upon them stones of clay ,
he said , “ the punishment of god has averted you . will you then dispute with one another ? you will have no relation with god . i too will be waiting with you , and you will be waiting with me . ”
and they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us . he saith : verily ye are unto me .
except his wife ; we have decreed that she will be among those who remain behind .
and in your own selves . will you not then see ?
but he turned away with his court , and said : `` a magician or a madman . ''
we sent a tumultuous wind against them on a day of unremitting misfortune ,
he said , “ my lord , i have called my people night and day
and then there comes to them what they were promised ,
he said : my lord ! expand for me my breast .
we know well what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , “ you are only following a man bewitched . ”
or who is the one who cried lies to his lord , and when you call upon him , then turn away from him ? then will he turn away from you , and will take to him a little .
storming tempestuously
a proclamation from allah and his messenger on the day of resurrection , and on the day of resurrection , if you turn away , then you will not be able to turn away from it . and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
say : 'allah has spoken the truth . follow the religion of abraham , the upright , and he was not of the polytheists . '
who created you , proportioned you , and proportioned you ?
and the sun and moon are joined together ,
do they then travel in the land , so that they might see the fate of those who have been doing ? they are stronger in power and power . god is certainly aware of the heavens and the all-powerful .
and indeed it has been revealed to you , and to those before you , that if you associate others with allah in your deeds , you will surely be among the losers .
but whoever turns away from my remembrance , for him is a confined life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
and we have spread out the earth , and set on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow therein of every well-balanced thing .
whoever desires this fleeting life , we hasten to him with whatever we wish , for whom we please , and then we will make him enter hell , condemned and rejected .
and it is allah who sends the winds , and they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land , and revive the earth after its death . even so will be the resurrection .
and indeed he is tenacious in the love of wealth .
o you who believe ! some of your women have some of your children or of your own children , and you have been afraid of your own children . then if you forgive them , then fear allah , and do not be of the merciful .
let not him who believes not in it and follows his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
you can not frustrateon the earth , and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
when the earth is shaken with ashaking ,
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
and i ask of you no answer concerning this .
o you who believe ! let not the servants of allah be of those who have been before you , in the morning and the last day , and the last period of your time . they will be brought forth to you in the morning , and the last period of your time will come to you , and they will be in the midst of it . and allah is the knower , the wise .
say , “ o people , i am a messenger to you , and allah is the one who is the one who is the lord of the heavens and the earth . there is no god except him . so take the way of god in his divinity , so that you may be guided , so that you may be guided . ”
when the believers saw the confederates , they said , `` this is what allah and his messenger had promised us . god and his messenger spoke the truth . '' and it only increased them in faith and submission .
he assumed that he would never return .
and he swore to them , “ i am your well-wisher . ”
and they will say : we believe in it , but how can they reachfrom afar off .
the building which they built will not cease to be askepticism in their hearts until their hearts are cut into pieces . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and obey allah and his apostle , and speak to them a low saying , and if you are one of the truthful , then , if you are one of the truthful , then indeed , allah is with the steadfast .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and do not be the first to disbelieve therein , and do not exchange my revelations for a paltry price , and fear me .
and they have no knowledge of this , but we said to them , “ it is not sent down to the earth . ” we said , “ it is not sent down to the earth , and you will have a share of the land , and they will have some good advice . ”
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
or have they taken for themselves protectors other than him ? but allah is the protector , and he quickeneth the dead , and he is over everything potent .
it is a written record .
and that those who have been given knowledge , know that this is the truth , and that it is the truth from your lord . and those who believe in the way of allah are guided .
in whatever form he pleased he constituted you .
eat of the lawful and good things that we have provided for you , and do not be responsible for his evil deeds , that you may have no power to be able to do so , and that is the matter of what i have been forging .
it is we who bring the dead to life , and write down what they have forwarded and what they leave behind . we have recorded everything in a clear book .
and marry those among you who are single among your male and female slaves and your slave , and if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
and madesmooth for him .
taste thou ! verily thou art the mighty , the honorable .
do they not see that we have created for them our handiwork , and they are their masters ?
worship allah , and worship not , nor associate with him any partners , and the relatives and the pagan . god does not love the proud and the people of the vainglorious . indeed , allah does not like the arrogant .
you have no authority over my servants except those who follow you , who follow you ,
they will swear to you by god , in order that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell , and their abode is hell .
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
as for those who believe in their faith , and do not fear allah , for those who do not fear allah , he is the ones who would have made it seem decorous to allah , and most of them were insolent .
and there is no one comparable to him .
and behold , he came to you with the hearing , the sight , and see what is in their belly ; and in their hearts is the test of you .
and he had recited it to them , they would not have believed in it .
and the people of the city will come to pass , and they will be told , `` o my people , these are my daughters . '' he said , `` o my people , these are my daughters , and do not be of those who have been pure . ''
to bring you every expert magician . ’
and do not consume one another 's wealth in vanity , nor proffer it to the judges that ye may devour a portion of the wealth of others sinfully , while ye know .
these are verses of the wise book ,
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill hell with all of you . '
then , after it , are turned away , and have been like a solid thing , it will come out of it , and some of them are the same . some of them will be told , `` god is not heedless of what you do . ''
a fitting recompense .
and as for the people of pharaoh , and those who were before them , those who were before them denied the signs of allah and those who denied the signs of allah , and allah is the pardoner , the most merciful .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day giving sight . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
and verily , for those who are unjust shall have a portion of the fire like their fellows . let them not ask me to hasten on !
when the wife of 'imran said , `` my lord , i have pledged to you what is in my womb to be devoted to your service . accept it from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing . ''
how will it be when we gather them for a day about which there is no doubt , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged ?
andwhen those who disbelieve , when they have cut off your covenant , confine you to your servants or do not kill them . god is the most wicked of the devising .
indeed , we have sent down to you the book with the truth for mankind . so whoever follows the right way , it is only for his own gain , and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . you are not a manager over them .
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far .
andothers who await allah 's decree , whether he will punish them or relent towards them . and allah is knowing , wise .
so i swear by the galaxies .
we have brought them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , and guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
it is all the same for him whether you speak softly or aloud , whether one hides himself in the night or conspicuousby day .
and thus have we sent it down as evidences , and indeed allah guides whom he wills .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
then , when he wills , he will resurrect him .
those who answer their lord and establish prayer , their affairs are by consultation , and who spend out of what we have given them .
so , on that day , we will strike them as if they were like dry hay , and they will be the like of it . so the trumpet will be blown , and all the trumpet will be split .
the thamud and 'aad denied the striking calamity .
as for the disbelievers , they were not like that of you , that they were stronger in valour than you , and more of your children . but you were wont to make a part of them in the seatbelt . as for those you seek to make a slip in the way of god , as if they were to deceive you , and they will be in the lurch .
so the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , where they will abide for ever . this is the recompense of the wrongdoers .
on the day when they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , `` peace ! '' he has prepared for them a generous reward .
and indeed , those who have invented a lie against you , think that they are a prey for what they have uttered in the same manner . but he who commits the right of his sins , is a great punishment and a great punishment .
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise .
and when the messengers came to them , they will think that they are a liar . and that is in the time that they are the ones who are in the end . and we will take revenge on him . and none will be able to take vengeance on us .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together .
o you who believe ! do not believe in allah and his messenger , and his messenger , in a few years , and those who have passed away before , and whoever believes in allah and his angels , and in the noble book , has gone astray in the right way .
we gave moses the guidance , and bequeathed the book to the children of israel ,
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are divers lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
and they said : o my people ! believe ! we believe in it , and we have revealed it in a book , and a guidance and a guidance , and a guidance and a guide to the right .
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
when the caravan departed , their father said : `` i smell the scent of joseph , though you will not think me . ''
that is a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
so fear allah and obey me .
and that allah may purify the believersand destroy the disbelievers .
and remember the name of your lord , and who has set up a witness against him , and he has set up a witness against the witnesses : `` you have no god . '' .
say : if there were other gods with him , as they say , they would have sought a way to the lord of the throne .
these are the inheritors
and when the anger of moses was appeased , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
we sent noah to his people : `` warn your people before a painful punishment comes upon them . ''
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes rolledand the hearts leapt to the throats , and you entertainedthoughts about allah .
and allah created every creature from water . some of them walk on two legs , and some others walk on four . god creates whatever he wills . god has power over all things .
so call not upon another god with allah , lest you be one of the doomed .
when it is said to them , `` do not cause corruption in the land , '' they say , `` we are only peacemakers . ''
so that they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
say , “ it is he who created you , and made for you hearing , eyesight , and hearts . little do you thank . ”
i would be your sin and your sin , and become your one of the fire . that is the reward of the wrongdoers . ''
yet lasting is the face of your lord , full of majesty and splendor .
and the heaven will crack ; so on that day it will be frail .
and the stupor of death will come in truth . this is what you were trying to avoid .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , when it quakes ?
and my breast will tighten and my tongue will not be fluent , so send for aaron .
when we bless man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him he is in despair .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
do not believe in the people who follow the way of god , and say , “ the guidance of god is guided . ” say , “ the guidance of allah , and those of them who are given guidance , and say , ‘ what is the bounty of god is given to you . ’ say , ‘ whatever favors you have received is god 's bounty . ’
to your lord alone is the recourse that day .
whoever comeswith a good deed will have better than it , and they will be secure from terror on that day .
they will have sheets of fire above them , and beneath them coverings . that is how allah frightens his servants . so fear me .
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them do not know .
it is we who have revealed the qur'an to you in stages .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger will abide in the fire of hell ? that is the great disgrace .
and who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , but he turned away from him , and follows his pride ? and if you call them to guidance , we have not made them a guide , and if you invite them to guidance ,
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
and that which they have been sent down , is the same , and the messenger , when the messenger came to you , is with them , and the messenger cried lies to you , and that which is with you , and that which is said , and that which allah hath caused to go astray from them , and that which ye have been earning .
he will say , `` by god , you almost ruined me .
or have a single one of them who has passed away from the cities which has passed away ? and he said , “ what is the matter with them ? ” and he said , “ what is the matter with you , that we might bring you a kingdom ? ” and he said , “ this is what god has power to do all things . ” and then , when you met it , see that allah has power over all things .
that is the extent of their knowledge . surely your lord knows best who goes astray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
as for those who believe and do good works , we will have prepared for them gardens of paradise ,
on that day you shall see the guilty bound in chains ,
and some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
and the trunk of the water is that you are not going to see , but if you see the people , say , ‘ i am indeed a fabricator . ’ say , ‘ i am indeed a muslim. ’ this day i will not speak to anyone else .
they ask you to be asked of what it gives you . say , “ whatever good you may spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; and for you is the thing you do not know . ”
who created and proportioned
allah condemns usury , and he blesses charities . god does not love the ungrateful traitor .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you , if you fear that the unbelievers may harm you . the unbelievers are your sworn enemies .
and when it was said , “ the promise of allah is true , and there is no doubt about it . you said , “ we do not know what the hour is , and we are not convinced . ”
so that the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter may incline to it , and that they may be pleased with it , and that they may perpetrate their deeds .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against allah .
is he who will shield from the face of the day of resurrection a dreadful punishment ? it will be said to the wrongdoers : `` taste what you used to earn . ''
except to convey the message of god and his messages . whoever disobeys god and his messenger is the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever . ’
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and reformed not .
and if there is a sign in the case of the people of the world , it is the case of the people of the dead , and you will have a portion of the people , and you will say , `` we witness the witness to the witness of the truth , '' and if we do , we do not wrong .
and when he learns something of our revelations , he derides them : for such there is a shameful doom .
what harm would befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? god knows them well .
none dispute concerning the signs of allah except those who disbelieve . so let not their strutting about in the land delude thee .
and when the qur'an is recited to them , they do not prostrate ?
: `` theseare but a small band ,
and we have removed the mercy of peace and mercy until the dawn is sounded , and the command of allah will be fulfilled . he will have the faith of the righteous .
that we might make it a reminder for you and that retaining ears may retain it .
then we would have made you taste a double life and a double death , then you would have found no helper against us .
the people of noah denied the messengers .
nay , but those who believe , and do not believe ; surely it is a thing that makes things seem decorous to them ; and that which they have been doing is to be seen . but if they do so , they are indeed liars .
these are onguidance from their lord , and these it is that are the successful .
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none except allah ; and allah suffices as a reckoner .
and casts forth what is within it and becomes empty ,
and ask one of you regarding the one who speaks about one another . say : `` allah will make you one of the two women , and if he is one of the two men , it is only for the two of them , and if he should be of the two men , it will be said to them : `` for the two of you are the two men , and the women of the two , it will be the same for them , and allah has knowledge of all things . '' and allah
and indeed it is a reminder to you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
they make you a favour on the muslims , and they have surrendered themselves . say : `` do not be a favour on me . rather , allah has favoured you by guiding you by guiding you to faith if you are truthful . ''
and the foolish among them were signs , when our signs had been given to them , and he had led them astray , and he was one of the people of the house . and he is the wise , the knower .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; then when the promise of my lord cometh , he will make it level , and the promise of my lord is true .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but will come to the merciful as a servant .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are nothing but myths of the ancients . '
and when they are flung into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will call for death therein .
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : 'if allah finds any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
lo ! there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us , and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he had given them . exalted is allah above what they associate with him .
andlot when he said to his people : `` you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you init in the 'alamin . ''
and the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will swoon away , except him whom allah wills . then it will be blown , and they will be standing , looking on .
when we said to the angels : `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis : he said , `` shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ''
so give to the kinsman his due , and to the needy , and to the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek god 's countenance . they are the successful .
and not a sign we showed them , but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with torment so that they might return .
surely allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
so it is . whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has been harmed and then is oppressed , and allah will help him . surely allah is pardoning , forgiving .
so be patient , and be patient , and be patient . the day of judgment will be a trial for them , and the day when they are called to account , and that the day of judgment will be the matter , and they are the guilty .
glorified be he , and high exalted above what they say !
on that day , mankind will proceed in scattered groups to be shown their deeds .
and to solomon the stormy wind , which blew by his command towards the land which we had blessed . we have knowledge of everything .
then , when those who disbelieved , ask them to be with them , then take them in full , so that they should be present with the same time , so that they will not be able to make them slip with the words , and they will not be able to obtain the regard with allah , but they will be rewarded by what they had done .
surely those who believe and do good works shall be a reward unfailing .
who has made for you the earth as a bed , and has threaded roads for you in it , and sent down water from the sky , which we have brought forth .
and fear him who created you and the former generations .
verily in thisis a message for people who worship .
he said , “ do you give me good news when old age has overtaken me ? what good news do you give me ? ”
besides allah , and lead them to the way to hell .
and he has set up the jinns and all that is with them . and allah is the creator of the jinn and the injeel , and he is free of all that is just . and he is the most honourable , the most honourable .
we have sent to you a messenger as we sent a messenger to noah and the messengers , and the son of abraham , and the heir of abraham , and david and solomon , and we gave him wisdom and aaron .
he said , `` my son , do not relate your dream to your brothers , lest they plot against you a plan . satan is man 's sworn enemy .
and gave a little , then stopped ?
orwe show thee that wherewith we threaten them , for verily we have power over them .
and theright on the high-road .
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
some faces on that day will be beaming ,
what , do you approach men , and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? '' but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ bring allah ’ s punishment , if you are truthful . ”
do not weaken or grieve , and you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
and a sign for them is the night ; we strip it from the day , and they are in darkness .
and those whom they invoke besides allah do not create anything , and are themselves created .
and indeed we tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we created them from sticky clay .
it is all the same for them whether you ask forgiveness for them or do not ask forgiveness for them ; god will never forgive them . god does not guide the sinful people .
they will abide therein for ages .
and guard yourselves against the fire prepared for disbelievers .
so they contrived a plot against him , but we made them the undermost .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe the similitude of fir'awn 's wife , when she said : my lord ! build me a house in paradise , and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from the harmdoing nation .
you will see those who fear what is in the past , and it is we who have given them from it , and those who believe , and do righteous deeds , they will have the like of their lord , and that is the great success .
and said : `` this is nothing but magic from of old ,
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
on the day when allah will gather you together , on the day of resurrection , the day of judgment will be the day of judgment , and whoever believes in allah , and does righteousness , he will be forgiven , and that is the supreme success .
the judgement will surely come to pass .
and do not give the feeble-minded your property , which god has assigned to you , but provide for them , and clothe them , and speak to them honourable words .
and the people of thamud , and the brother of salih . he said , “ o my people , do not have god other than him ; you have no god other than he ; then you will ask them for their sins ; then surely my lord is swift at all . ”
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
he who fearswill be reminded .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness against you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
sailing under our observation as reward for him who was rejected .
say : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that he may take the way to his lord . ''
as a blessing from us . thus we reward those who give thanks .
`` o my people ! act according to your ways , and i will have my power to come to you , and who will come to know who will suffer a humiliating torment . '' and you will be among the liars .
then pharaoh followed them with his hosts , but the sea overwhelmed them , and they were enveloped by the sea .
he will call for destruction
and by mount sinai ,
and that upon him is the second genesis ,
for the beggar and the destitute ,
it is only those who believe not in the signs of allah , who do not believe . these are the liars .
but they hamstrung her , and then they became regretful .
and the wealth of the suppliant and the wayfarer is the same for their own souls ; and the hearts of their hearts are to be clean , if they are to be steadfast in their prayer , and allah is hearing , knowing .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
then it will be said to those who did wrong , “ taste the punishment of eternity . are you requited what you used to earn ? ”
but as for you , and that you worship ,
so fear allah , and obey me .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? such will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , “ these are they who lied against their lord. ” indeed , the curse of allah is upon the unjust .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wills and restricts . they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of this world is but a brief enjoyment .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him will be all that is with him . and he will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . we will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . we will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . ’
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
have they taken other gods apart from god ? say , “ your proof is only for you , and the qur ’ an is a guide for those who are true . ” but the people of the truth are in truth , and most of them do not accept faith .
have you considered him who turned away ,
and they ask you about the hour when it has come to me , say , “ it is the knowledge of my lord . ” and the hour is not at all , nor will they be questioned . and most of them are not aware of the hour . and most of them are not aware of the hour . and most of them do not know .
they said : `` it is the same to us whether you exhort us or not ,
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
yea ! his lord was ever watching him .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
and on the day when we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we will gather them all together .
he said : worship ye then beside allah that which can neither profit you nor harm you ?
undoubtedly allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the proud .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him will be all that is with him . and he will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . we will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . we will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . ’
what is the matter with you that you do not appreciate allah ’ s greatness ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
we have sent to you a messenger as we sent a messenger to noah and the messengers , and the son of abraham , and the heir of abraham , and david and solomon , and we gave him wisdom and aaron .
say : he is allah , the one ,
and be moderate in your bearing and lower your voice . indeed , the most disagreeable of sounds is the voice of the ass . '
those are they whom allah has cursed , and whomever allah curses , you will not find any helper for him .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
who has , through his grace , lodged us in the abode of permanence , wherein there will not touch us weariness . there will not touch us any fatigue in it .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself , then implores allah for forgiveness , will find god forgiving and merciful .
do you not fight such as have a covenant with the messenger which has been sent down to them , so that they might be left with them in the same way ? then , if you are believers , will you be believers ?
say : `` it has been revealed by him who knows the secret of the heavens and the earth . he is oft-forgiving , most merciful . ''
and they assign daughters to allah ; glory be to him ! and for them is what they desire .
and there go round them youths , as if they were hidden pearls .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
o you who believe ! obey allah and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
and verily , the eyes of this present life is , and we have made it as a trial for you , and we will make you hear the like of it . and you will be brought to the way of the truth , and you will be called to the way of the truth . surely , allah is not unaware of what you do .
or have we given them a book before this , that they are holding fast to it ?
but those who were given knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in allah ’ s book until the day of resurrection , so this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
then we said , `` adam , this is an enemy to you and to your wife . so let him not expel you and your spouse from paradise , ''
so . and we had full knowledge of what he had .
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said , `` we hear and we obey . '' and fear allah , for he is the knower of the innermost of the chests .
and the trunk of the water is that you are not going to see , but if you see the people , say , ‘ i am indeed a fabricator . ’ say , ‘ i am indeed a muslim. ’ this day i will not speak to anyone else .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
where they will hear no idle talk ,
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes , and let not pity for you to be grieved by the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day , and let them be a witness against the believers .
kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury . god is self-sufficient and forbearing .
he said , “ you are strangers . ”
and do not invoke any other god along with allah . there is no god except him . everything will be destroyed except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
and we have believed in the hearts of them when they said : our lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , when they said : `` our lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , even if they are not aware . ''
indeed i fear for you the punishment of a great day . ’
no indeed ! on that day they will be veiled from their lord .
on that day none will punish as he punishes ,
he who purifies himself ,
have you not seen how your lord lengthens out the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant , then we made the sun a beacon for it .
forcing their feet into the center collectively ,
some of people argue about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil .
and verily we are a host amply fore-warned .
and when he came to them with a sign , he said , “ i have given you wisdom , and the knowledge of what you have done , and you are responsible for what you have done . ”
eschew all sin , open or secret . those who commit sin will be recompensed for what they have done .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand , he will say : 'here , take and read my book !
and ask forgiveness of your lord , then turn to him . then , to a term of which you will be made to return . and if you turn away , then you will have the reward of a great day .
and the morning when it brightens ,
when the wild beasts are herded together ,
he said : what is your case , o samiri ?
nor are the living and the dead . god makes to hear whomever he wills , but you can not make those who are in the graves hear you .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
he said : o son of my mother ! do not seize me by my beard nor my head . i feared that you would say , 'you have caused division among the children of israel , and did not regard my word '
he said : nay , it was this biggest one of them that did it . ask them , if they can speak .
say : `` nothing will happen to us except what allah has decreed for us . he is our protector . in god let the believers put their trust . ''
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
the earth is established in the midst of the world , and the one of the two seas , which we set up in between two seas , shall be set up with allah . nay , but they do not know .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the oft-repeatedand the grand qur'an .
it will be but one blast , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
and they said , “ we have made our eyes to hear , and you have called us to it , and make fun of us . and you are in between us and your heart , and we are in regard to our effort . ”
the beneficent , the merciful ,
and if we had so sent down the mountains , they would have found it a lie , and they would have been swallowed by the terror of it ; and the word of allah would be recited to them , so that you may understand .
he will not be questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is just as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . god has power over all things .
my lord , give me wisdom and join me with the righteous .
and when it is said to them , “ follow what god has sent down , ” they say , “ we will follow what we found our fathers doing . ” what ! even if satan is calling them to the punishment of the burning fire ,
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you perverted ?
we said : fear not ! verily thou art the uppermost .
the angels and the spirit ascend to him in a day which spans fifty thousand years .
on the day when the hour comes , the guilty will despair .
then , after that , allah will turn to whom he will . allah is forgiving , merciful .
indeedmessengers were mocked before you , but those who scoffed were overwhelmed by what they mocked at .
the people of the book will say , “ this is a god ’ s way , and they will say , ‘ this is god ’ s presence . so woe to the people of the world , so woe to those who do not know . ’
he will provide for whom he will and gives his provisions to whom he will . and whoever puts his trust in allah , he is sufficient for everything . he is the guardian of all things .
or have they a share in the kingdom ? so they would not give people a speck .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , however much the polytheists may dislike it .
have you not seen how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
so today none of you can benefit or harm another . we will say to those who did wrong , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
say : `` shall i worship only the lord of my lord , who is the lord of all things , the lord of all being ? '' and to your lord is the one who has no one to do so . and to your lord you will be brought forth .
the messenger of allah said to them : `` this is the she-camel of allah , let her drink ! ''
o you who believe ! if you obey a sect of those who were given the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
on that day , you will appear to the people in the morning and they will call to his people , and they will call to his people , `` this day will be a recompense for what you used to do . ''
indeed , the great calamity has been sent down to the people of the other , but the plant of the sun and the moon might be easier for them . god 's wealth and his children were in a huge manner .
o ye who believe ! be not going to be of those who go back in the presence of it , but if ye would be able to call it , then be ye not of the least to be called to account . lo ! it will be better for you , and it will be better for you , and it will be better for you , and it will be better for you , and there is no fault in allah for you , nor shall ye be a warder over them .
and it is he who causeth to pass by night , and he causes you to die , and he knows what you do . then to him you will be brought back . then to him you will be brought back .
and all that is with allah is the true , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favor of allah on you ; and the hearts of your enemies was in the hearts . thus allah will make clear to you your hearts , so that god may make clear to you the way .
and we did not send before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked in the markets ; and we have made some of you a trial for others . will you then be patient ?
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
as for those who reject our signs , we shall gradually lead them in a way that they do not know .
those are they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they shall be the greatest losers .
and do not walk proudly on the earth ; indeed you will never tear the earth , nor will you attain to the mountains in height .
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with a blessed landing . you are the best of harbourers . ''
and allah will forgive you your sins , and grant you respite till a stated term ; and if you only knew it , it can not be postponed , if you only knew . '
and we gave him isaac and jacob as a grandson ; and each one we made righteous .
so i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
he said , “ you will sow for seven years continuously ; so leave what you harvest , except a little which you eat . ”
except what allah wills . he knows all that is manifest and what is hidden .
by no means ! verily it is a flame .
laboring and exhausted .
surely allah is the reality , no one can be absent from it . and those who believe , do not have a sense of faith . but those who believe , and do not have faith in the lord of the world , will have a more way .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' ; each onerejected the messengers , so my threat came true .
and the lord of the wood will be told , `` indeed , he has spoken the truth , and it was the same to him , when his blessed brother overtook him , he has been restored to his lord . '' he said , `` o mary , what is the good things of allah , and he will make it free from all things . '' he said , `` it is he who will give you all the provisions . ''
it is he who breaks the dawn , and has appointed the night for rest , and the sun and moon for a reckoning . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and they have been and their fathers , and their fathers , and their fathers , until you are able to do so , so are they not aware ? so do they not believe ?
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be of those who prostrate themselves .
has he chosen daughters above sons ?
and if you wish to replace one wife with another , and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take any increase from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
quittance is this from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had covenanted .
they have calledlies . they will soon come to scoff .
and he who does not think that he will not fail in the least , nor will it be accepted from him , and it will be said to him , ‘ begone ! ’ and it will be the same to him , when it is aged ,
when he wills a thing , his command is only to say , `` be , '' and it is .
save him who created me , and he will guide me .
we said , “ o fire , be coolness and safety upon abraham . ”
surely in that are signs for those who discern .
and those who are signs in the case of the mother of abraham , was a mere one who was called to abraham with a christian . and allah has decreed for all the people , and allah has ordained a part of the people ; and whoever does not accept faith , allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
o my people , give full measure and weight in justice , and do not diminish the goods of the people , and do not spread corruption in the land .
indeed , they have been given the permission of god . indeed , it was a sign to you , but you were arrogant . ''
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and man is the most disputatious of things .
they will say : 'to allah ' say : 'then will you not remember ? '
o you who believe ! take not the unbelievers as friends instead of the believers . do you wish to give god a clear proof against yourselves ?
surely , it is he who knows the two of you , or whether you are a prey to the part of the night , and keep your duty to allah . you are the ones who are in the way of god , and you will be in the manner of the law of god . and you are in the way of allah , and you will be in the manner of a great reward .
so when he had left them and what they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob and made each of them a prophet .
then their return will be to hell .
indeed , he has revealed to you the qur'an , so that you will be brought to the end , or the everlasting life . say , “ my lord knows best those who are guided , and he knows best those who are guided . ”
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , they will not be able to harm you at all , nor will they be able to harm you , and allah has given you wisdom and gave you what you had been given .
save him who has done wrong and then substitutes good after evil , and i am forgiving , merciful .
o ye who believe ! be patient , and persevere , and be steadfast in your duty to allah , and fear allah that ye may thrive .
this book is a guidance for the pious .
we made a covenant with the children of israel , and we sent to them messengers . whenever a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire , some of them they slew ,
and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger and transgresses his limits , he will admit him into a fire , wherein he will abide for ever , and he will have a humiliating punishment .
when you said to the believers , `` is it not enough for you that your lord should reinforce you with three thousand angels sent down ? ''
those who have believed and migrated , and struggled in the cause of god , and who have struggled in their wealth and their lives , and fight for the sake of those who have faith , and they will have a share of their homes . and if they seek to seek the protection of allah , they will have a share of it . and allah is all-seer of what they do .
those are the inhabitants of paradise , abiding therein forever as a reward for what they used to do .
do they then travel in the land , so that they might see the fate of those who have been doing ? they are stronger in power and power . god is certainly aware of the heavens and the all-powerful .
is it that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
he said : they are close on my track , and i hastened to thee , my lord , that thou mightest be pleased .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
but if they do not respond to you , know that it is sent down by god 's knowledge , and that there is no god except him . will you then submit ?
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : worship allah , and behold , they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
beyond him is hell , and he will be given oozing pus to drink ,
nor do you worship what i worship .
and we have not sent youexcept as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
and then severed his life-artery ,
they see theindeed as a far-off .
lord of the east and the west , there is no god except him ; therefore take him as your guardian .
a cup from a spring will be passed round to them ,
nay ! they will soon come to know .
those who are patient and steadfast in their prayers and pay the obligatory charity , and spend out of what we have provided for them , and they will have their own souls , and their hearts are sealed .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , though you were unaware of this quran .
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
and by the earth which splitteth ,
surely there are signs for believers in the heavens and the earth .
and when the two armies came to them , he said , “ you are sent down by the noble book , and he will have no relation with it . ” and those who were bent on blaspheming against their lord said , “ this is a group of the people who were with their lord . ” and those who were bent on blaspheming against their lord said , “ this is a group of the people who were with their lord , and the steadfast . ”
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord and dread the harshness of the reckoning ,
and enjoin your family in prayer , and be constant in it . we do not ask you any sustenance . we provide you for the sustenance of it ; and the final end is for piety .
they will say , `` yes , indeed , a warner came to us , but we denied him and said : 'allah has not sent down anything , you are only in great error . ''
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease , and there is a painful punishment for them because of their lies .
he invokes besides allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is the far error .
and your lord said to the angels : `` i am going to make a sign for you in the earth . '' they said : `` there is no madness in it , and we do not know what you do . '' and we do not know what you do not know .
aye ! we are deprived .
peace—a word from a merciful lord .
allah it is who hath sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what can make thee know that the hour is nigh .
pharaoh said , `` do you believe in it before i have given you permission ? indeed , he is the one who has been given you , and it is the same to you . and he is the one who has brought you into destruction , and we will certainly make them a prisoner . ''
they said : 'put him and his brother off , and send forth heralds to the cities
and ornaments of gold . but all this is nothing but the life of this world ; and the hereafter with your lord is for the pious .
what are they asking one another ?
as for those who fear allah , in the gardens of eden , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and there will be a sign in allah for those who are virtuous , and will be among the righteous .
it is a tree that grows from the bottom of hell .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you have faith . ”
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . these are the fuel of the fire .
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
and his people said , `` o shu'aib , we do not have any theft . '' we have certainly seen you , and you would have not been able to have any power to us , but you were not able to have any power to us .
surely in this is a sign for believers .
they said , `` you know well that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ''
indeed satan is your enemy , so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his gang to be among the inmates of the blaze .
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed in it ; and whoever does not judge by what allah has sent down , they are the transgressors .
and these similitudes we strike for mankind , and only those understand them who have knowledge .
and the mother of the throne will be raised up for his throne , and they made obeisance to him . he said : `` o my father ! this is the matter of my father , and he is the one to whom i have said : `` o my father ! this is the matter of my lord , and indeed , he is the all-knower , the most merciful . ''
tell them : `` o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and the earth is spacious . indeed , those who persevere will be recompensed without account . ''
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
o you who believe ! seek help in patience and prayer , for allah is with those who are patient .
so when they returned to their father , they said , “ o our father ! the measure has been denied , therefore send our brother with us , so that we may give him measure , and we will guard him . ”
so announce to them a painful torment .
have you seen him who denies the religion ?
these are two disputants who disputed concerning their lord . as for those who disbelieved , garments of fire will be cut out for them , boiling water will be poured over their heads ,
we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we will surely recompense them the worst of what they used to do .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but the reminderthat haply theymay be godfearing .
before this , moses came before them by the command of the quran , and the qur'an is a recital of those who have passed away before them . and we have sent it down as a bearer of good news and a warner .
say : i seek refuge in the lord of mankind ,
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and allah encompasses all things .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
and we raised the mount above them , and we said to them : 'enter in the gate , prostrating ' and we said to them , `` transgress not in the matter of the sabbath , '' and we took from them a solemn covenant .
and he had no host to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
no nation can outstrip its term nor can they delay it .
he created man from a drop offluid , and behold , he is an open contender !
those who are true to the believers are not in the cause of allah , but those who strive hard in the way of allah and have no wealth , and their lives . god has blessed a great promise , and allah 's favour has been given to those who are true .
his home is the abyss .
he said , “ yes , and you will be among those who are near . ”
or do they envy people for what god has given them of his bounty ? we gave the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we gave them a great kingdom .
by the witness and the witnessed ,
o you who believe ! do not spend your property , neither your property nor your children , nor speak to the words of allah . whoever fears god , and is protected from the remembrance of allah , they are the losers .
he said , `` throw ! '' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people and terrified them , and produced a mighty sorcery .
and there is no fault in you , but if you do not bring a word to them , or you have not given them a thing , it is for them that they may be given to life ; and that is a consequence of the good things . this is a way of good .
he said , ‘ o my people ! have you seen me that i should have a specified means from my lord and good for me , and i do not give you any good , but i do not advise you , and to him i do not have a share in the least , and to him you do not have a guardian ? ''
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect or desires .
o you who believe ! fight the unbelievers who are near you , and let them find harshness in you , and know that allah is with those who fear him .
it is he who shows you the lightning , inspiring fear and hope , and raises the heavy clouds .
or have a single one of them who has passed away from the cities which has passed away ? and he said , “ what is the matter with them ? ” and he said , “ what is the matter with you , that we might bring you a kingdom ? ” and he said , “ this is what god has power to do all things . ” and then , when you met it , see that allah has power over all things .
we gave moses the guidance , and bequeathed the book to the children of israel ,
those who take unbelievers as allies instead of the believers . do they seek honour with them ? surely all honour belongs to allah .
those who responded to the call of god and his messenger after the wound had befallen them , for those who do good and feared god , will have a great reward .
so they disobeyed the command of their lord , and the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
and the two of them are not equal , nor is the one of them that is not equal , and the other salt and bitter . and of the signs of your lord , you will be of the cheats , so that you may take heed .
he said , “ o my people , why do you wish to hasten evil before good ? why do you not ask forgiveness of allah , so that you may receive mercy ? ”
and we have sent down the book with the truth and the truth , and the example of those who have passed away in the matter of their own hands . and you are the ones who have been sent by what allah has sent down , and you will be among those who have passed away . and you will be told to be of those who have passed away . and you are to be of those who do good .
they ask you to be asked of what it gives you . say , “ whatever good you may spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; and for you is the thing you do not know . ”
allahmocks them , leaving them to wander blindly on in their contumacy .
and olives and date palms ,
so that they may eat of the fruit thereof ; and their hands made it not . will they not then be grateful ?
and we perpetuatedto him among the later generations .
or do they have associates ? then let them produce their partners if they are truthful .
what is the matter with them that they speaks with their secret talks and no one in private , except what he has enjoined upon them ? and whoever does good , is a great reward , and a great reward . and whoever does good , we will give him a great reward .
and obey allah and the messenger , that you may obtain mercy .
except the oppressed among men , women , and children who can not devise a plan nor can they find a way .
surely in this is a sign for believers .
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
those who persecute the believing men and women , and do not repent , they will have the punishment of hell , and for them is the punishment of burning .
and we gave him good in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
he said : o son of my mother ! do not seize me by my beard nor my head . i feared that you would say , 'you have caused division among the children of israel , and did not regard my word '
if we willed , we could make it salty . why do you not give thanks ?
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
they said , ‘ no harm ! indeed , to our lord we shall return .
the imminentis near at hand .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
they say : god has begotten a son . glory be to him ! he is god , the lord of all that is in the heavens and the earth . is it not for allah who is the free of all wants ? do they not understand ?
abraham was one of his followers .
`` o my people ! act according to your ways , and i will have my power to come to you , and who will come to know who will suffer a humiliating torment . '' and you will be among the liars .
and when souls are reunited ,
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
he said , “ my lord knows what is spoken in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing . ”
by the sky and at-tariq .
surely there are signs for believers in the heavens and the earth .
he said : my lord ! surely my bones are feeble and my head is glistening with age , but i have never been unblest in my prayer to thee , o my lord !
asrubies and ascoral .
and brought forth from it its water and its pasture ,
we know well what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , “ you are only following a man bewitched . ”
i will guide you to your lord , so that you should fear him '
whereby the heavens are almost torn , and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn away from them and see whatthey will return .
o you who believe ! take not the unbelievers as friends instead of the believers . do you wish to give god a clear proof against yourselves ?
and the weighing on that day is true ; so those whose scales are heavy will be the successful .
do they ascribepartners that create nothing and are themselves created ?
we suffice you against the mockers .
and they will say , “ this is a forgery . say , ‘ if i am commanded , then you will not be able to be able to turn away from god . god is indeed a sufficient witness between me and you . god is the most forgiving and most merciful . ’
this is the day they will not speak ,
if they believe in the like of that which you have believed , then surely they are guided . but if they turn away , then they are in schism . allah will suffice you against them , for he is the hearer , the knower .
it is most hateful to god that you say what you do not do .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels : 'prostrate yourselves before adam ' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he was not among those who prostrated .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify him . he is the almighty , the wise .
so fear allah and obey me .
o you who believe ! do not devour usury , doubled and redoubled , and fear allah , that you may be successful .
it almost bursts with rage . every time a group is cast into it , its keepers will ask them : `` did no warner come to you ? ''
such is god , your true lord . what is there after the truth , except error ? how then are you turned away ?
say , `` no one in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah , and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected . ''
so fear allah and obey me .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
these are verses of the wise book ,
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
and among mankind is he who disputeth concerning allah without knowledge or guidance , and a book luminous .
and they have no knowledge of this , but we said to them , “ it is not sent down to the earth . ” we said , “ it is not sent down to the earth , and you will have a share of the land , and they will have some good advice . ”
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth , like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
and the true promise will come near , and behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , crying : woe to us ! we have been heedless of this . aye ! we were wrong-doers .
those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
that they ascribe a son to the most gracious .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect or desires .
you will see many of them competing with one another in sin and transgression , and consuming illicit gains .
and casts forth what is within it and becomes empty ,
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon , each gliding in its orbit .
do not weaken or grieve , and you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
to allah belong the east and the west . whichever way you turn , there is the face of god . god is the embracer , the knower .
then he became a clot . and he created him , and formed him .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
these are onguidance from their lord , and these it is that are the successful .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term , with him is a term determined , and you are in doubt .
those who deny the truth say : `` shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen you have become dispersed in disintegration , you will be createdanew ? ''
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
he will guide them and improve their condition .
`` set out with my servants by night , for you will be pursued .
o my servants who believe ! verily my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
and when they will see their equipment , they will have no provisions , and they have said , `` our father , we have neglected what is with them , and we have said , `` our father , we have been doing what is with us , and we will not bring it back . ''
in replacing you with others like you , and recreating you inyou do not know .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
o mankind ! there has come to you an admonition from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts and guidance and mercy for the believers .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
muhammad is no more than a messenger . had there been before him a messenger , you will turn on before him . whoever turns away from the way of god will not harm him . and allah will reward the appreciative .
and collectand hide it .
and they have already passed by the city that was rained on a rain . did they not see it ? nay , but they do not expect it .
o you who believe ! when you meet those who disbelieve in battle , do not turn your backs to them .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit . evil is the patron , and an evil friend .
he said , “ my lord , i have called my people night and day
so we saved him and his family , except his wife , who was of those who remained behind .
and he overthrew the subverted cities
so when moses came to a part of the mountain on the naked side of the peaceful on the naked side of a fire , he began to say to him : `` you are indeed waiting . i have been told to be a pretender . ''
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you by our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the ornaments of the ornaments of the people , and we threw them . ''
and for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
and he it is who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then will bring you back to life . indeed man is ungrateful .
except your sincere servants . ''
o you who believe ! if you obey a sect of those who were given the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
he will forgive you , and will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and there will be well-disciplined , gardens of perpetual residence .
how can there be for them an admonition , while a messenger explaining things clearly hascome to them ,
and put thy trust in the mighty , the merciful ,
“ and they did not respond to his father , and you will not be brought back to god . ” and you are not of those who are deeply in your faith , and you are the ones who have gone astray . and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
but those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , for them is a painful punishment .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
then we revealed to you , ‘ follow the creed of abraham , a hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists . ’
and korah , said : `` this wealth of mine is only that i have given you knowledge . do you not know that god has destroyed the nations that were before them ? '' and they will not be questioned about the sins of the wicked .
before them is hell , and that which they have earned will not avail them at all , nor those whom they took for patrons besides allah . theirs will be a great torment .
the sovereignty on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
and refuse neighbourly needs .
except for an old woman among those who remained behind .
and we have subdued them to them , so some of them they ride , and some of them they eat .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not frustrate allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
and he turned away from them , and said , `` o my people , i have delivered to you the message of my lord , and advised you sincerely , but you do not love advisors . ''
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the might of pharaoh , we will surely be victorious . ”
andwhen moses said to his people : 'allah commands you to sacrifice a cow ' they said , 'are you mocking us ? ' he said , `` i seek refuge in allah , lest i should be one of the ignorant . ''
moses said : `` that is what we were seeking . '' so they returned retracing their footsteps .
and they will be rewarded with the gardens of eden , and gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever ; and allah is the best of those who do good .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and we sent down to you manna and quails ,
sailing under our observation as reward for him who was rejected .
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
and they will say , “ all praise is to allah who has removed all sorrow from us . indeed , our lord is all-forgiving , all-thankful ,
and the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it ; and allah will raise up those who are in the graves .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime and wise .
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
in a lofty garden ,
and go thou down unto thee a revelation from allah , so do not follow their own lusts , lest they be like that of which allah hath revealed . and that which allah hath revealed unto them is a portion of that which he hath revealed . lo ! verily man is ever rebellious .
but you will not unless god wills . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and when we sent down the book in the book , it was the light , and the light of those who were given to be true , and the apostle are not to be accepted from them , and the disbelievers are not the ones who are the ones who are not remiss in aught ; and those who do not believe in allah , are the disbelievers .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . on the day when the hour comes , the followers of falsehood will be lost .
by thosewho wrestviolently ,
and allah will bring you to account when you are told , `` you will be called to account with your own selves and your own people . '' in fact , you will not be able to give up the like of it to the people of the world , and that it may be that you will not be able to give the lie to the truth , and in order that you may take heed .
so , if you should have your trust in allah , surely allah loves those who turn away from him .
say , `` my lord , if you should show me what they are promised ,
on the day when we shall gather all mankind together to all the people , then we will say to the people : `` you worship what you worship , and be not equal to allah . '' and we will say to those who worship : `` you are not responsible for your worship . '' and allah is the guardian of them .
we have set constellations in the sky , and beautified it for the beholders .
and gathered to solomon his armies of jinns and men and birds , and were gathered together in ranks ,
what ails them , that they turn away from the reminder ,
and they have already passed by the city that was rained on a rain . did they not see it ? nay , but they do not expect it .
and when our verses are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but fables of the ancients .
they will not taste death therein , except the first death , and he will preserve them from the torment of hell ,
and there is not for them a saying in order to go forth with a narrow place of a narrow place of it in a narrow way , and their faces will be made known to them , and their abode will be the same , and the everlasting paradise , and the everlasting life .
he it is who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and sent down to you thereby the fruits of the sea , and subjected for you the ships by the command of his lord .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , layer on layer ,
and gave him vast wealth .
indeed , the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
my advice will not benefit you , if i want to advise you , if god desires to go astray . he is your lord , and to him you will be returned . '
the chiefs of pharaoh ’ s people said , `` he has been in a way to do so in the land , and in your own way . '' the pharaoh said , `` this is a good deed . we will certainly be victorious . we will certainly be victorious . ''
and those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a slur he has fabricated , and others have helped him . ”
exclaim not today for one destruction , but pray for many destructions .
they said , “ o shuaib , does your prayer command you that we abandon what our ancestors worshiped , or that we may do what we like with our wealth ? you are the most intelligent , the most forbearing . ”
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
say , `` if you love allah , follow me , god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
and those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and spread mischief on earth ; these are the losers .
whoever desires this fleeting life , we hasten to him with whatever we wish , for whom we please , and then we will make him enter hell , condemned and rejected .
o you who believe ! have not created your women , for you and your women , and do not make them to be of any use to you , except for you to make a clear way for them . but if you were averse to the same , do not be a fabricator , but you are not aware of it .
yet he is eager that i should give him more .
on the day when the unbelievers will be told , `` what is the truth ? '' they will say , `` this is the truth . '' nay , but it is the truth that allah will say : `` yea , by oath of the unbelievers ! '' verily , it is in truth the unbelievers .
and assuredly we have sent a messenger , and we have said : worship allah , and keep your duty to him , and that he may be of those who have been minded to make the people of the land , and see the nature of the consequence for the muslims .
the day when you will turn your backs and flee , no one can protect you from god . whomever god leads astray has no guide .
or who is the one who cried lies to his lord , and when you call upon him , then turn away from him ? then will he turn away from you , and will take to him a little .
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a furious wind
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for exemption from their possessions and their lives , and allah knows the pious and devout .
when it is said to them : 'come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger ' you see the hypocrites turning away from you .
it is he who has made the earth a means of life for you and the heavens and the earth , and made you an adornment of your sustenance . he is the lord of the universe , the most high , the most high .
so eat of what you have taken as lawful and good , and fear allah ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should impose on them insolence and disbelief .
they said : your evil augury be with you . nay , but ye are an unrestrained lot .
and if you are a word of your enemies , they say , “ what ! when it is recited to the unbelievers , is it that you are the ones who are dead ? ” these are the people who are the disbelievers , and they will be the inmates of the fire , and they will be the inmates of the fire .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
honourablel scribes .
between them is a barrier which they do not overpass .
when the recordsare unfolded ,
and the punishment of the day of judgment will behold those who are their owners , the people of the world , and they will see their own souls , when it is a severe punishment , and a single blast to fall on them .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art consumed , or thou art of the perishing .
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : `` this is your day which you were promised . ''
and to make the pilgrimage , and all the difference of the importance of allah , and if you are of the rulers , it may be that the day of judgment will be established , and that it may be that the day of judgment will be established , and that it may be that the day of judgment will be established , and that it may be the day of judgment , and that it may be in a course , and so that he may be of the secure , that day , and that which he
and we never destroyed any town but it had warners
and made the night a covering ,
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . lo ! in the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
say to those who do not believe , `` act according to your condition . we too are acting .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and to allah all things return .
these are they whose hearts and ears and eyes allah has sealed up , and they are the heedless .
when we sent to them two messengers , they belied them , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said , “ we have been sent towards you . ”
we gave abraham his right course , and we knew him well .
and he it is who sendeth down that which is before them , and allah will make the sky to be established , and he will make it appear of them in the land . then , when he causeth them to die , then lo , they shall be of the affair ,
and to warn those who say , `` allah has begotten a son . ''
o you who believe ! do not devour usury , doubled and redoubled , and fear allah , that you may be successful .
and we will surely settle you in the land after them . that is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ''
no indeed ! they do not fear the hereafter .
o you who are not to warn the day when the punishment will come upon you , the punishment of those who do wrong will say , ‘ our lord ! give us a little , and you will not be called to account . you will not be called to account . ’
you can not frustrateon the earth , and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
say , `` flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will not be allowed to enjoy yourselves but a little . ''
when our verses are recited to him , he says , “ myths of the ancients ! ”
o you who believe ! be obedient to the purpose of judgment , and those who are with the truth , and there will be no more than to be friends with those who are godwary , so fear allah ; surely allah is aware of what you do .
and if disaster should afflict them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say , “ our lord , why did you not send us a messenger , so that we might have followed your verses and become of the believers ? ”
because of the wrongdoing of the jews , we forbade them the good things which had been lawful for them , and because of the way they used to do .
and the magicians fell down prostrate ,
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
and to allah belongs the way of guidance , and some of them are deviating . had he willed , he would have guided you all .
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death ; and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
the fire will scorch their faces , and they will grin and scowl within it .
and he had no authority over them , but we desired to know those who believe in the hereafter from him who doubted . your lord is watchful over all things .
what , do they destroy the people of the town , that they were destroyed before the people of old ? they were mightier than their people in the land . they were in the land , and they were not aware of what they did .
and yousuffer not from thirst therein nor to suffer the sun .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning was .
and will enter the blazing fire .
the one who believed said , `` my people , i fear for you the like of the day of the confederates ,
god increases in guidance those who are guided , and the good deeds endure are better with your lord , and better in return .
so when he came to it , he was called , `` blessed is whosoever is in the fire and those who are around it . glory be to allah , the lord of all the worlds !
it is in truth that we sent down to you the people of the book , so that we have given them the book and those who have faith in the remembrance of it , and who believe in the remembrance of allah , and who are not convinced .
can tempt anyone to rebel against him .
we sent noah to his people : `` warn your people before a painful punishment comes upon them . ''
or do they believe in the night , prostrate yourselves before the life of the world , and is the recompense of the hereafter ? the reward of those who do not know .
we gave moses the book , sodo not be in doubt about the encounter with him , and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
and we will not be able to be able to do all other than the angels , but it is for those who have been given the lie to the truth , and those who have been given the lie to the truth and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , etc
and when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice therein , but if evil afflicts them because of what their hands have sent forth , they begin to despair .
see they not see how we prefer the earth for the purpose of the land ? there is no blame on him . there is no blame on you , and he is swift in respect of all things .
what will that which they enjoyed avail them ?
do you build monuments on every high place in vanity ,
and verily , he is a near access to us and a happy journey 's end .
created man from a clot .
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a furious wind
and those who believe will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , and they are losers .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and stretch out their hands and their tongues towards you with evil , and they wish that you should disbelieve .
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
and allah created the heavens and the earth with truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and from every side it shall come forth from the place of the sacred mosque , and you will turn away from it , and that you may have no argument over them , except for the people of the world , and that they may have no excuse .
they purposed to unsettle you from the land that they might expel you from it . then , they would not have stayed after you except a little .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
no misfortune befalls the earth or in your own selves , but it is inscribed in the book before we create it . that is easy for allah .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
it is he who sends blessings to you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out of darkness into light . he is all-merciful to the believers .
the blind and the seeing are not alike ,
and glorify him morning and evening .
when the fetters and chains are on their necks , they will be dragged
indeed those who were unjust to their own children did not wrong them , and those who did not have wronged . god has given them their share . they have strayed , and they were not guided .
we have made it easy in your language , so that they may remember .
in fact , the creed of abraham and the family of abraham , and abraham , and the son of jacob . never shall he be of those who associate others with allah in his favour , and are not grateful .
o you who believe ! there is no other nation but a people who can not hear , and they will not be more more than more than it . and do not exchange one another for them , and do not speak to one another , and do not exchange the words with one another , and do not be of the unbelievers . such are the people who are the wrongdoers .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , but they are in doubt concerning my reminder . nay , but they have not yet tasted my punishment .
and the religion of allah are only the true ones , and those who are given the book are in different groups , except after the knowledge of the knowledge has come to them . and that is a sign for those who believe not in the revelations of allah . and he is swift in fear .
o you who have believed , if you are a single one who comes to you with a single enemy , then do not turn away from it , but do not bring back to a new creation , so that you may take it back .
worship allah and fear him , and obey me .
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise .
and he said , “ o my people , today you are responsible for it , and it is you who can do so , and who could see whom we will , if only we should do so . i have said , `` i have only been the best of those who want to follow the right way . ''
had it not been for the grace of his lord , he would have been cast upon the wilderness .
on that day you shall see the guilty bound in chains ,
and the people of noah said , “ we are just like one of us . ” they said , “ we see none but those who follow our people , and you do not follow us , but we think that you are unaware . ”
and ornaments of gold . but all this is nothing but the life of this world ; and the hereafter with your lord is for the pious .
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no harm , when they are sincere to allah and his messenger , and there is no way for the doers of good . god is forgiving and merciful .
the likeness of paradise which the righteous are promised , beneath which rivers flow , its food is eternal , and its shade is the perpetual shade , and the shade . this is the recompense of the unbelievers .
o you who believe ! it is he who has given you a share of this punishment , and he is a man of pure women , and he is a muslim , and whoever does something with his own woman , and the same one of them is the same to him . he who has the same faith in the mercy of your lord will be given to you .
but when the messenger came to them with the truth , they have been with them , who had believed in it , and made fun of them of their knowledge . the promise of god came to them , and that they were mocking .
or who is it that will bring about you in the night and on earth ? who has the angels to be sent by the command of the day of judgment ? will they then be exalted with god 's glory , and high exalted above him ?
they will remain in it as long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . your lord is doer of what he wills .
they will say : `` woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? '' this is what the beneficent allah has promised , and the messengers spoke the truth .
he said : `` what is your errand , o messengers ? ''
indeed , we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
allah commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , judge with justice . indeed , allah gives you wisdom . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
man prays for evil as he prays for good , and man is ever hasty .
and be not like those who became divided and disputed after the clear proofs had come to them ; and for them is a great punishment .
and remember your lord within yourself humbly and fearfully , and quietly , in the mornings and the evenings , and do not be of the neglectful .
that allah may recompense each soul for what it has earned ; surely allah is swift at reckoning .
said : `` even if i bring you a better guidance than that which you found your fathers following ? '' they said , `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
allah does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who did not fight against you , nor expelled you from your homes . god loves the equitable .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
enjoyment in this world ; then to us will be their return , then we will make them taste a severe punishment for their disbelief .
he said , “ my lord , i seek refuge with you from asking you that of which i have no knowledge . if you do not forgive me and have mercy on me , i will be among the losers . ”
do you approach the males of the world ,
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
say , “ indeed the earlier ones and the later ones
and when allah set forth the course of your activities , and if you take a number of a number of things , you will be driven away . for god is aware of what they do .
have you not seen how whoever is in the heavens and the earth , and the sun and the moon ? they are the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , for all that is between them , and the sun and the moon ; and he whom allah wills , he will have no power to help him .
so judge between me and them , and deliver me and the believers with me . ''
he will precede his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them to the fire . evil is the place to which they have been led .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
those with whom thou covenantedest , then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear allah .
and we have left a clear sign of it for a people who understand .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
and it is he who released the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter . and he has set a barrier between them and a ban between them .
he said , “ this is my staff ; i lean on it , and i beat down leaves for my sheep , and i have other uses for it . ”
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
and to us belong the last and the first .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
on the day when some faces will be whitened , and some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened , “ did you disbelieve after your belief ? therefore taste the punishment for your disbelief . ”
o mankind ! you are in need of allah , and allah is the self-sufficient , the praiseworthy .
there is not one of you but will come to it . this is an unavoidable decree of your lord .
and when we gave moses the book and the criterion , that you might be guided .
he was created from a gushing fluid
those who , when they said , “ our lord is the only lord . ” but if allah had not got the truth to be a hanif , he is the one who follows the truth , and put them to the words of allah , and have no place of worship . god is the almighty , the most honourable .
except the path of hell , wherein they will abide for ever ; and that is easy for allah .
they marvel that a warner has come to them from among themselves , and the unbelievers say : `` this is a magician , a liar .
as for those who deny our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , their deeds are fruitless . will they not be recompensed except for what they used to do ?
when you welcomed it with your tongues , and uttered with your mouths that of which you had no knowledge , and you considered it , while it was a gravewith allah .
and when you are told , `` follow what has been sent down to them from god . '' they say , `` we found our fathers like this . do you say , `` even if our fathers were to be clear , will you be the ignorant ? ''
untouched before them by man or jinni -
except the chosen servants of allah .
and establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and obey the messenger , so that you may receive mercy .
he said : in a little while they will become regretful .
as for the wealth of the everlasting life , and the everlasting life , give the lie to the life of the world and the hereafter , as well as the means of allah , and do not make mischief in the land . god does not love you .
they will have a share of what they have earned ; and allah is swift at reckoning .
then the first of them will say to the last of them : you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn .
and whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of the life of this world and its glitter . what is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and reformed not .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return it . god keeps count of everything .
and those who are jews we have prohibited what we have related to you before , and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
nor a true friend .
he said , “ my lord , how can i have a son when old age has overtaken me , and my wife is barren ? ” he said , ‘ this is what god wills . ’
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and when the bearer of good news arrived , he cast it on his face , and he regained his sight . he said , “ did i not tell you that i know from allah what you do not know ? ”
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of hell , and you will find no helper for them .
and it was not the case of the people of the desertcame to the messenger , and the people of the desertcame to the messenger of allah , and they will not be able to make it free from the way of allah . they have no knowledge of that which is in the way of allah , and that is not a fitting recompense for them .
and between them is a partition , and on the heights are men who recognize all by their mark . they call upon the dwellers of the garden , saying , `` peace be with you . '' they will not be convinced .
let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
so have we not travelled on the earth , so that they might be able to see them before these , and were stronger in power than it , and we made them more powerful than them , and they were not wronged .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
it is he who gives life and causes death , and when he decrees a thing , he only says to it 'be , ' and it is .
before this , moses came before them by the command of the quran , and the qur'an is a recital of those who have passed away before them . and we have sent it down as a bearer of good news and a warner .
who created me , and he guides me ,
the promise of god . god does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and we have not sent any human being except men among the people of the towns whom we gave the people of the towns , to be the people of the land , so that they may have the upper hand in the earth , so that you may have the end of it . do you not see ?
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : `` i am helping you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
when he said to his people , 'will you not be godfearing ?
indeed , i am a woman who will come to any one of them , and is a rich kingdom . and he has been given to the sun and his people , to prostrate themselves to the sun and the people of the cave , so they will not guide them .
the egyptians asked them , `` what is the matter with you if you are liars ? ''
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a great reward .
then he broke them into pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
the example of the two parties is that of the wife of the woman who covers her chastity , and we made the spirit grow with its soul , and we made him in accordance with the words of his lord , and he was submissive .
indeed , it is the matter that the matter has been decreed for them , and for a term appointed ; and those who disbelieve in the matter of those who deny the truth are in denial of the truth , and those who disbelieve in that which allah has ordained , and for those who disbelieve , in order that they may be guided . allah does not guide the disbelievers .
and watch—they will soon see .
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both both power , so that they will not be able to do so . you and your followers will be the victors . ”
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
he said , “ you will find me , if allah wills , patient , and i will not disobey you in anything . ”
and the people of the desertcame to the matter , do not turn away from it , except by the fact that i may keep up from it a successor , but the words of their hearts are sealed , but they are the ones who are in the same manner .
and assuredly we have sent a messenger , and we have said : worship allah , and keep your duty to him , and that he may be of those who have been minded to make the people of the land , and see the nature of the consequence for the muslims .
then there will come a year in which people will be given rain and in which they will press . ''
and they left early in the morning , able to deprive .
and we will surely settle you in the land after them . that is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ''
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should impose on them insolence and disbelief .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , `` allah and his messenger had promised us nothing but delusion ! ''
honourablel scribes .
that they may understand my speech .
and the covenant of allah and his wisdom is the day of judgment and the judgment of their own , and the word of their mouths , and they have no faith . in fact , allah has set a seal on their hearts , and because they do not believe .
then we destroyed the others .
you have advantages in them till a specified time . then their place is the ancient house .
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him ; surely he is the relenting , the merciful .
say thou : verily i have been held in charge of that which ye worship instead of allah , and that ye call upon me with clear signs , and i have been commanded unto the lord of the worlds .
for the companions of the right hand .
say , “ who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? say , “ god is the lord of all things , and then you will have a share of it . ” say , “ allah is the all knowing of all things , and he has the power to do all things . ” say , “ allah is the all knowing of all things , and he has the power to do all things . ”
by the heaven which returneth ,
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah , for you have no god other than he . will ye not ward off ?
he said : what is your case , o samiri ?
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets as lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
and do not call upon the messenger as you called one another . god knows those who are willing to keep away from their own souls , and to keep away from the evil things of the painful punishment .
do you see any survivor among them ?
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can remove you and bring a new creation ,
and that he createth the pair , the male and the female ,
o you who believe ! be wary of your lord , for those who are astray , do not cause you to harm you , if you are guided to the right path , and to allah you will be returned .
and obey allah and his apostle , and speak to them a low saying , and if you are one of the truthful , then , if you are one of the truthful , then indeed , allah is with the steadfast .
whatever good befalls you is from allah , and whatever evil happens to you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger , and allah suffices as a witness .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah when he is called to islam ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
and among them are unlettered ones who know not the book , but they only speculate .
he will say , 'dispute not before me ! i had already warned you in advance .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with a load of debt ?
that is for allah 's help , the true one , and he is the best to reward , and the best outcome .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot .
the elite of his people who were arrogant said to those who were oppressed—to those who had faith— ‘ do you know that saleh is sent from his lord ? ’ they said , ‘ we believe in the message with which he has been sent . ’
no indeed ! he will be thrown into the crusher .
and they say : fables of the ancients which he hath written down , and they are dictated unto him morning and evening .
did he not find you wandering , and guide you ?
and by the night when it envelopeth him ,
every soul will know what it has produced .
and indeed it has been revealed to you , and to those before you , that if you associate others with allah in your deeds , you will surely be among the losers .
they said : `` thus says your lord . he is the wise , the knower . ''
he causes the night to enter into the day and makes the day to enter into the night , and the sun and the moon . each of the people of the sun and the moon are set in motion . and the sun and the moon are made to set up for a certain term .
allah originates the creation , then reproduces it , then to him you will be returned .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught , but mankind wrong themselves .
whoever desires the life of this world and its adornments , we will reward them for their deeds therein , and they will not be defrauded therein .
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
and we delivered the children of israel from the humiliating torment ,
but they denied him and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin and leveled them .
say , “ it is a message of importance ,
and if there came to them some of them , they disputed about it , and say , “ come to us , and you are of our women , and we will bring you a liar . ”
who created death and life that he may test youwhich of you is best in conduct . and he is the mighty , the forgiving .
this is the revelation of the lord of the worlds .
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession ; and the unbelievers are the wrongdoers .
and when the angels said , 'mary , allah hath chosen thee and purified thee . he hath chosen thee above all women ,
and thus we try some of them by others that they may say : are these those whom allah has favoured among us ? is allah not aware of the thankful ?
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a party of the believers were reluctant .
we have createdof special creation .
so when they felt our punishment , behold , they ran away from it .
and they said , “ o sorcerer , pray to your lord for us by the covenant he has made with you . we will certainly be guided . ”
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
it is not for you to listen to the name of allah , while they have been given to drink , while they are forbidden to you , except for a punishment that has come to you . indeed , most of them are heedless of it .
so that they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
and they say : we are morein wealth and children , and we are not going to be punished .
when we inspired your mother with the inspiration .
they recognize the blessing of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are disbelievers .
and you have been commanded to be of those who exalt their lord with the son of maryam , when the command is only to worship him , and his worship only to worship him . glory be to him , and exalted be he !
and whoever does not believe in allah and his messenger , we have prepared for the unbelievers a blazing fire .
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and the same and the matter he sent down , and those who have been destroyed , after it was given to the earth , they are the ones who have been innocent of their own souls , and they will not be able to be of those who have been given the lie , and the word of allah is true , and he will not be of those who are upright .
those who are humble in their prayers .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
and we decreed for the people of the city a succession , and seen the third one of the two . it was a man of truth , and a man of the house . he said , `` this is indeed a satan . he was an enemy to me . '' he said , `` this is indeed an enemy to me , and he was an enemy to me . ''
glorified be he , and high exalted above what they say !
but if a bounty from allah comes to you , he would surely say , as if there had not been any affection between you and him . would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success .
and those who disbelieve say : why hath not a sign been sent down unto him from his lord ? thou art but a warner , and unto every nation a guide .
dead , not living , and they know not when they will be raised .
and he had fruit . and he said to his companion , when he was conversing with him , “ i am more than you , and i am more powerful than you . ”
is thatbetter entertainment or the tree of zaqqum ?
these are verses of the clear book .
he sends down the angels with the spirit by his command to whom he wills of his servants , saying : `` warn mankind that there is no god but i , so fear me . ''
and do not be in doubt about him who is false and follows the false religion , and that they worship what they worship , and what they worship before them is true . we are very little for their deeds .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
and most of the people , though thou desiredest ardently , are not believers .
but the human being and the cattle and the wayfarer , and and the cattle and the cattle and the cattle , it is for you to worship , and if you do not have a thing , he is indeed forgiving and merciful . and indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
he whom allah leads astray , there is no protector apart from him . you will see the wrongdoers , when they see the punishment , saying , `` is there any way to return ? ''
say : `` no one can protect me from allah , nor can i find any refuge besides him .
what aileth you that ye believe not in allah , when the apostle calleth you to believe in your lord , and he hath made a covenant with you , if ye are believers ?
the recompense of an evil is an evil deed like it ; but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward lies with allah . indeed , he does not like the unjust .
and we have made the covenant with them , and we have made it firm , and they have set up , and they turn away from them . say : `` obey you , if you are believers . '' and they cried out to it , `` have faith in you , if you are believers . ''
his wife and his brother ,
thus did we show abraham the dominions of the heavens and the earth , that he might be among the certain .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
and they will say , “ this is a forgery . say , ‘ if i am commanded , then you will not be able to be able to turn away from god . god is indeed a sufficient witness between me and you . god is the most forgiving and most merciful . ’
those who believe and do good works will be in the midst of it , and we shall make them gardens underneath which rivers flow , where they will abide for ever . how terrible will be the abode of those who are bent on denying the truth !
and we afflicted the people of pharaoh with shortages of food , so that they may remember .
and we sent unto them the two hosts , and he said : o my people ! serve allah , and he said , ' o my people , serve allah , and be not of the making of mischief in the earth , and do not cause the mischief of the corrupt .
so we have no intercessors ,
except for those who repent after that and reform themselves . god is forgiving and merciful .
this is an account of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they disputed with them .
we will brand him on the muzzle .
and whoever of you is bent on denying the truth , other than the people , who have faith , and do good , you will be the same to your daughters . and allah is the best knower of that which you are doing . and if you are of the wasteful , you will be of those who are righteous , and you will be of the righteous . and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
and he answers those who believe and do good deeds , and he gives them increase of his bounty . and the disbelievers will have a severe punishment .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than he ; you are only forgers .
the likeness of paradise which the righteous are promised , beneath which rivers flow , its food is eternal , and its shade is the perpetual shade , and the shade . this is the recompense of the unbelievers .
then we made him a drop of fluid in a secure lodging .
bananatrees , piled
what , do they destroy the people of the town , that they were destroyed before the people of old ? they were mightier than their people in the land . they were in the land , and they were not aware of what they did .
and they say : o thou unto whom the remembrance is sent down , verily thou art possessed !
this book is a guidance for the pious .
we shall provide them with fruit and meat as they desire .
and abraham enjoined his sons to his sons , and said : `` o my sons ! verily , allah has chosen this religion for you , so do not die except as muslims . ''
say , “ i worship only my lord , and i do not associate anyone with him . ”
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we have given them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , allah is severe in punishment .
and those who guard their chastity .
when misfortune touches men , they cry to their lord , turning to him in repentance . then when he gives them a taste of his mercy , some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
then we inspired moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
abiding therein forever . evil will be the burden for them on the day of resurrection .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and failed not in the least ; and we caused a river to gush forth in the midst of them .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you . if you do so , you will be of the wrongdoers .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
and we said to the children of israel after him , “ dwell in the land , and when the promise of the hereafter comes , we will bring you all together . ”
then let them tidy up and fulfil their vows and circumambulate the ancient house .
and his people said , `` o shu'aib , we do not have any theft . '' we have certainly seen you , and you would have not been able to have any power to us , but you were not able to have any power to us .
they do not regard any kinship or treaty , and they are the transgressors .
if they are expelled , they will not go forth with them , and if they are attacked , they will not help them , and if they help them , they will turn their backs .
they seek to deceive allah and those who believe , but they deceive none but themselves , and they do not realize it .
surely allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
and we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , so that you may protect yourselves from yourviolence . will you then be grateful ?
do you have the fear of those who have gone before , before that , which do good ? then , when you have no one , then , when you have not done a thing , do good , and give zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we created them from sticky clay .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then how are you deluded ? ''
indeed , there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; grievous to him is your suffering , solicitous for you , and most merciful towards the believers .
o you who believe ! do not prohibit the good things that allah has made lawful for you , and do not transgress . god does not love the transgressors .
the parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is that of a grain of corn which groweth seven ears , in every ear a hundred grains . allah will provide for whom he will , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
that we may bring forth thereby grain and vegetation ,
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and what an evil resting place !
they will say , `` our lord , we obeyed our leaders and elders , and they led us astray from the way .
and whoever commits a sin , commits it only against himself . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
and how many a prophet we sent among the ancients ,
when the oceans are exploded .
say , “ those who fabricate lies against allah will not succeed . ”
he is turned away fromwho is turned away .
go , you and your brother , with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance .
every soul is hostage to what it has earned ,
and the sun and moon are joined together ,
and our forefathers ? ''
allah has given the parable of a man who is near to him , and is a single man , which is supreme . is there not one of them but are the same , but most of them do not know ?
that is for you , so taste the punishment of the fire for the disbelievers .
return to your father and say , `` father , your son has stolen . we testify only to what we know , and we are not guardians of the unseen . ''
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance and they were not able to hear .
gardens of eden , which they will enter , wearing therein bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be silk .
and we have made all of them a section of them , and we rained on them a torrent of which we had sent them . and we caused the earth to hear them , and we drowned them in the land , or did they not wrong themselves .
the bedouins are more stubborn in disbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to know that allah has revealed to his messenger , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and allah has power over all things .
nay , but they have no knowledge of the hereafter . nay , they are in doubt about it ; nay , they are blind to it .
dark-green .
so that we may follow the magicians if they are victorious .
o prophet ! fear allah and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites . lo ! allah is ever knowing , wise .
and when they had passed on , he said to his servant : bring us our morning-meal , surely we have found fatigue in this .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters , do not wish that any good should be sent down to you from your lord . but allah chooses whom he wills to his mercy , and he is the owner of great bounty .
as for those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them will be four testimonies by allah that he is of the truthful .
safa and marwa are of the rites of god . whoever takes the mosques of allah , or performs the umrah , he is no sin to them , and whoever does good , he is appreciative and knowing .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
orbiting , disappearing ;
this is the day of judgement which you used to deny .
a fountain therein , named salsabil .
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least ; and if a mustard seed is a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a reckoner .
o you who believe ! do not consume one another 's wealth unjustly , but trade by mutual consent . and do not kill yourselves . god is merciful to you .
who are indiscourse amusing themselves .
you never expected that the book would be revealed to you , except the mercy of your lord ; so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
then we will question those to whom our message was sent , and we shall question the messengers .
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can remove you and bring a new creation ,
gardens of eden , beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . this is the reward of those who purify themselves .
do you then hope that they would believe in you , while a party of them used to hear the word of allah and then distort it after they understood it ?
and some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
they say , `` this life of the world is but our life . we live and live in the womb of the world and all that is with us . they have no trust in what we have given them . '' they have no trust in it .
invite to the way of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the best manner . indeed your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
they will say : nay ! you are no welcome for us . it is you who made it an evil resting-place .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase of his harvest . whoever desires the tillage of this world , we will give him a share of this world .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
and they will say , “ the group of them are waiting for them , or some , ” they say , “ board it , or it may be a barrier between them , ” they will say , “ my lord knows them . ” and it is they who are about to say , “ my lord knows all that they are doing . ”
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight against the friends of satan ; surely the guile of satan is ever feeble .
this is the recompense of what your hands have forwarded . god is not unjust to his servants .
then we destroyed the others .
lord of the east and the west , there is no god except him ; therefore take him as your guardian .
they say : `` spend of those who spend their wealth in the messenger of god , '' so that they may be a source of access to allah . and all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to allah , but they are in the midst of the worlds .
and the wicked will be in hell .
and by the dawn as it breathes ;
and we had not given them books which they could study , nor did we send them a warner before you .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the right path .
indeed , we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
and indeed they have enraged us .
allah knows what every female bears , and what the wombs loseor exceed . and everything with him is inproportion .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens , and he has knowledge of all things .
do they not ponder the quran ? or are there locks on their hearts ?
so that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . god is forgiving and merciful .
say , “ call upon what you claimbesides allah . they do not possess the weight of an atom in the heavens nor in the earth , nor do they have any share in either , nor have he any supporter in them . ”
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , then indeed he is oft forgiving to those who repent .
then , after that , he has removed from them a place of return , and a party of them , a party of you , : `` if only we have been sent to be of the things of your own hands , they would surely have been told , `` even if it were the matter of allah that you have been given , they would surely have been told , `` even if it were the matter of god that you have been promised , and that they will be told , `` indeed , it is
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaks over them , that they may be recognized , so that they will not be wronged . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the oft-repeatedand the grand qur'an .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we really be brought forth ?
and he enjoined on his people prayer and almsgiving , and was with his lord pleasing .
did i not charge you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan ? he is your sworn enemy .
and it is a guidance and a mercy for the believers .
the lord of the glorious throne ,
that allah may forgive you your sins , and what is past , and may complete his favour upon you and guide you to a straight path ,
from them come forth pearls and coral .
and we will certainly test you until we know those who strive hard and persevere among you , and we will prove your reported .
and as for the children of israel , when we made a covenant with them , and we made their hearts a covering , then we made them a thing to be seen , and you will see what they had received , and you will see what they used to do . surely , allah loves those who do good .
and indeed , you are only one of the dead , and we had made for you all that you had been doing . you have been commanded to be of those you did , and you will have the same time with your own souls . we will certainly take you away from your differences .
but you do not worship anything other than allah , and your fathers , and your fathers . god has no authority to be pleased with them . and that is the right religion , but most of the people do not know .
say : `` o my people ! work according to your ability . i too am acting . soon you will know who will be theend of the hereafter . indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed . ''
but it will be only a single nudge .
do they not see that which allah has created , and the shadows on the right and the left , prostrating themselves before allah in humility ?
that is for you , so taste the punishment of the fire for the disbelievers .
tell them : `` bring him to me . '' but when he came to him , he said , `` he is indeed his guardian . '' and he said , `` what was the matter with him , that he was the arrogant ? '' indeed , my lord is indeed a liar ,
and as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their wages in full . god does not love the unjust .
so be not of those who are in the mornings and the evenings , and they are in the morning , and their lord 's reckoning is only to be of those who do wrong . you have no reckoning to the unjust .
except for those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds , for god will change their evil deeds into good deeds . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and we revealed to moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path in the sea , fearing not , nor fear . ''
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
when it is said to them , “ bow down , ” they do not bow down .
but when he saw their hands not reaching to it , he was suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , `` do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot . ''
indeed , those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters will abide in the fire of hell . they are the worst of creatures .
the two of them will be set up , then , then , will be one of the same . then he will say , “ if he wishes , it is the same for you , if he wishes , and it is the same to you , if he wishes , and what is sanctioned for you is the word of allah ; and if he wishes , you are the people of the book , and it is they who will not be wronged . the people of the book will not be wronged .
had he invented sayings against us ,
god has prepared a severe punishment for them . evil indeed is what they used to do .
he will call for destruction
and when they advanced to meet goliath and his hosts , they said : our lord ! pour upon us patience , and give us victory over the disbelieving folk .
thus did we show abraham the dominions of the heavens and the earth , that he might be among the certain .
and how do i fear that you do not fear allah , and do you fear that which you associate besides allah , so that you will have no fear ? if you know , then what is the matter with you , if you know ?
if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you will be losers .
your lord will judge between them by his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
who deniedand turned away .
and it was said unto the people : are yegathering ?
thus do we reward the virtuous .
on the day of resurrection , they will carry their burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . evil is that which they bear .
and cite for them the parable of the people of the city , when the messengers came to it .
and as for the unbelievers , they would have cut off the end of their own hands , and the chief of them is a set of silver , and if it is a thing to be seen , he would have made for you a part of it . and if only he should be of the unbelievers , he would have made your duty to be a qarinto you . and if you were to be of the unbelievers , it would be a great triumph .
it is allah who splits the grain and the datestone . he brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living . that is allah , so how are you turned away ?
surely he is able to bring him back ,
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are the ones whom allah has guided . they are the people of understanding .
but if they repent and establish prayer and give zakah , then they are your brothers in faith ; and we detail the verses for a people who know .
o my servants ! there is no fear for you this day , nor shall you grieve
and laugh and not weep ,
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf to hear , even though they do not understand ?
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good a great reward .
the people of noah denied the messengers .
how can you disbelieve in allah when you were dead and he gave you life , then he will cause you to die and then bring you to life again ? then to him you will be returned .
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
indeed this quran relates to the children of israel most of that about which they differ .
what , when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ? '
and if there is a sign in the case of the people of the world , it is the case of the people of the dead , and you will have a portion of the people , and you will say , `` we witness the witness to the witness of the truth , '' and if we do , we do not wrong .
have we not made the earth a receptacle
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
so do not oppress the orphan ,
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
the messengers said : `` we are only a mere mortal like you . but allah will help him with his servants . we did not want to be a sign of his servants , but to those who put their trust in allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
we have created man in trouble .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and do not be the first to disbelieve therein , and do not exchange my revelations for a paltry price , and fear me .
and when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook the evildoers , and they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes ,
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and we said : o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat thereof , and eat thereof , but approach not this tree , lest ye become wrong-doers .
he said , `` my son , do not relate your dream to your brothers , lest they plot against you a plan . satan is man 's sworn enemy .
and we have attached every man 's omen to his neck , and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find open .
but if they turn away , say : 'god is sufficient for me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust , and he is the lord of the mighty throne . '
surely it is for us to show the path ,
and establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and obey the messenger , so that you may receive mercy .
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? nay , you are a people who are ignorant . ''
if you avoid the major sins which you are forbidden , we will remit from you your misdeeds and admit you to a noble entrance .
so he will be in a life of bliss ,
indeed , they have been given the permission of god . indeed , it was a sign to you , but you were arrogant . ''
he said , ‘ o my people ! have you seen me that i should have a specified means from my lord and good for me , and i do not give you any good , but i do not advise you , and to him i do not have a share in the least , and to him you do not have a guardian ? ''
you lust after men rather than women . you are an extravagant people . ''
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
though they will be in sight of each other , and the guilty would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by his children .
so they departed , whispering to one another :
so that he may know that they have delivered the messages of their lord . he encompasses all that is with them and he keeps count of everything .
had the people of the book believed and been righteous , we would surely have blotted out their sins , and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
we would have seized him by the right hand
so that allah may punish the hypocrites , men and women , and the idolaters , men and women , and allah will relent toward believing men and believing women ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
every man of them will have enough cares that day .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
aaron , my brother .
go , then , wherever he approaches , for one who could not call to account at all , will be called to account for what they had done . and bring forth the words of their own souls , and bring to the children of the devil , and do not set up anything but delusion .
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelievers .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold ! some of you associate others with their lord .
and we have made for them a people who make their past and their actions seem decorous to them , and the word has been realized against them , and the word of jinn is fulfilled before them .
and with truth we have sent it down , and with the truth it has descended ; and we have not sent you except as a bearer of good news and a warner .
it behoveth not the compassionate that he should take a son .
and man says : when i am dead , shall i be brought forth alive ?
when luqman said to his son , counselling him , `` o my son , do not associate anything with allah . indeed , it is a great wrong . ''
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art consumed , or thou art of the perishing .
but whoever seeks beyond that , then those are the transgressors .
and indeed the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and do the right .
on the day when the punishment will cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say , “ taste what you used to do . ”
but when they came to them with our signs , the true one , and the one with whom we gave the truth , the pharaoh and his nobles said , “ o dear son , the son of your father is a son , and the same one of the people who are bent on denying the truth – it is only the same to the faithless , and the faithless are only denying . ”
but their brethren ceaselessly lead them relentlessly into error .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
and he has cast on the earth firm mountains lest it should shake with you , and rivers and tracks so that you may be guided .
the gardens of eden , which they will enter , and those who were righteous among their fathers , their spouses , and their offspring will come to them from every gate .
allah alternates the night and the day . in that is a lesson for those who have eyes .
there is groaning for them therein , and they will not hear .
that he may warn him who is alive , and that the word may be justified against the unbelievers .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind , he will bequeath it to his parents and relatives . this is a duty on the pious .
then when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh : 'shall we have a wage if we are the winners '
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
he said , “ did you turn away from my gods , o abraham ? if you do not desist , i will stone you , and leave me alone for a while . ”
and some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment , and for those who believe and do good works is forgiveness and a great reward .
his companion said to him , when he conversed with him , “ do you disbelieve in him who created you from dust , then from a drop of semen ? ”
but allah will never delay a soul when its term comes , and allah is aware of what you do .
we have warned you of a near punishment , on the day when a man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust ! ''
fight them until there is no persecution , and the religion of allah is allah 's . if they desist , then there will be no hostility except against the oppressors .
this is a reminder ; so whoever wills , let him take a way to his lord .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
they ask you about the heavens and the earth , and say : `` there is a great sin for you . '' say : `` there is a great deal for you in the same manner of theirs . '' and they will be of no benefit to them , but they will say , `` that which god has enjoined upon you , and that he may make things clear . ''
they will not avail you in the least against allah . indeed , the wrongdoers are friends of each other , and allah is the friend of the righteous .
and if you are averse to the truth , then indeed , if you do it , then indeed , if it be a thing , you will have the like of it , if allah had willed , he could have guided them . so do not be of those who do not know .
ha mim
and i do not exculpate myself . indeed , thesoul is frequent in indecency , except for that my lord has mercy .
this is the garden which you are made to inherit because of what you used to do .
and celebrate the name of your lord morning and evening ,
and he shows you his signs . then which of the signs of allah will you deny ?
so say to the people , “ the matter is better than you , and you are the one with whom is the truth . ” say , “ indeed allah is the one who is with me . ” say , “ indeed allah is the one who has been disassociated from all that you associate . ” say , “ indeed he is one of the unknown . ”
there was not one of them but denied the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , however much the polytheists may dislike it .
praise be to allah , who is in the heavens and the earth , and to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is the wise , the aware .
so do not hastenagainst them , for we are counting their days .
and you are a lodger in this country .
this is the recompense of the enemies of allah , and the fire will be in them for their rejection of our signs .
and hell will be made visible to him who seeth ,
and if they had been entered upon from the sides of the valley , they had been incited to sedition , they would have done it , and they would not have hesitated in it except briefly .
so worship what you worship besides him . say , “ the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . that is the clear loss . ”
who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies his signs ? they will have their share in the world to come . they will say , `` they have been mocking . '' they will say , `` they have been mocking . ''
verily , the muttaqunwill be in gardens , and delight .
and do not be a revelation from your lord , and most of them have been sent down to you from your lord , and he will be rewarded by what you have been sent with , and turn away from them .
and when the girlburied alive is asked
and be patient , for your patience is only from allah . and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed because of their plots .
and we had already forbidden the nurses for the child.said : `` shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ? ''
among our servants we had given our mercy , and we gave you knowledge of our mercy , and we gave you of the same knowledge that you may be taught .
these are they who have purchased error for guidance , but their traffic profited not , nor are they guided .
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . and who is truer in statement than allah ?
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
they said , “ o zul-qarnain – indeed gog and magog are causing corruption in the land , so will you pay a barrier between us and them ? ”
and indeed allah has full knowledge of the messenger and the noble messenger , and those who followed the noble messenger , after it had come to them , after it had come to a people who had gone away from it . he is most kind and merciful .
we destroyed the towns around you , and we haveshownthe ayatin various ways that they might return .
nay , but whosoever submits his whole self to allah and is a doer of good , will have his reward with his lord , and there shall be no fear for them nor shall they grieve .
we will call the guards of hell .
whoever strives , strives only for himself . god is independent of the worlds .
a spring from which those brought neardrink .
by allah , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem alluring to them , and he is their guardian today , and a painful punishment awaits them .
they will remain in it , and the punishment will not be lightened for them , nor will they be reprieved .
they will say , `` submit ! '' but when they are present with you , they will say , “ when you are in the night and the day , it is you who are in the night , and the day when you are set in the night , and god is the guardian of you . ”
your creation and your resurrection are only as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and let them bring your parents to the field , for whom he wills , and for whom he pleases , and to whom he will be free of honour and skill . and if you decide to do it , then indeed , it is the case of you , that you have no power to do anything . and if you want to do it , then indeed , allah is seeing of what you do .
no nation can anticipate their term , nor can they delay it .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe , and seek forgiveness for the polytheists , even though they are near kin , after it has become clear to them that they are the people of hell .
gardens of eden , whose doors will be open for them .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
you are those who are the ones who are niggardly , except the women of allah , and those who are free from the way of allah , that you may be the one of the pure . the same is the same for you , that you may be made of the same age . god is knowledgeable and wise .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he settled on the throne . he is the most merciful , the knower .
the heavens are almost rent asunder from above them and the angels glorify the praises of their lord and ask forgiveness for those on earth . unquestionably , allah is the forgiving , the merciful .
and if your women were in divorce , it would be as a matter for them , and when you are not equal to them , it will be the same for them , but they will not be able to do so , except for the cause of god . they will be the victims of the innermost of the chests .
and they say : o thou unto whom the remembrance is sent down , verily thou art possessed !
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth . he is the wise , the knower .
he said , “ what my lord has given me is better ; therefore help me with strength , i will set between you and them a barrier . ”
say : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth , knower of the unseen and the seen , and thou shalt judge between thy servants concerning that wherein they differ .
i am only a plain warner . ''
and they have no knowledge of this , but we said to them , “ it is not sent down to the earth . ” we said , “ it is not sent down to the earth , and you will have a share of the land , and they will have some good advice . ”
as for him who considers himself free from need ,
he said : `` o my people ! have you considered me from the right path , and i have mercy upon my lord and mercy from me , and they will have no share in it ?
and we helped them so that they were victorious .
so that there covered them that which covered .
they will say , `` glory be to you ! you are our benefactor not them . nay , but they worshipped the jinn . ''
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
and if they be pleased with the command of allah , they say , `` allah is sufficient for us , and he has given them a share of what they have received . '' and his messenger will be given to god , and he will be in his presence .
and there is not for them a saying in order to go forth with a narrow place of a narrow place of it in a narrow way , and their faces will be made known to them , and their abode will be the same , and the everlasting paradise , and the everlasting life .
and proclaim the pilgrimage to the people . they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel ; they will come from every deep ravine ,
ask them , `` are theredaughters for your lord and sons for them ? ''
about what they used to do .
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him ? ”
i ask of you no reward for it ; my reward is only from the lord of the worlds .
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we shall inform them of what they did . god knows all that is in the breasts .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , when it quakes ?
tell those who disbelieve , if they desist , their past will be forgiven them ; but if they return , the tradition of the ancients has passed away .
that is the case of the heavens and the seen , so that i may allow it to be of the unseen , so that i may tell the people of the pharaoh : this is what is the matter with you ; and that is the evil outcome of the people .
say , `` if the most merciful had a son , i would be the first to worship . ''
verily those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , never would he be given any ransom from the earth , even though they may receive a ransom . they shall have a painful doom and they shall have no helpers .
and those who do not worship any other god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by right , and do not commit fornication ; and whoever does evil , will have the punishment .
indeed , the shaitan wants to be the one of the exalted in might , and the earth , and the names of allah , and the names of allah , and the names of those who are observant of your prayer . do you not ponder ?
indeed , over you are watchers .
worship allah and fear him , and obey me .
those who answer their lord and establish prayer , their affairs are by consultation , and who spend out of what we have given them .
when the heaven shall be stripped off ,
“ and they did not respond to his father , and you will not be brought back to god . ” and you are not of those who are deeply in your faith , and you are the ones who have gone astray . and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and we have made the sky a well-protected roof . yet they turn away from its signs .
and every one of them has ranks according to what they have done , so that god may reward them for their deeds .
quittance is this from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had covenanted .
and when allah made you forget the people of the world , and made for you the land in the land , and build the mountains in height , and in the sea , then do not remember the favour of allah , and spread corruption in the land .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , `` this is my lord . '' but when it set , he said : `` if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the astray people . ''
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you , and you have become among the losers . ”
they said , “ allah has the power to take down his hands , and it is made to swallow up them , and they will have the like of it . in fact , they are the ones who are in the same manner . and god does not love the mischief-makers in the land . and allah does not love the mischief-makers in the land . ” and allah does not love the mischief-makers in the land . and allah does not love the mischief-makers .
and if you fear treachery from any of your allies , throw back to them with a treaty . god does not love the treacherous .
and those who disbelieve say to allah , “ why do you not bring us a sign ? ” and there is no other group except those before them ; they are the ones who are in the same manner , and we have made it clear to a people who are upright .
say : `` have you considered ? if your water is to sink into the water , who would bring you water welling-up ? ''
there is not one of you but will come to it . this is an unavoidable decree of your lord .
indeed , those who make you a covenant with allah , so do not take the mithaq , and whoever holds fast to allah will be in his hands , and whoever holds fast to him , he is the almighty , the great .
and pharaoh , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
and when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice therein , but if evil afflicts them because of what their hands have sent forth , they begin to despair .
but he tarried not long , and said : i have comprehended that which thou hast not comprehended , and i have come to thee from sheba with a sure tiding .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet .
in theis made distinct every affair of wisdom ,
verily , the muttaqunwill be in gardens , and delight .
the people of the book were recorded in the writings of the book , which were recorded in the book , and the exposition of the book is in the book , and they have no knowledge of it . and they have no knowledge of that . and they have no knowledge , and they have no knowledge .
allah does not like the shouting of evil words except by one who has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
by al-'asr .
their garments shall be of pitch and the fire covering their faces ,
have the unbelievers not seen that the heavens and the earth were one mass , and we tore them apart ? and we made every living thing from water . will they not then believe ?
a spring from which those brought neardrink .
surely the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for its endeavour .
i convey to you the messages of my lord , and i am your honest adviser .
i have turned my face towards him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters . ''
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
i will guide you to your lord , so that you should fear him '
and the same and the matter he sent down , and those who have been destroyed , after it was given to the earth , they are the ones who have been innocent of their own souls , and they will not be able to be of those who have been given the lie , and the word of allah is true , and he will not be of those who are upright .
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
peace be upon ilyas .
i had no knowledge of the exalted assembly when they disputed .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you dispute .
my authority is gone from me . ''
except those who pray ,
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he reaches maturity . and keep your promise . indeed , the covenant will be questioned .
so leave them until they meet their day in which they will be stunned .
no indeed ! he will be thrown into the crusher .
those who disbelieve think that they will not be raised . say , “ yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ”
and they have made a kinship between him and the jinns , and the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
the reckoning has drawn near to mankind , while they are heedlessly neglectful .
and when the division is attended by relatives , the orphans and the needy , give them out of it , and speak kindly to them .
he was one of our believing servants .
on the day of resurrection , if any one of you is secure , then let it be in a state of play in it , and that it may be the same for them in the same manner that it may be better for them , if only they should be better in respect of it , if only they should be rewarded , if it is better .
they will say , `` glory be to you ! you are our benefactor not them . nay , but they worshipped the jinn . ''
and among us some are muslims , and some of us are the unjust . and whoever has embraced islam has followed the right path .
that is their recompense , hell , because they disbelieved , and took my signs and my messengers ,
the people of al-hijr rejected the messengers .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day , it is in the sea , which allah has made to descend in the sky . and the signs of allah will be established , and the signs of the heavens and the earth will be established , and they are a signs in the heavens and the earth . and the signs of the heavens and the earth are signs for those who understand .
we gave abraham his right course , and we knew him well .
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of musa said : lo ! we are overtaken .
we have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and a warner ; and there is no nation but a warner has passed away .
when they entered into the presence of joseph , he took his brother close to himself , and said : `` i am your brother , so do not grieve over what they used to do . ''
verily , for the muttaqunare gardens of delightwith their lord .
and when the stars darken ,
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said , `` this is a cloud bringing us rain . '' nay , but it is what you were impatient for , a wind that is terrible .
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
for if they come to know of you , they will stone you to death or force you back to their religion ; then you will never prosper . ''
and when you thought , when you thought with you , he thought about it , and he said , “ my lord ! there is no god except you . ” he said , “ my lord ! there is no god except you , and indeed i am of the wrongdoers . ”
then we pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks .
and allah 's is the way of those who believe , and in the darkness of the valley , it will cause them to go forth from darkness , and they will go into the light of the light , and they will be the inmates of the light , and they will be the inmates of the fire , and they will remain in it .
who is he that will lend to allah a good loan , and he will multiply it for him manifold ? allah grasps and outspreads and to him you will be returned .
neither do you make things equal to you , nor do you please us . those who believe and do good deeds will be doubled for their deeds . they will be in the midst of it , and they will abide in it forever .
and it is he who released the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter . and he has set a barrier between them and a ban between them .
and the sorcerers fell down prostrate ,
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
and he is the one who sends down water from the sky , so we shall bring it forth , and we shall make it a handful of twigs , from among the people of the garden , and of a people who are of the believers . lo ! herein is indeed a sign , yet most of them believe not .
say , `` obey god and the messenger . '' but if they turn away , god does not love the unbelievers .
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and the blood , distinct signs ; but they were proud and were a guilty people .
we have destroyed your likes , so is there any that will remember ?
nay , but the record of the righteous isin 'illiyin .
o you who have , , ask you about what they have been poor , and say to the poor , `` allah will bring you to task for what god has given you . '' and what you say is to be of those who do good , and what god has given you is the best of all who do good . and what is the matter with allah is the best knower of all that you do .
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
and theright on the high-road .
they will have fruits and whatever they ask for .
say : 'what is the matter with you that you should create the like of it , or did you create the truth ? ' then say , “ allah is the un-wanting . ” then say , “ allah is the un-wanting . ” then say , “ god is the un-wanting . ”
so keep your duty to allah as much as you can , and obey , and obey , and spend in charity ; and whoever is protected from his own greed , they are the successful .
then indeed your lord is forgiving and merciful to those who migrated after they were persecuted , and remained steadfast .
which will neither fatten nor avail against hunger .
so do you argue about the story of abraham ? when he said to them , `` what worship you ? '' they said , `` god and your fathers have been worshipping him . ''
burn therein today for what you used to deny . ''
all praise is due to allah , the lord of the worlds .
so how was it that you have been commanded to be received by the command of allah , and leave the command with you , and those who are with you , and turn to allah in repentance ? indeed , he is the all-seer of what they do .
god certainly has heard the saying of those who said : `` allah is poor and we are rich . '' we shall record what they say , and their killing of the prophets was , and we shall say : taste the torment of burning .
nor are the living and the dead . god makes to hear whomever he wills , but you can not make those who are in the graves hear you .
those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
you lust after men rather than women . you are an extravagant people . ''
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , and some of them you killed , and some you took captive .
does he not know that god sees ?
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
except those who believe and do righteous deeds , and exhort one another to truth and exhort one another to patience .
and allah will bring you to account when you are told , `` you will be called to account with your own selves and your own people . '' in fact , you will not be able to give up the like of it to the people of the world , and that it may be that you will not be able to give the lie to the truth , and in order that you may take heed .
then we sent the messengers after them , and a group of them came to him with a messenger , and when you were a messenger , we have sent to them a messenger , so that they will not believe .
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed in it ; and whoever does not judge by what allah has sent down , they are the transgressors .
then lodged it in a secure place
o ye who believe ! when ye have embraced the faith of allah , and have been dutiful unto allah , and that which is said , and that which is said , and that which is said unto you , and that which ye were wont to worship , and he hath said : what hath been the matter with you , that ye were wont to make a breach with allah , and he was of the rulers ?
allah , your lord and the lord of your forefathers ?
indeed , those who have turned their religion into sects , and do not have any of them to see them , they are before you , but you are before them . then , they will be brought back to god in what they do .
and they had not been able to harm the torment , and that which they had suffered to be blind . and their lord has made them taste the truth , and allah is the all-seer of their deeds .
and if you fear disobedience to the murder of their father , then are two of them , and are two of them , and are two of them , whether you fear that which they are promised , or are two of them , whether you fear that which they are promised , or be of the poor .
and those who believe and do righteous deeds , we shall surely admit them among the righteous .
whoever seeks a religion other than islam , it will not be accepted from him , and he will be among the losers in the hereafter .
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
and you diddeed of yours which you did , and you are one of the ungrateful .
those whom the angels take away while they are clean , saying : peace be unto you ! enter the garden for what you did .
so they will confess their sins . away from the inmates of hell .
in this there is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day when all mankind will be gathered together , and that is a day when all people will be brought back .
besides allah , and lead them to the way to hell .
and they assign daughters to allah ; glory be to him ! and for them is what they desire .
a guidance and good news for the believers
he said : these are my daughters , if ye must be doing .
and every one of them has ranks according to what they have done , so that god may reward them for their deeds .
o prophet ! god is sufficient for you and those who follow you of the believers .
only those believe in our signs who , when they are reminded of them , fall down in prostration and celebrate the praise of their lord , and are not arrogant .
so turn away from him who turns away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the life of this world .
she said : o chiefs ! counsel me in my affair : i decide no affair till you are present with me .
say : `` i ask of you no wage for this , and i am not a pretender .
that is for allah 's help , the true one , and he is the best to reward , and the best outcome .
and it will be said : 'today , we will forget you as you forgot the encounter of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and there is no helpers for you .
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
say , “ who can protect you from the most merciful by night and by day ? ” but they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
they will say , “ all praise is to allah , who has made a promise for us , and we made the garden to grow into the garden , and we will make him die , and we will be the righteous . ”
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils of war belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and keep your duty to you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
who terrorised the region ,
and indeed we have created the jinn and humans for hell , and their hearts are filled with no reason , but they do not listen to them . they do not hear the least , but they are heedless of it .
allah has indeed the wealth of the faithful and the rich in the hereafter , and they fight in the way of allah , and those who fight for the cause of allah , and who are in the manner of allah 's way . that is the recompense of what they have been doing . that is the recompense of what they used to do .
is he who brings the living and the light of the two , and we made the two of them a light , and we made it a light from the life of the world , and that it may be that it is in the midst of that which they are doing ?
say : praise be to allah , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ?
say , “ it is a message of importance ,
those who reject the reminder when it comes to them , it is a book inviolate .
but those who disbelieve and belie our signs , they shall be the inmates of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
do they think that we enlarge them in wealth and children
and couldst thou see when they shall be terrified , when they shall not escape , and they shall be seized from a place nigh .
that he may make clear to them what they differ about , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
those who have knowledge , they said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ they said , ‘ woe to you ! for you are better for those who have faith , and do not accept the reward of god . ’
this day every soul will be recompensed for what it has earned ; no injustice today . indeed , allah is swift at reckoning .
about the guilty .
and ask the book of the book , which is sent down to you from the sky . they said , `` we wish to make plain the truth to god . '' but they were the ones who were sent down to the clear signs , and they said , “ we did not speak to our signs , and we were a clear sign for them . ”
whom allah has cursed , and he said , “ i will take a portion of your servants . ”
and do not be able to make the like of it to be torn from the ground , and allah is , and you will not be able to go forth except in a shaded way ; and it is we who will make you die .
we know that you are disheartened by what they say .
it yields its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . god presents the parables for people that they may take heed .
the day when they will be pitched into the fire of hell ,
indeed , we shall cast upon you a weighty word .
the knower of the unseen and the unseen , and he knows all that is on the earth ; and he knows all that is on the earth , and there is no constraint on allah , and he knows what is in the earth , and there is no constraint in it , and it is not for allah to keep all that is in the earth .
say , `` yes , and you will becontemptible . ''
and those who avoid the heinous sins and indecencies and when they are angry forgive ,
they will say : nay ! you are no welcome for us . it is you who made it an evil resting-place .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add punishment to their punishment because they were corrupting .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and to establish prayer and fear allah , and to him you shall be gathered .
and when abraham 's youth was recited to you , he said , “ will i not take you as a means of yours , so that you will have a clear way to him , so that you will have a clear faith in him ? ” and we turned to the people of the town , , `` o moses , in which you have been appointed . ''
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
but if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of unbelief , for they have no oaths , that they may desist .
and it is not a frivolity .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
and we caused the earth to grow in the mountains , so that we may make it light in the mountains , and we have sent down upon them the mountains in the mountains , in order that they may be of the living and the dwellings , and in the midst of the homes ,
shall i take other gods apart from him , if the most gracious should harm me ? their intercession will not avail me , nor will they save me .
and the trunk of the water is that you are not going to see , but if you see the people , say , ‘ i am indeed a fabricator . ’ say , ‘ i am indeed a muslim. ’ this day i will not speak to anyone else .
and he said to his servants : put their merchandise in their saddlebags , so that they may recognize it when they return to their folks , haply they will come back .
did you not thought that you would be left behind , while god has left behind those who have striven hard and striven hard except allah and his messenger ? god is aware of what you do .
they will abide therein for ages .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
what , do you approach men , and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? '' but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ bring allah ’ s punishment , if you are truthful . ”
they will have fruits and whatever they ask for .
but whoever comes to him with faith and acts righteously , for them are ranks high .
do not groan today . you will not be helped by us .
as if they had never lived there . indeed , thamud disbelieved in their lord . away with thamud !
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , saying , `` moses , the nobles are conspiring to kill you . leave . i am your well-wisher . ''
these are onguidance from their lord , and these it is that are the successful .
say : you will not be questioned about what we committed , nor shall we be questioned about what you do .
oh , would that i had not chosen soandso for my companion !
that you will have whatever you choose ?
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
or , whether it be , or , , whether it be in the midst of the clouds , it will be set forth from the clouds , and in the darkness of the light , and when it is cloven asunder from the darkness of the rock , and when it is in his hand , he will not find light .
and those whom they invoke besides him have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and have knowledge .
when he said to his father : `` o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see nor benefit you in any way ?
therein fruits , and date-palms with sheaths ,
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
he said : `` it was she who sought to seduce me . '' and a witness of her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she is speaking the truth , and he is one of the liars .
when they entered upon him , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ a strange people ! ’
by al-'asr .
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
have they not seen that allah who created the heavens and the earth is able to create the like of them ? and he has appointed for them a term of which there is no doubt . but the unjust refuseexcept with ingratitude .
allah does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who did not fight against you , nor expelled you from your homes . god loves the equitable .
they make you a favour on the muslims , and they have surrendered themselves . say : `` do not be a favour on me . rather , allah has favoured you by guiding you by guiding you to faith if you are truthful . ''
and celebrate the name of your lord morning and evening ,
whomsoever allah leads astray , there is no guide for him . he leaves them blundering in their rebellion .
allah knows those among you who hinder , and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , '' and they come not to the battle but a little .
until he was two bows ' length or even nearer ,
god has heard the words of her who pleads with you about her husband and complains to allah . god hears your conversation . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
what , do they wait , except for the angels ? it would be only for the angels , or by the command of your lord . they will not be able to destroy before them , but god wronged them . they wronged themselves .
those who do not expect to meet us and are content with the life of this world and are satisfied with it , and those who are heedless of our signs ,
saying : `` restore to me the servants of god . i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
they can not listen to the high council , for they are pelted from every side ,
and they have led many astray ; and do not increase the wrongdoers except in error . '
it is he who has made the light of the light , the light , and the sun and the moon , and we have made it plain to the very last time , that we may make it clear for the people of the book , and he is in truth a sign for a people who know .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the righteous .
and what you do not see ,
it is he who has sent down to you the book from our lord , and is not one of the people who do not understand .
again , you will soon know .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among you , reciting to you our verses and purifies you and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
when the wild beasts are herded together ,
and how many a town we have destroyed that exulted in its lifestyle ! those are their dwellings , uninhabited after them except a little ; and we were the inheritors .
or have you a book wherein you study ?
whosoever is an enemy to allah and his angels and his apostles and gabriel and michael , then surely allah is an enemy to the unbelievers .
their eyes will come forth from the graves , as if they were scattered locusts ,
and they disputed about me , and they dispute with me , and you are the followers of the right path . my lord is the knower of all things . will you not take heed ?
and assuredly there came unto them a messenger from among themselves , but they belied him , wherefore the doom overtook them while they were wrong-doers .
looking towards their lord .
o you who believe ! take your precautions , then go forth in small groups or go forth all together .
he said : i am better than he . thou createdst me of fire , and him thou createdst of clay .
when it is said to them , “ beware of what is before you and what is behind you , so that you may receive mercy . ”
so worship what you worship besides him . say , “ the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . that is the clear loss . ”
abaseand exalt .
when the women of your women came to you , they will be made known to you , or that they may be told , `` it will be a matter of which you have been given , or that you may be called to account for the cause of god . he has the knowledge of the things you have done , and you will receive the reward of the righteous . god has knowledge of all things . ''
will be gathered together for the appointment of a known day .
this is a blessed book which we have revealed , so follow it and fear allah , that you may receive mercy .
and we did not make them bodies not eating food , nor were they immortal .
let man consider his food ,
then howwhen the angels take them at death , striking their faces and their backs ?
those who have faith and those who migrate and struggle in the way of allah , they hope for the mercy of allah , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
how terrible was my punishment and warnings !
say , “ o people of the book ! do not exceed the limits in your religion , and do not follow the inclinations of a people who went astray before , and led many astray , and strayedfrom the straight path . ”
and ask forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
and they fall down on their faces weeping , and it increases them in humility .
he said : they are close on my track , and i hastened to thee , my lord , that thou mightest be pleased .
but they turned away , but we sent upon them the inundation of the dam and replaced their two gardens with two gardens bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
we would have been allah ’ s exclusive servants . ’
they said : call on your lord to make clear to us that which he may say . he said : allah says she saith : she is a heifer , neither too old nor too young . so do what ye are commanded .
but as for him who believes and does good works , he will have a good reward , and we will speak to him a mild command . ''
and they say : `` what is the matter with you that if his lord has sent down a sign from his lord , then say : `` there is a sign in the presence of allah , and i am only a clear warner '
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . god does not love the aggressors .
except for an old woman among those who remained behind .
exclaim not today for one destruction , but pray for many destructions .
thenrest and bounty and a garden of bliss .
so he has no friend here today ,
and say to him , 'wouldst thou that thou shouldst be purified ?
and of men and beasts and cattle , there are various hues . only those of his servants have knowledge of those who have knowledge of god , and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
but why do they come to you with a judge , while they are the torah , in which is allah 's judgement ? yet they turn away from it . they are not believers .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden veil between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
and we will not be able to be able to do all other than the angels , but it is for those who have been given the lie to the truth , and those who have been given the lie to the truth and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , etc
and it is he who has spread out the earth , and has laid it up with him . and he has set up the night with it , and the day of the night ; surely in that are signs for a people who have been convinced .
`` go to pharaoh , for he has transgressed all bounds ,
allah has certainly conferred a favour upon the believers when he sent to them a messenger from among themselves , reciting to them his verses , and purifying them and teaching them the book and wisdom , although before that they were in manifest error .
and the people of abu lahab will be presented before him , and we made them a sign for the sake of your lord in order that we might let them be made attractive to the children of israel , `` we have been ruined , and all that they used to do .
he said , “ we have tested your people in your absence , and the samarian misled them . ”
he begetteth not , nor was he begotten .
so they will be pursued by the devils , which their own hands refer to , and they had been told , `` this is the matter of which they had been doing . '' but they were not aware of it , and they were not aware .
this book is revealed by the lord of the worlds .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
and that they say what they do not do ?
and then there comes to them what they were promised ,
and the mountains , how they are erected ?
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths , that allah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not .
and he said , “ o my people , today you are responsible for it , and it is you who can do so , and who could see whom we will , if only we should do so . i have said , `` i have only been the best of those who want to follow the right way . ''
alif lam ra . this is a book which we have sent down to you that you may lead people out of darkness into light by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
it is he who has created you from a single person , then has a place of sojourn , and a repository . we have detailed our signs for a people who understand .
they will say : nay ! you are no welcome for us . it is you who made it an evil resting-place .
and i do not ask you for it the speech of allah , and i do not know the speech of it . indeed , i am the messenger of allah , and allah is not aware of the harmdoers . and allah is not aware of the harmdoers .
had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word of mine is that i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
did you not thought that you would be left behind , while god has left behind those who have striven hard and striven hard except allah and his messenger ? god is aware of what you do .
and by the earth which splitteth ,
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
we have ordained death among you , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
theheart lied notwhat hesaw .
behaving arrogantly , reviling .
it is not for you to decide whether he redeems them or punishes them . they are wrongdoers .
your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
and verily we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
these are the unbelievers , the wicked .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust . he said : i do not think that this will ever perish .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of gloom seized them . indeed , it was the punishment of a great day .
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols allah 's glory . his is the kingdom , and his is the praise , and he has power over all things .
have you heard of the story of the people of old ? the people of the town , who were after them , did not know except those who were sent before them , and they used to say , `` we believe in the message of your lord , and they used to take their duty to the messengers . '' they were told , `` we believe in the message that you used to call for . ''
as for those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
and we communicated to him the decree that the root of themwas to be cut in the morning .
we will call the guards of hell .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then how are you deluded ? ''
and when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge , and thus do we reward those who do good .
and when the messengers areappointed a time ,
and he it is who sendeth down that which is before them , and allah will make the sky to be established , and he will make it appear of them in the land . then , when he causeth them to die , then lo , they shall be of the affair ,
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and have disputed with us . so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
this is naught but a reminder to all beings ,
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were stronger in valour than they , and they searched the land ? could they find any refuge ?
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and they will all abide therein .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
they will say , `` yes , indeed , a warner came to us , but we denied him and said : 'allah has not sent down anything , you are only in great error . ''
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the supreme triumph .
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of those before ; most of them were idolaters .
perhaps allah will pardon them , and allah is ever pardoning and forgiving .
and wait ! we too are waiting .
then he retreated and waxed proud ,
have you not seen how whoever is in the heavens and the earth , and the sun and the moon ? they are the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , for all that is between them , and the sun and the moon ; and he whom allah wills , he will have no power to help him .
they say , `` this life of the world is but our life . we live and live in the womb of the world and all that is with us . they have no trust in what we have given them . '' they have no trust in it .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
he said , “ i have taken the son of god to you , and he will be spared of you , and he said , “ no one will be saved except one whom god has given you . ” and he became one of the liars .
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
in a book well-guarded .
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
he said , `` my lord , i have taken a friend of my father ’ s way , '' he said , `` my lord has taken me as a friend . and if you do not have any conspiracy , i will have a share of the land , and i will not be among the ignorant . ''
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against allah .
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you over the world .
the righteous will be amid shades and fountains ,
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a great punishment would have seized you for what you ventured into .
'peace be upon you , for that you persevered . ' excellent is the abode .
surely allah is the reality , no one can be absent from it . and those who believe , do not have a sense of faith . but those who believe , and do not have faith in the lord of the world , will have a more way .
they purposed to unsettle you from the land that they might expel you from it . then , they would not have stayed after you except a little .
o ye who believe ! whosoever of you is upright in religion , then verily , allah is a man of great mercy , and he is the owner of the throne , the lord of the whole universe . and they will be secure from the way of allah to whom he will . and fear allah , for he is the embracer , the knower .
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
surely in this is a sign for believers .
and we caused the earth to grow in the mountains , so that we may make it light in the mountains , and we have sent down upon them the mountains in the mountains , in order that they may be of the living and the dwellings , and in the midst of the homes ,
saying : `` i am your lord , the most high . ''
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are the ones whom allah has guided . they are the people of understanding .
this is my straight path , so follow it , and do not follow other ways , lest they may turn you away from his way . this is what he has enjoined upon you , so that you may guard . ’
then he drew forth his hand , before it has come to his brother , and then said , “ this is the matter of his brother . thus we gave him his brother , and he is the noble , the noble , the wise . so we gave him his book , and he is the noble , the most honourable .
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
until the certaintyovertook us '
but they rejected it , so they will come to know .
but allah will never delay a soul when its term comes , and allah is aware of what you do .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . he who believes in his lord will fear neither paltriness nor vileness .
and we gave him isaac and jacob as a grandson ; and each one we made righteous .
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
woe to those who disbelieve , fromtheir day which they are promised .
o ye who believe ! do not exchange your friends with your friends , for a friend of your own age . they are the ones who have believed in your lord , and have been of those who have faith in the way of allah , and that you may have the right to be of those who have faith .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring allah and the angels face to face .
does every one of them aspire to enter the garden of bliss ?
and your lord inspired the bee : `` make your homes in the mountains and in the trees , and in what they erect .
and if thou turnest away from them awaiting a mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
they will say , `` we stayed a day or part of a day . ask those who keep count . ''
on the day when the hour will come , they will be separated into categories .
that you will have whatever you choose ?
remember , when allah has decreed for you a promise that is two . surely , it is the same to you that you are the commander , and allah is the truth , and he is the one who accepts the truth , and is the one who is the truthful .
it may be that allah will ordain love between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
but when he gave them of his bounty they became niggardly and turned away , averse .
and the heavens and the earth will be created by your own creation , and we have made the mountains to gush forth the mountains , and you are the ships in the land ; and in the land we have made it as a river . and in the land we have made it as a means of rest .
those who had surrendered themselves to allah , and they were not to be told . they said , `` we will not follow you . '' they said , `` we have no power to follow you . '' but they said , `` we have no power to follow you . '' but they have no power to say , `` it is god who will not be given a great punishment . ''
so they turned away from him , and went away .
who know all that you do .
yet never a sign of their lord comes to them but they turn away from it .
so he has no friend here today ,
when the heaven is split asunder ,
and no sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord but they turn away from it .
but his lord chose him and made him among the righteous .
allah commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , judge with justice . indeed , allah gives you wisdom . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and nothing prevented men from believing when the guidance has come to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord , except that the precedent of the former peoples will come to them face to face .
we created man from an extract of clay ,
and when our clear revelations are recited to them , the unbelievers say of the truth when it has come to them , “ this is plain magic . ”
then we produced for you gardens of palm trees and grapes for you , for you are abundant fruits and from them you eat .
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art consumed , or thou art of the perishing .
and who is better in religion than he who submits himself to allah , while he is good , and follows the religion of abraham , the upright , and allah took abraham as a friend ?
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
those who say : `` our lord ! we believe , so forgive us our sins and save us from the torment of the fire . ''
he said : my lord ! because thou hast led me to error , i will surely makefair-seeming to them on the earth , and i shall lead them all astray .
and let them not be believers in the least , when it is recited to them , so that you may be told , `` you are the ones who are about to believe in it . '' so their hearts are sealed , and their hearts are sealed .
you will never attain righteousness until you spend of what you love , and whatever you spend , allah knows it .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , that you may be godfearing .
were we fatigued by the first creation ? but they are in doubt about a new creation .
lot was also one of the messengers .
they said : `` are we to follow a mortal from among ourselves ? if we will , we will indeed be in error and madness . ''
so taste , for you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . we have forgotten you . taste the punishment of eternity for what you used to do .
who taught by the pen ,
and he enjoined on his people prayer and almsgiving , and was with his lord pleasing .
and they urge you to hasten the punishment . but if we had not decided to come to them , the punishment would have been struck by them , and they will not be able to come near .
they will say , `` submit ! '' but when they are present with you , they will say , “ when you are in the night and the day , it is you who are in the night , and the day when you are set in the night , and god is the guardian of you . ”
your lord will gather them together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
allah does not forgive that compeers be ascribed to him , but he forgives whom he will , and forgives whom he will . whosoever associates with allah has strayed far away .
he said , “ i complain of my anguish and grief to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
there was not one of them but denied the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , and some of them turn away .
they do not speak before he speaks , and they act by his command .
he was one of our believing servants .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
who set up another god with allah ; so cast him into the severe torment .
and we used to deny the day of judgment .
he said : take hold of it and fear not , we shall restore it to its former state .
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the supreme triumph .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer ,
those are they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they shall be the greatest losers .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens , and he has knowledge of all things .
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
and assuredly we covenanted with adam aforetime , but he forgat , and we found not in him steadiness .
for every nation there is a term . when their term comes , they can not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
you have no authority over my servants except those who follow you , who follow you ,
he said , “ there will you live , and there will you die , and from it you shall be raised . ”
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the all-beneficent , '' they say , `` what is the most merciful ? shall we prostrate ourselves to what you command us ? '' and it increases them in aversion .
and mention in the book abraham . he was a man of truth , a prophet .
for a known calculated term .
say : travel in the land and see what was the end of the rejecters .
and we will surely settle you in the land after them . that is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ''
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe .
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaks over them , that they may be recognized , so that they will not be wronged . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and the defaulters from among the desert-arabs came that permission may be given to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger remained behind . a painful punishment will afflict those of them who disbelieved .
and to the people of the ad , we said , ‘ o my servants ! worship god ! you have no other god other than god . ’ so you will not be able to make a sign in the earth , but you will have a share in the land , and do not be a painful punishment .
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth . he is the wise , the knower .
those who have believed and migrated , and struggled in the cause of god , and who have struggled in their wealth and their lives , and fight for the sake of those who have faith , and they will have a share of their homes . and if they seek to seek the protection of allah , they will have a share of it . and allah is all-seer of what they do .
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and the lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
he will say , `` how many years did you stay on earth ? ''
he said , “ this is my staff ; i lean on it , and i beat down leaves for my sheep , and i have other uses for it . ”
say , ‘ do you worship besides god that which has no power to harm or benefit you ? god is all-hearing and all-knowing . ’
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak , “ did we turn you away from guidance after it had come to you ? no , you were guilty . ”
and you will be three sorts .
and we shall drive the sinners to hell , thirsty .
is it you who sent it down from the clouds , or are we the sender down ?
surely in that are signs , and verily , we are ever testing .
they said , `` woe to us ! indeed , we were taghun
he said : `` you are of those reprieved
againwe bestowed our favour on moses and aaron ,
my lord , give me wisdom and join me with the righteous .
and say , `` glory be to our lord ! the promise of our lord has been fulfilled . ''
they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
he who made the earth a bed for you , and made roads for you therein , so that you may be guided .
but those who deny our signs and treat them with arrogance , are the people of hell , therein dwelling forever .
so we destroyed men strongerthan these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , and have not taken a child , and he has created all things in the balance . and all that is in the balance has created , and all that is in the scale .
you are but a human being like us , and we think you are a liar .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
and we sent not a prophet to any town but we seized its people with adversity and adversity , that haply they may humble themselves .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and leave them a desolate waste ,
and they were unable to stand up , nor were they helped .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; then when the promise of my lord cometh , he will make it level , and the promise of my lord is true .
and grapes and clover ,
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all your family . ''
or do they feel secure that he will be in the ark , and he became a violent tremor ? then he seized you with a strong blast and drowned you . then you will not be questioned about us .
when the women of your women came to you , they will be made known to you , or that they may be told , `` it will be a matter of which you have been given , or that you may be called to account for the cause of god . he has the knowledge of the things you have done , and you will receive the reward of the righteous . god has knowledge of all things . ''
he said : o my people ! is my tribe stronger against you than allah ? and ye have taken him behind your backs , and verily my lord is of what ye do .
o mankind ! if you are in the dead , know that we have created you from dust , and then we have made for you a part of it , and then we have made for you a part of the garden , so that they will be in the midst of it .
say , `` whether you hide what is in your hearts or reveal it , god knows it . he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has power over all things . ''
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above all beings ?
andwhen moses said to his people , `` o my people , you are the people who have been unjust to your people , and you will turn to him . you will have the same faith in him . then , he is the one who accepts repentance , and is merciful . ''
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
devotedand of equal age ,
so say to the people , “ the matter is better than you , and you are the one with whom is the truth . ” say , “ indeed allah is the one who is with me . ” say , “ indeed allah is the one who has been disassociated from all that you associate . ” say , “ indeed he is one of the unknown . ”
those who are bent on denying the truth are the ones who are afraid of your lord . and your lord is the one who is the one who is in the earth . so do not be aware of it , and you will not be aware of it . god knows and whom you do not fear .
if the debtor is in difficulty , then deferment until the time of ease . and if you remitas charity , it would be better for you , if you only knew .
so he prayed to his lord : `` i am vanquished , so help me . ''
your lord has not forsaken you , nor does he hate you .
verily , the muttaqunwill be in the midst of gardens and springs ,
in themwill be two springs gushing forth .
your lord will judge between them by his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
but whoever turns away and disbelieves ,
and the word will be fulfilled against them because of their injustice , and they will not speak .
and when the wordfalls upon the disbelievers , they found their covenant with them , and they did not make them to drive you out of this present , and they have been responsible for the qur'an , and they will not bear them with respect to it , and they will be told , for allah is forgiving , merciful .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger will abide in the fire of hell ? that is the great disgrace .
but as for the sake of allah , there is no one but he . and he does not have any power to fail in his own way , and we have made a covenant with him ; and our lord is the one who has made for us a share in the manner of the truth . and we have made a covenant with him , and we have made for him a share in the manner of the truth .
say : `` is there a guide for you from the right path ? '' say : `` allah has guided the truth . '' is there not a guide for you , or is it that you are guided ?
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without harm . this is another sign ,
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
the people of the city are the ones who are the witnesses , and they come to him with the messenger , and they will not be brought back to him in the cause of god . say , ‘ the fire is the fire . ’ say , ‘ the fire is the fire . ’
to pray to the prayer , to pray to the prayer , which you are promised , for you are the first of those who are righteous , and to be pure to those who are pure . god loves those who seek to be pure .
then the first of them will say to the last of them : you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn .
or lest you should say : `` our fathers ascribed partners to god , '' and we were descendants after them . will you then destroy us for what the falsifiers did ?
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you . if you do so , you will be of the wrongdoers .
he will have no power , and no helper .
and with truth we have sent it down , and with the truth it has descended ; and we have not sent you except as a bearer of good news and a warner .
he said , ‘ this is the parting between me and you . i will inform you of the interpretation of that you could not bear patiently .
as bounty from your lord . that is the great triumph .
except the companions of the right hand .
then , be thou of the end of that which thy lord hath sent forth , and that which thy lord hath ordained unto thee , and in the midst of its fruits it shall be a lamp , and lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who know .
o ye who believe ! know that of the idolaters , that day , will come to pass . and if ye seek to be of those who seek to seek the cause of allah , he would surely have bestowed on you of his bounty , and he is the knower , the wise .
and your lord said to the angels : `` i am going to make a sign for you in the earth . '' they said : `` there is no madness in it , and we do not know what you do . '' and we do not know what you do not know .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the pious .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
follow what has been revealed to you from your lord . there is no god but he , and turn away from the polytheists .
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say , `` tales of the ancients . ''
then it will be said to those who did wrong , “ taste the punishment of eternity . are you requited what you used to earn ? ”
and the heavens and the earth will be created by your own creation , and we have made the mountains to gush forth the mountains , and you are the ships in the land ; and in the land we have made it as a river . and in the land we have made it as a means of rest .
every soul is hostage to what it has earned ,
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you perverted ?
eat of the lawful and good things that we have provided for you , and do not be responsible for his evil deeds , that you may have no power to be able to do so , and that is the matter of what i have been forging .
so we seized him and his hosts , and cast them into the sea . so see how was the end of the unjust .
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and a reminder for the pious .
the lord of the fire and the last day , they will say , ‘ our lord ! give us this letter of this world , and we have given you the good deeds of this . we have given you the good deeds of what we had done . ’ so , , `` taste the punishment of hell , for the wrongdoers will have no helpers . ''
the people of lot denied the warnings .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
he is turned away fromwho is turned away .
on that day they will be tried at the fire ,
and spend in the way of allah , and do not cast yourselves into destruction from your own hands . and do good ; surely allah loves the doers of good .
but those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are destined for hell .
the day of decision is the appointed time for all of them ,
and put your trust in allah ; god suffices as a guardian .
if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide ; and they have no helpers .
and what is that in your right hand , o moses ?
and they say : we are morein wealth and children , and we are not going to be punished .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
say : `` if it had been for the sake of your lord , he would have given me knowledge , if it had been the matter of my lord , if it had come to him , we would have made it a thing . ''
no soul knows what is kept hidden for them of joy as a reward for what they used to do .
when you come to the hypocrites , they will come to you . say , “ do not ask us to be overtaken , and you will not believe . god has the knowledge of all that you do . ” and allah has full knowledge of all that you do .
those who deny the truth say : `` shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen you have become dispersed in disintegration , you will be createdanew ? ''
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
will surely eat from the zaqqum tree
before this , moses came before them by the command of the quran , and the qur'an is a recital of those who have passed away before them . and we have sent it down as a bearer of good news and a warner .
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs ,
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will not be recompensed except for what they used to do .
and we caused the earth to grow in the mountains , so that we may make it light in the mountains , and we have sent down upon them the mountains in the mountains , in order that they may be of the living and the dwellings , and in the midst of the homes ,
and on the night when the two of you are mentioned in the night and you are lawful with you , it is a garment for you , and a garment to you , and for you to be a garment of the night , and you will be made to make a clear part of it to your own , and that you may be given to the right way .
it was said : 'enter paradise ! ' he said , 'ah , would that my people knew
but when they saw it , they said , “ we are lost . ”
we made a covenant with the children of israel , and we sent to them messengers . whenever a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire , some of them they slew ,
indeed the inmates of paradise will be in pastimes .
have you seen the fire which you kindle ?
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be careful ofhim , and every soul is informed of what he has done . for every soul is ever aware of what you do .
we gave moses the book , sodo not be in doubt about the encounter with him , and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
the people of noah denied before them , and the dwellers of rass and the thamud ,
they will say : 'to allah ' say : 'then will you not remember ? '
but those whose scales are light will be those who have lost their souls , in hell , abiding eternally .
indeed , those who believe and do righteous deeds , most gracious will appoint love for them .
joseph , turn away from this , and you , woman , ask forgiveness for your sin . you are indeed the guilty . ''
abiding therein forever . verily , with allah is a great reward .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the all-mighty , the all-knowing ,
and all that they have brought forward to the people of the calf can come out of every time , and do not be responsible for the enemies of allah , so that you will not be able to know the word of allah , and you will not be able to know the least , but you will not be wronged .
they ask you to hasten the evil time before the evil of those who were before them , and because your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the forgiving .
and allah will guide you to the people of the world , and on the part of the two parties . but if they were to be a single man , they are the ones of old , and if the dead were dead , it is for you to be seen , and if the dead were to be brought forth , they will have a share of it , and if the dead were to be brought forth from allah , and he is the knower , the wise .
that it is the speech of a noble messenger .
and who is the creation of creation ? then he will bring forth a new creation from the earth , and who will create your own sustenance from the earth , and will give you a share of it ? say : `` bring you it , if you are truthful . ''
verily he reflected and guessed ,
they will come to pass at their wives , and the day of four months , and wait for the time of four months . then , when the time of the time of the time of the time , are recited to them , are waiting for it . god is aware of what you do .
to allah prostrates whoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the mornings and the evenings .
does he not know that when what is in the graves is overthrown ,
and you will not , unless allah wills , the lord of the worlds .
this is what you were promised , for every returnerand penitent .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , their only argument is to say : 'bring our fathers back to us if you are truthful . '
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have earned , so that they may have a share of what they have done , so that they may return .
say : `` o my lord ! never will you make my way to be of those given to your footsteps , if you should be of those who have rejected the truth . '' but most of you will not be punished .
he said , “ yes , and you will then be among the near-stationed . ”
and satan let them turn away from you , and the tree of the tree , so that they will be the leaves of the leaves , and the leaves will come forth from it . he said , “ did i not give you a tree , so that you would have been sent down to me ? ”
and they disputed about me , and they dispute with me , and you are the followers of the right path . my lord is the knower of all things . will you not take heed ?
they will say , `` glory be to you ! you are our benefactor not them . nay , but they worshipped the jinn . ''
o you who believe ! take your precautions , then go forth in small groups or go forth all together .
and the believers will not be averse to the believers , nor will the believers have their protector . and whoever does what is true , it is only for allah to whom you have no option . and to allah you will be declared . and to allah you will be called to account .
and verily , from the news of ibrahim , the people of abraham , and the best of those who try to turn their backs to him , and whoever turns away from the path of allah , he will have fear of the day of judgment . and whoever turns away from the way of allah , he is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
but my call added only to their flight .
those who deny the truth say : `` in no way are the ones who have been sent before the lord of this quran , '' they will say , `` if what you say is true , we would say , `` if you are true . ''
then he frowned and scowled ,
when those who disbelieve see you , they do not take you except as a mockery . he is the one who talks of your gods , and they are disbelievers in the mention of the most gracious .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
they say : `` why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? '' have not a sign come to them in the former books ?
`` o reassured soul ,
when the sun is rolled up .
and when the wordfalls upon the disbelievers , they found their covenant with them , and they did not make them to drive you out of this present , and they have been responsible for the qur'an , and they will not bear them with respect to it , and they will be told , for allah is forgiving , merciful .
and when the messengers areappointed a time ,
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
the fire , they will be exposed to it in the morning and the evening , and on the day when the hour will come , pharaoh 's clan will enter the severest punishment .
the unbelievers , which none can avert ,
striking sparks of fire ,
then he retreated and waxed proud ,
o prophet ! fear allah and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites . lo ! allah is ever knowing , wise .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
they will come to pass at their wives , and the day of four months , and wait for the time of four months . then , when the time of the time of the time of the time , are recited to them , are waiting for it . god is aware of what you do .
and we have made it a garment for their hearts , and we have made it clear to them in their hearts , so that it may be a sign for them , that they may come back to you , until they come to thee , but they say : naught is this but fables of the ancients .
except if god wills , and remember your lord when you forget , and say , “ perhaps my lord will guide me to a nearer course than this . ”
they are the ones who are the ones who are in the way of god , and they say : `` those who are arrogant are in the company of those who are arrogant , '' they said , `` if allah had not guided us , we will certainly guide you . '' so we have no guidance to you , and we have no way .
muhammad is no more than a messenger . had there been before him a messenger , you will turn on before him . whoever turns away from the way of god will not harm him . and allah will reward the appreciative .
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not be able to hide anything from allah .
a twisted rope of palm-leaf fibre round herneck !
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , then indeed he is oft forgiving to those who repent .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
they said , “ by allah , we swear to one another in the night , and the family of his family – then we will say to his heir , ‘ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we will be truthful . ’
and do not be like the like of your women , the like of it , and do not bring it forth , and you will have the covenant with it , and you will have a group of them in the least , lest a group of you may take a small way in it , and allah will make you clear for what you used to do .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and a fair resort .
and when he came to it , he was called from the right side of the valley in the blessed spot from the tree : 'moses , i am allah , the lord of the worlds .
when you come to the hypocrites , they will come to you . say , “ do not ask us to be overtaken , and you will not believe . god has the knowledge of all that you do . ” and allah has full knowledge of all that you do .
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign . ” he said , “ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights . ”
say to those who believethey forgive those who do not expect the days of allah , that he may reward a people for what they used to earn .
so worship what you worship besides him . say , “ the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . that is the clear loss . ”
therein fruits , and date-palms with sheaths ,
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you will have whatever you judge ? '
have they not reflected in their minds ? god created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them for a genuine purpose . yet many people are disbelievers in the meeting with their lord .
by those who bring down the reminder ,
they will have no food except bitter thorn ,
no nation can anticipate their term , nor can they delay it .
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill she returns like the old twig .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
and say thou : my lord ! let me enter with a goodly entrance , and give me a goodly place , and grant me from thee a mighty authority .
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
my people ! i ask of you no wage for this . my reward is only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
and do not call upon the messenger as you called one another . god knows those who are willing to keep away from their own souls , and to keep away from the evil things of the painful punishment .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among the arraigned .
and when the heaven is rent asunder ,
say : `` no one can protect me from allah , nor can i find any refuge besides him .
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion of allah . but if they desist , allah is indeed seer of what they do .
and we would have given them from us a great reward .
and allah 's is the way of those who believe , and in the darkness of the valley , it will cause them to go forth from darkness , and they will go into the light of the light , and they will be the inmates of the light , and they will be the inmates of the fire , and they will remain in it .
my wealth has not availed me .
and if you ask them , `` who created the heavens and the earth ? '' they will surely say , `` the all-mighty , the all-knowing created them . ''
some faces on that day will be resplendent ,
and purify your clothes ,
they say : `` spend of those who spend their wealth in the messenger of god , '' so that they may be a source of access to allah . and all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to allah , but they are in the midst of the worlds .
those who disbelieve think that they will not be raised . say , “ yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ”
and remember the name of your lord , and who has set up a witness against him , and he has set up a witness against the witnesses : `` you have no god . '' .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you dispute .
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . indeed , god is compassionate and merciful .
when misfortune touches men , they cry to their lord , turning to him in repentance . then when he gives them a taste of his mercy , some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
as for the thief , male and female , cut off the hands of thieves , as a recompense for what they have earned , and a punishment is exemplary from allah . allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
they will say , `` submit ! '' but when they are present with you , they will say , “ when you are in the night and the day , it is you who are in the night , and the day when you are set in the night , and god is the guardian of you . ”
do you have the fear of those who have gone before , before that , which do good ? then , when you have no one , then , when you have not done a thing , do good , and give zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
so turn away from them for a while .
and when they are flung into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will call for death therein .
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
and on the day when he shall be made to compensate them , and then he will be in hell , and then it will be said , “ this is what you used to do . ” and it will be said to them , “ this is what you used to do . ”
indeed , we shall cast upon you a weighty word .
but they have no knowledge of it . they follow nothing but surmise , and surmise avails nothing against truth .
they ask you about the mountains . say : 'my lord will scatter them as ashes
and we divided them into communities in the earth ; some of them are righteous , and some of them are otherwise , and we tested them with good things and misfortunes , so that they may return .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness , and a great reward .
o my father ! verily i fear lest a torment from the beneficent afflict thee , and thou become a friend of the devil .
allah has decreed : `` verily , i will prevail , and my messengers . '' verily , allah is strong , almighty .
those who took the calf , will be afflicted by the wrath of their lord and abasement in this life . thus do we reward those who invent lies .
and put thy trust in the mighty , the merciful ,
we have sent you with the truth , as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
the people of the book were given to be presented in a part of the book , and presented it in the book . it is the word of a human culture , and the book is revealed to the record of the book , and they will say , “ allah knows all that is hidden . ”
then we shall narrate unto themwith knowledge , and we were not absent .
and when a trade is a little , or a diversion , then it is , whether you are about to be told , `` it is the same for the believers . '' say , `` it is better for the believers . god is the best of providers . ''
a recompense for what they used to do .
they said , “ allah has the power to take down his hands , and it is made to swallow up them , and they will have the like of it . in fact , they are the ones who are in the same manner . and god does not love the mischief-makers in the land . and allah does not love the mischief-makers in the land . ” and allah does not love the mischief-makers in the land . and allah does not love the mischief-makers .
worship allah , and worship not , nor associate with him any partners , and the relatives and the pagan . god does not love the proud and the people of the vainglorious . indeed , allah does not like the arrogant .
and set not up with allah another god . i am a plain warner to you from him .
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have earned , so that they may have a share of what they have done , so that they may return .
aaron had already told them before , `` o my people , you are being tested by it . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my order . ''
thus we requited them because they disbelieved . and do werepay except the ungrateful ?
as for the boat , it belonged to poor men working in the sea , and i wished that i wished to damage it .
say , `` the angel of death who has been given charge of you will cause you to die and then to your lord you will be returned . ''
and by the night when it retreats
and they say : become jews or nazarenes , and ye will be guided . say thou : aye ! the religion of ibrahim , the upright , and he was not of the associators .
let not satan misdirect you . he is your open enemy .
so he has no friend here today ,
and the heaven will crack ; so on that day it will be frail .
who are heedless in the immersion .
and thus do we try our vision , and we raised them up in order that he may say : `` unless your lord is longer than a day . '' and the one of you said , `` it is only for your lord who will give you a part of the day . '' so the one of you said , `` this is what your lord has ordained for you , and you will have no share . ''
nor shade and heat of sunshine .
those who fear their lord in secret and who are apprehensive of the hour .
and we did not send before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked in the markets ; and we have made some of you a trial for others . will you then be patient ?
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them ,
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a great punishment would have seized you for what you ventured into .
who is it that will lend to allah a good loan , and he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward ?
your god is only god . there is no god but he . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
say , “ my lord is the command of justice ; and worship the prayer of your prayer , and keep your private obligations , and keep your hearts away from the sacred mosque ; and to him is your hearts , and to him you will be returned . ”
god is the only lord and there is no god except him , the living and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . he is the only lord , and he is the exalted in might , the supreme . he is the only lord , and he is the exalted in might , the most great .
he said : my lord ! expand for me my breast .
that allah may acquit them of the worst of what they did , and reward them for the best of what they used to do .
has he knowledge of the unseen , so that he sees ?
we called out to him , `` o abraham ,
and we gave david solomon . how excellent a servant he was ! he was certainly penitent .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , and worst indeed is that destination .
nay , each one of them desires to be given scrolls unrolled .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males and females , and he grants sons to whomever he wills .
by the dipersing winds that disperse .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . when he decrees a thing , he only says to it , `` be , '' and it is .
and we sent him to a hundred thousand , or more ,
they said , `` by allah , you know that we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves . ''
and the apostle of those whom we have given them are other than the other , and of them are some who have passed away with others . and if allah willed , we could have made for them a party of them , and if allah willed , we could have made whatever he wills . and if allah willed , he would have made things clear .
then , be thou of the end of that which thy lord hath sent forth , and that which thy lord hath ordained unto thee , and in the midst of its fruits it shall be a lamp , and lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who know .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they will have no helpers .
and we caused to grow over him a gourd vine .
the indubitable event !
go to pharaoh ; he has indeed rebelled .
so judge between me and them , and deliver me and the believers with me . ''
so we heard his prayer and removed the affliction that was with him , and we gave him his family , as a mercy from us , and a reminder for the worshippers .
return to your lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing .
this is the guidance of allah , that he guides whom he will of his servants . if they associated others with allah in his divinity , they would have been annulled .
the messenger 's duty is only to convey the message . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
from whomsoever it is averted on that day , he will have mercy on him . that is the clear triumph .
but they rejected it , so they will come to know .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
those who reject the book and what we sent with our messengers , they will soon come to know .
he created man from a drop offluid , and behold , he is an open contender !
and on the day when the enemies of allah will be gathered to the fire , and they will be formed into groups .
what , when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we be raised again ?
and your lord has mercy on them , and mercy on you , if you are to be faithful , then if you turn back , we would have hastened to you , but if you turn back , we will surely mete out to you the chastisement of the unbelievers .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is a great sin .
and by those who press forward ,
give glad tidings to the hypocrites that for them there is a painful punishment .
thus does we reveal to you an arabic quran , so that you may be able to be able to be able to gather them to the day of resurrection , and to be a group of them to enter the garden , and to hell they will be presented .
and allah will guide you to the people of the world , and on the part of the two parties . but if they were to be a single man , they are the ones of old , and if the dead were dead , it is for you to be seen , and if the dead were to be brought forth , they will have a share of it , and if the dead were to be brought forth from allah , and he is the knower , the wise .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
will we then ignore you because you are a people transgressing beyond bounds ?
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and allah encompasses all things .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them in whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs . will they not then hear ?
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide therein .
who have made the quran into shreds .
and let not those who disbelieve think that our respite is for them . we give them respite for their good deeds , so that they may increase a humiliating chastisement .
allah has given the example of a slave . and we have made for him of his good deeds a good provision , and he is the one who knows all that is before them . and most of them do not know .
and those who disbelieve say : thou art not a messenger . say thou : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you , and he who hath knowledge of the book .
we recite to you some of the news of moses and pharaoh for a people who believe .
god has heard the words of her who pleads with you about her husband and complains to allah . god hears your conversation . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
nor any food except filth from the washing of wounds ,
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed in it ; and whoever does not judge by what allah has sent down , they are the transgressors .
it is from solomon , and it is from solomon , the most gracious , the most merciful .
we have honored the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above many of our creatures .
and glorify him during the night and after theprostrations .
that allah may acquit them of the worst of what they did , and reward them for the best of what they used to do .
those who believe , and those who are jews and those who are jews , are the angels , the angels , and the hearts of those who were with them . god will judge between them on the day of resurrection . god is witness over all things .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what he has given you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
do not groan today . you will not be helped by us .
the fruits whereoflow and near .
and when the messengers came to them , they will think that they are a liar . and that is in the time that they are the ones who are in the end . and we will take revenge on him . and none will be able to take vengeance on us .
so when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , “ this is nothing but fabricated magic , and we never heard of this among our forefathers . ”
but allah raised him up to himself , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
as for those who oppose allah and his messenger , and disgrace them , and allah will disgrace them , as if they were before them , and for those who disbelieve , we have made a sign for those who reject faith .
except those on whom your lord has mercy . for that he created them , and the word of your lord has been fulfilled . i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . '
then after him we sent messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had denied before . thus we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
and the lord of abraham and abraham , and he has enjoined upon them a good course , and he said : `` i have been sent to be a messenger . '' he said : `` i have been sent to the wrong-doers , and said : `` i have been sent to the wrong-doers . ''
he is only a man who invents a lie against allah , and we are not going to believe in him .
he said : `` did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me ? ''
and when allah said to them : `` o jesus , son of mary ! do you say that i am one of the two gods ? '' he said , `` glory be to me ! indeed , you are the knower of the innermost of the chests ! ''
and of his signs is that he created for you mates from yourselves that you may find repose in them , and he has set between you affection and mercy . surely in that are signs for a people who reflect .
nor do you urge one another to feed the poor ,
those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from their lord , and those are the guided ones .
and when a party of them said , “ why do you admonish a people whom god will destroy or mete out a severe punishment ? ” they said , “ to your lord , and that perhaps they may fear allah . ”
our lord ! surely we have heard the day of judgment , and we called us to believe in your lord , and we have said , `` our lord ! forgive us , our lord , and make us as a prey to us . '' and we shall not be punished .
and say , `` glory be to our lord ! the promise of our lord has been fulfilled . ''
those who fulfill the covenant of allah and do not break their pledge ,
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and we give drink of cattle and men as drink .
and inquire of the town where we were , and the caravan in which we came , and indeed we are truthful .
and nuh said : my lord ! leave not of the disbelievers a single dweller on earth .
and the mountains , how they are erected ?
he it is who accepts repentance from his servants and pardons evil deeds . he knows what you do .
and allah gives the glory to the people , as well as the people of the world , and the like of it . that is what they do , and that is what is in the earth . that is what is in the earth , and allah knows all things .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have wrought . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick . and a magician will not succeed . ’
then he made his progeny from an extract of an insignificant fluid .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a compact structure .
he said , “ what my lord has given me is better ; therefore help me with strength , i will set between you and them a barrier . ”
among the two people are the two groups that they will come to you in a way of god . and the disbelievers are two of them , and the disbelievers are two in the presence of god . indeed , in this is a sign for those who are in a clear way .
it is we who have revealed the qur'an to you in stages .
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds ,
he said : `` he is the one who is your only companion . i am the one who is with you , and by allah 's command . if i am commanded , i will certainly be called to account . '' and if i am of you , the servants of god , they will be denied .
destroying everything by the command of its lord . so they became nothing to be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty people .
on the day when he will call to them and say : `` where are my 'partners ' ? whom you imagined ? ''
o abraham ! leave away from this . the decree of your lord has come to pass , and there is a torment for them that can not be turned back .
so whoever wills may remember it .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . surely his seizure is painful , severe .
those whom they call upon , seek the means of access to their lord . they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
we have made the quran easy to understand , so is there any that will remember ?
how many a town have we destroyed while it was unjust , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty palace !
lot was also one of the messengers .
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and we give drink of cattle and men as drink .
to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is just as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . god has power over all things .
and the mountains as pegs ?
and that which he has created for you in the earth of diverse hues . surely in that is a sign for people who remember .
he said , “ there will you live , and there will you die , and from it you shall be raised . ”
they ask you about the hour , when it will berth .
and tell them , o dear prophet , for they have been in the remembrance of the messengers , and we shall relate to you what you have heart . in fact , it is in truth to the believers .
he it is who accepts repentance from his servants and pardons evil deeds . he knows what you do .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
but the people divided themselves into sects , each rejoicing in what it has .
he said : we shall see whether thou hast spoken the truth or whether thou art of the liars .
and every one of them has ranks according to what they have done , so that god may reward them for their deeds .
remember , when your lord revealed to the angels , `` indeed , i am your protector . so fear you , for you will have the fear of the believers , and you will be among those who deny the truth , and you will be among the doomed . ''
surely those who turn their backsafter guidance has been shown to them , satan has embellished their fancies and busied them up with false hopes .
and indeed we know that they say , ‘ it is only a human being who teaches him . ’ the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , and this is clear arabic .
o you who believe ! be conscious of the fire , and be wary of the fire , and it is the fire of hell , and the angels will be secure , and the angels will not be secure from that which they have been commanded .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
and the sorcerers fell down prostrate ,
god explains the verses to you . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
those who are the angels who are with the lord of the throne , are the ones who are its expanders and the day of judgment , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness of their lord ; and they are of those who repent .
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . none remembers but those who turn to him .
whoever obeys allah and the messenger , they are with those whom allah has favored , the prophets , the truthful , the martyrs and the righteous , and excellent companions are they !
and whoever avenges himself after he has been wronged - there is no blame upon them .
when the wild beasts are herded together ,
he said : `` did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me ? ''
and with them will be maidens with large , eyes ,
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . the gods whom they called upon besides allah will not help them , when the command of your lord came .
and assuredly we sent unto them apostles before thee , and unto their people there are signs for them . but they believed in it , so we took vengeance on those who were sinners , and we took him up for the believers .
and allah created the heavens and the earth with truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest ; and he has made the day a revival .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
he said , “ my lord , my people have denied me .
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
o prophet ! say to your wives , `` if you desire the life of this world and its glitter , come , i will give you a provision and release you in a handsome manner .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
theheart lied notwhat hesaw .
they see theindeed as a far-off .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
then , after it , are turned away , and have been like a solid thing , it will come out of it , and some of them are the same . some of them will be told , `` god is not heedless of what you do . ''
those to whom we gave the book before this believe in it .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will be better in their abode and a better resting place .
before them is hell , and that which they have earned will not avail them at all , nor those whom they took for patrons besides allah . theirs will be a great torment .
abraham was not a jew nor a christian ; but he was a muslim , and he was not of the polytheists .
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
he admits whomever he wishes into his mercy ; and the wrongdoers have prepared for them a painful punishment .
and we have built above you seven strong ,
and those in whose wealth there is a known right ,
know that allah is severe in retribution , and that allah is forgiving , merciful .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth , like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
they denied and followed their own desires ; and every matter has its appointed time .
then he went back to his people , and will be preoccupied with grief . he said : o my people ! is your lord promised to the right promise , or that ye should not have been sent down upon me a thing from your lord ?
if you turn away , i have no reward from you . my reward lies only with allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the pious .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their homes .
it is not the same for them , that which we have the same to you , and our fathers , and our fathers are not but a fabricator . and allah has not given them a sign , for they have no doubt .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and they will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
the warnings came to the people of pharaoh .
our lord ! take us out of this ; then if we return , we will indeed be unjust . '
say , “ bring the proof of the witness that they testify to the witness that god has spoken the truth . and if you give them witness to our signs , do not follow those who do not believe in our signs , and do not follow the people who do not believe in our signs . ”
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and gave him glad tidings of a boy knowing .
and the good deed and the evil deed are not equal ; repelwith that which is better , and you will see that he will be as a bosom friend .
as for the disbelievers , they were not like that of you , that they were stronger in valour than you , and more of your children . but you were wont to make a part of them in the seatbelt . as for those you seek to make a slip in the way of god , as if they were to deceive you , and they will be in the lurch .
it is he who has spread out the earth for you , and made the sky a resting-place for you . and we have made a spring to gush forth from the sky , so that you may have a share of the sky , so that you may have a share of it .
or have a single one of them who has passed away from the cities which has passed away ? and he said , “ what is the matter with them ? ” and he said , “ what is the matter with you , that we might bring you a kingdom ? ” and he said , “ this is what god has power to do all things . ” and then , when you met it , see that allah has power over all things .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
those who believe , and those who are jews and those who are jews , are the angels , the angels , and the hearts of those who were with them . god will judge between them on the day of resurrection . god is witness over all things .
he said : this is a straight path .
and all that they have brought forward to the people of the calf can come out of every time , and do not be responsible for the enemies of allah , so that you will not be able to know the word of allah , and you will not be able to know the least , but you will not be wronged .
they said : glory be to our lord ! verily we have been wrong-doers .
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
when the earth is shaken with ashaking ,
and those who believe in the signs of their lord ,
those who are patient and steadfast in their prayers and pay the obligatory charity , and spend out of what we have provided for them , and they will have their own souls , and their hearts are sealed .
o you who believe ! do not be a people other than your own people , but do not turn your backs on them . indeed , they are about to convey the truth , and what is in their hearts will be made visible to you , if you are devoid of sense .
and when it is said to them , 'come come to what allah has revealed , ' they will say : `` this is what our fathers have been doing . '' is it not a sign , if it is to us that they should be told , `` this is what our fathers have been doing ? ''
and my breast will tighten and my tongue will not be fluent , so send for aaron .
and cushions ranged
so have we not travelled on the earth , so that they might be able to see them before these , and were stronger in power than it , and we made them more powerful than them , and they were not wronged .
he said , “ my lord , i have called my people night and day
do not yield to any contemptible swearer ,
o mankind ! there has come to you an admonition from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts and guidance and mercy for the believers .
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
and it is the record of every soul , but the guilty are going to be in their hearts . and the hearts of those whose hearts are wasted , and they will say : `` woe to us ! indeed , your lord does not wrong , nor do you .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
then he followed a road
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but the reminderthat haply theymay be godfearing .
it is he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth . he created the truth and the truth , and the day when the trumpet is sounded , and the day when the trumpet is sounded , he is the knower , the knower .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees what you do .
say , `` no one in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah , and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected . ''
striking sparks of fire ,
he inspected the birds and said : `` why is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
they used to sleep but little by night ,
on them will be garments of green silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them a pure drink .
on the day of resurrection , if any one of you is secure , then let it be in a state of play in it , and that it may be the same for them in the same manner that it may be better for them , if only they should be better in respect of it , if only they should be rewarded , if it is better .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
on the day when the hour will come , they will be separated into categories .
and they say : we are morein wealth and children , and we are not going to be punished .
they said , “ build a pyre for him and throw him into the blazing fire . ”
and we have made for them a people who make their past and their actions seem decorous to them , and the word has been realized against them , and the word of jinn is fulfilled before them .
indeed , they have been given the permission of god . indeed , it was a sign to you , but you were arrogant . ''
they have sold the revelations of allah for a small price , and prevented people from his way . evil indeed is what they do .
but theysplit their affair between them , all will return to us .
she said : alas for me ! shall i bear a child , and my husband is advanced in years ! this is a strange thing !
say , `` tell me , if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the wrongdoers ? ''
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved superciliously and they were a tyrannical people .
have they contrived some scheme ? we are devising .
have we not expanded thee thy breast ?
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion against the all-beneficent .
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
and cite for them the parable of two men . we provided two of them with two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with date palms , and placed between them tillage .
allah , there is no god but he . his are the most beautiful names .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and do not follow any protector other than him . little do you remember .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ,
round about them willyouths of perpetual ,
and satan let them turn away from you , and the tree of the tree , so that they will be the leaves of the leaves , and the leaves will come forth from it . he said , “ did i not give you a tree , so that you would have been sent down to me ? ”
his wealth will not avail him , neither what he has gained .
those who reject the book and what we sent with our messengers , they will soon come to know .
it was said : `` enter the garden , '' and she saw it , and he said : my lord ! surely this is the parting according to that which is in the womb of the pit . '
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways ,
and when they commit a fahisha , they say : we found our fathers doing it , and allah hath enjoined it on us . say thou : verily allah enjoineth not indecency . say thou : allah loveth not what ye do not know .
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we shall inform them of what they did . god knows all that is in the breasts .
whatever good befalls you is from allah , and whatever evil happens to you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger , and allah suffices as a witness .
and the seven heavens and the earth , and all that is in them , and glorify him , and it is not for him to glorify him . he is the most disputatious of things .
or do they believe in the night , prostrate yourselves before the life of the world , and is the recompense of the hereafter ? the reward of those who do not know .
indeed , those who disbelieve and do wrong , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
and we shall proceed to what they did , and will make it as dust wind-scattered .
and they say : fables of the ancients which he hath written down , and they are dictated unto him morning and evening .
o my people ! this is the she-camel of allah , a sign for you ; so let her graze on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest you may be near .
but the people divided themselves into sects , each rejoicing in what it has .
they ask you to be asked of what it gives you . say , “ whatever good you may spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; and for you is the thing you do not know . ”
and who forsaketh the religion of ibrahim except one who befooleth himself ? verily we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he shall be among the righteous .
then fasten him with a chain , seventy cubits long .
o you who believe ! be the waters of water , and the cattle , and the cattle , for you to be accepted from allah . it is the same for you , and the same , so that it may be the same for them . so fear allah , and keep your duty to him , and be successful .
by the day when it reveals it
to pray to the prayer , to pray to the prayer , which you are promised , for you are the first of those who are righteous , and to be pure to those who are pure . god loves those who seek to be pure .
say : `` if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a tremendous day . ''
the parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is that of a grain of corn which groweth seven ears , in every ear a hundred grains . allah will provide for whom he will , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
the hypocrites will have the faith of the believers . `` did we not believe in you ? '' but they have said , `` it is you who have been waiting for it . '' but you have been told , `` it was you who have been waiting for it , and you have been told to be of those who were told . '' and you were told , `` it was the matter of allah , who has been abandoned to you , and it was the same to them . ''
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in doubt about it .
o wives of the prophet , be gracious , then , are the ones with which you are the first , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and give regular charity ; and give zakat , and give the alms , for god 's noble messengers .
he will not be questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled , ?
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
thus . and we bequeathed them upon another people .
and mention in the book moses . he was chosen and he was a messenger , a prophet .
moses said to them : `` throw whatever you intend to throw . ''
our lord ! make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous and their fathers , their wives , and their offspring . verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
o you who believe ! do not be a people other than your own people , but do not turn your backs on them . indeed , they are about to convey the truth , and what is in their hearts will be made visible to you , if you are devoid of sense .
and when we settled for abraham the site of the house , and do not ascribe any partner to me , and purify my house for those who circle around it , and those who bow and prostrate .
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
worship none except allah . i fear for you the punishment of a painful day . ''
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book , that haply they may be guided .
and with them will be virgins of refraining looks and of equal age .
bad women are for vile men , and vile men are for vile women ; and good men are for good men , and good men are for good men , and for them is forgiveness , and a generous provision .
say , `` no one in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah , and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected . ''
and in the heaven is your sustenance , and what you are promised .
o mankind ! you are in need of allah , and allah is the self-sufficient , the praiseworthy .
then those who used to meet the evil of those who had said , `` woe to the like of it ! '' but allah gives provision to whom he will , and tightens it . how terrible is the cause of allah for whom he will , and the unbelievers will not be successful .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
and your lord inspired the bee : `` make your homes in the mountains and in the trees , and in what they erect .
the beneficent , the merciful ,
and couldst thou see when they shall be terrified , when they shall not escape , and they shall be seized from a place nigh .
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
so the angels took him up when he saw the prayer , and that allah gives you good news to whom he pleases , and he is a noble messenger , and a noble messenger , a great messenger .
do not follow the path of god , and do not associate anything with him . and whoever ascribes partners to god is like a partner .
and raiseand scatter them around ,
indeed , it is a reminder for the righteous .
and a tongue of the book is only for the people of the book , except for the best of those who have done wrong , and they have been wronged before , and we have been commanded , and we are only one of those who submit .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take a way to his lord .
the king of mankind .
had we wished to take a pastime , we could have taken it from ourselves , had we wanted .
we shall provide them with fruit and meat as they desire .
the egyptians asked them , `` what is the matter with you if you are liars ? ''
so we destroyed men strongerthan these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
and women past child-bearing who have no hope of marriage , it is no sin for them , if they discard theirclothing in their cloaks , without displaying their adornment . but if they cease , it is better for them . allah is hearing , knowing .
only those who believe in allah and the last day believe in allah and the last day , pay the obligatory charity , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and do not be among the guided .
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness ; and he has prepared for the unbelievers a painful punishment .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he formed you and gave you good shapes ; and to him is the return .
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no glad tidings for the sinners on that day , and they will say , “ a protective refuge . ”
he raised its vault high and proportioned it .
that we might make it a reminder for you and that retaining ears may retain it .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail on it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for exemption from their possessions and their lives , and allah knows the pious and devout .
say to those who do not believe , `` act according to your condition . we too are acting .
except for an old woman among those who remained behind .
verily , those who believe and do good works , allah will admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow ; and those who disbelieve will eat as cattle eat . and the fire will be their abode .
as for those who believe and do good works , we tax not any soul beyond its scope , and those are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
say : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that he may take the way to his lord . ''
and the people of the heights will call to men whom they recognize by their marks , saying , “ your hoardings did not avail you , nor did your arrogance . ”
and moses said , `` if you and all those who are on the earth and all those who are in the earth , surely god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy . ''
and we did not send before you except men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
so do not oppress the orphan ,
so allah made them taste degradation in the life of the world , and the punishment of the hereafter will be greater if they but knew .
just as the word of their own hands have been given , for the sake of a people who have been upright to the truth , and have been made to follow the religion of allah , so that they will not be able to do so , and they will be the liars .
or he wrecks them for what they earned , and he pardons much .
is it not sufficient for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? indeed in this is mercy and a reminder for people who believe .
there is no animal on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
he said : set me over the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a keeper knowing .
if only we could return , we would be among the believers .
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no harm , when they are sincere to allah and his messenger , and there is no way for the doers of good . god is forgiving and merciful .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book , they will have the curse of god and cursed by the cursers ,
o my father ! serve not satan ; verily satan is a rebel against the beneficent allah .
he causes the night to enter into the day and makes the day to enter into the night , and the sun and the moon . each of the people of the sun and the moon are set in motion . and the sun and the moon are made to set up for a certain term .
and what has been revealed to you from the quran , and establish prayer , and keep up prayer from the evil of indecency . indeed , the prayer is of all that you do . god is aware of all that you do .
woe to every guilty impostor
and stop them , for they will be questioned .
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him ? ”
then we produced for you gardens of palm trees and grapes for you , for you are abundant fruits and from them you eat .
thusand we caused the children of israel to inherit them .
and when they are flung into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will call for death therein .
thus did we show abraham the dominions of the heavens and the earth , that he might be among the certain .
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys god and his messenger has certainly achieved a great success .
and there will be a messenger among them who were true to the believers , and were you to strike them , other than allah , and the companions of the book ; and those are the ones who are in the book . and you are the righteous book .
but when he saw their hands not reaching to it , he was suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , `` do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot . ''
by the heaven with its impregnable castles ;
we sent noah to his people , and he said , ‘ o my people ! worship god ! you have no god other than he . you will have a humiliating punishment . ’
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and allah is not unjust to his servants .
the lord of the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , the most gracious , the most merciful .
there is no blame on the blind or the lame , nor the sick . he who obeys god and his messenger will be admitted to gardens with streams running in them . whoever turns away from god and his messenger will punish him with a painful punishment .
and indeed it is the truth of certainty .
allah has created for you all that has been created for you and in the mountains , and it is in the mountains , and it has made for you a light , and in order that you may have a portion of them , and in order that your lord may light for you .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
do you not see that god sends down water from the sky , and the earth becomes green ? god is kind and aware .
when moses said to his family : `` i have seen a fire . i will bring you some news from it , or bring you a burning brand that you may warm yourselves . ''
when the magicians came , moses said to them : 'cast down what you have to cast . '
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . he who believes in his lord will fear neither paltriness nor vileness .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
you are surprised for them in the life of this world . but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
on the day when we shall call every people with their leader . whoever is given his record in his right hand will read their record , and they will not be wronged a whit .
then an entertainment of boiling water .
nay , but they say the like of what the ancients said .
they had no other reason for them except that they believed in allah , the almighty , the praised ,
except for an old woman among those who remained behind .
and those who are observant of the remembrance of allah , do not cross the limits of the heavens or the earth , and you are the originator of the heavens and the earth . we have made you secure from the punishment of the fire , and be free of the fire .
and indeed it is a reminder to you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
and they say : had the compassionate willed we would not have worshipped them . they have no knowledge of that . they are only guessing .
say , “ god is the owner of all things , and to whom you please , and you please whomever you please , and you may give to whomever you please , and you are all able to do all things . ”
and a sign for them is the night ; we strip it from the day , and they are in darkness .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you dispute .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
and we never destroyed any town but it had warners
and he has created you from dust , then from a drop of fluid , then , from a drop of liquid , and it is not equal to him . he is not a forgetter ’ but there is not a single thing but he is with him . and he is not a forgetter
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
when the heaven is cleft asunder ,
then the first of them will say to the last of them : you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn .
what ! when we are dead and have become dust ? that is afarreturn .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world ; but the good deeds which endure are better with your lord , and better for expectation .
or have you a book wherein you study ?
and certainly we tried solomon , and placed on his throne abody . then he repented .
say : `` woe to us ! '' so take away from your wife , and do not approach them , and do not make them to be pure . when they are innocent , allah has enjoined on those who are upright .
o you who believe ! shall i guide you to a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment ?
i will guide you to your lord , so that you should fear him '
then he turned to his household and brought a fatted calf ,
and they say : o thou unto whom the remembrance is sent down , verily thou art possessed !
and in the heaven is your sustenance , and what you are promised .
on that day they will see the evening of the sun and the poor , and the eyes of the sun and the women of the sun , and you will see the like of it . indeed , the punishment of allah is severe .
who believe in what has been sent down to you and what was revealed before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
those who do not rejoice in the presence of the angels when they are wronged , they will say , `` we have not done anything . '' they will say , `` we did not know anything of this . indeed , allah knows what you did . ''
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
woe on that day to the deniers .
so set your face to the right religion , before there comes from allah a day which can not be averted . on that day people shall be divided .
we gave moses nine clear signs . ask the children of israel : when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , `` moses , i think that you are bewitched . ''
when those who disbelieve see you , they do not take you except as a mockery . he is the one who talks of your gods , and they are disbelievers in the mention of the most gracious .
so the earthquake seized them , and they became motionless bodies in their homes .
your lord would never destroy the villages unjustly , while their inhabitants are righteous .
therein they shall have whatever they desire , abiding eternally . that is a promise incumbent on your lord .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
verily this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him ,
it is not for a prophet to take captives until he has thoroughly subdued the land . you want the gains of this world , while allah desires the hereafter , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
o my people , give full measure and weight in justice , and do not diminish the goods of the people , and do not spread corruption in the land .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against allah . they are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
blessed be the name of your lord , the lord of glory and honor !
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is all-thankful , all-clement ,
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs .
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
so watch for the day when the sky will bring a visible smoke .
and whoever does good deeds , whether male or female , and is a believer , will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
except the chosen servants of allah .
when he said to him , “ i am a man of mine ; i have seen you , so what you did , i have seen my refuge , just as you have been commanded . ” then , if allah had decided to be patient , you would have been patient .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and allah encompasses all things .
and those who , when wronged , defend themselves .
when they were at the time of the time , they will be set in front of you , or to be with you , or do they speak to them , and they will be told , `` this is the matter of those who are in the matter of god ; and the one of the people who are righteous will be in the matter of god . god will make it clear for the righteous .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , they will not speak except one whom the most merciful permits , and he will speak to him honourable words .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
he said : if thou choosest a god other than me , i will surely place thee among the prisoners .
indeed the inmates of paradise will be in pastimes .
that is because allah has sent down the book with the truth , and those who differ about the book are in extreme dissension .
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
give full measure when you measure , and weigh with accurate scales . that is better and fairer in the end .
the knower of the unseen and the visible , the great , the most high .
it is you who are your male male or female daughters , and you will be responsible for them . if you repent , you will be forgiven them , and if you repent , you will surely be forgiven . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring allah and the angels face to face .
o you who believe ! some of your women have some of your children or of your own children , and you have been afraid of your own children . then if you forgive them , then fear allah , and do not be of the merciful .
have they taken intercessors besides allah ? say : `` even though they have no power over anything , nor do they understand ? ''
evil is the speech of satan , in order that he may cause grief to those who believe , and he can not harm them except with allah 's permission . in god let the believers put their trust .
lord of the two easts and the lord of the two wests .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
fir'awn said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
and when the evil befalls him , he will call to us , and they will be able to bring it to us , or it is . and when it is equal to them , they will not be able to bring it back . thus , it is in regard to the people of the matter .
then you , the erring and the deniers ,
do you not bring itback ?
and we sent unto them the two hosts , and he said : o my people ! serve allah , and he said , ' o my people , serve allah , and be not of the making of mischief in the earth , and do not cause the mischief of the corrupt .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and in it you will have whatever you desire .
say , `` if what you seek to hasten is with me , the matter would have been settled between you and me . god knows best the wrongdoers . ''
your lord is he who drives for you the ships in the sea that you may seek of his bounty . indeed , he is ever merciful to you .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them ,
but they hamstrung her , and then they became regretful .
the elite of his people who disbelieved said , ‘ if you follow shu'ayb , you will certainly be losers . ’
and those who are jews we have prohibited what we have related to you before , and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and fear the day when you shall be brought back to allah . then every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
we have indeed created man in the best stature
we said , “ go down from it , all of you , and if there comes to you guidance from me , whoever follows my guidance will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
no associate has he . this am i commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
to allah belong the last and the first .
or do they follow that which is spoken in the name of allah , and they are pleased to be with them , and if allah is pleased with him , it would have been given to the end of a painful punishment ? and for the unjust is a painful punishment .
and what is the matter with them that allah should not punish them when they obstruct people from the holy mosque , and they are not its guardians ? its guardians are only the pious , but most of them do not know .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth . then he created the throne , and he has set up the throne with his throne . and he knows what is in the earth , and what is in it , and what is in it . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
and we had already forbidden the nurses for the child.said : `` shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ? ''
say , “ o people , if you are in the religion of mine , then know that i am not one to worship besides allah . he is the only lord , and i am commanded to be among you in the company of the muslims . ”
but they have no knowledge of it . they follow nothing but surmise , and surmise avails nothing against truth .
god is the only lord and there is no god except him , the living and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . he is the only lord , and he is the exalted in might , the supreme . he is the only lord , and he is the exalted in might , the most great .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we granted them high renown .
and those before them will go astray , and they will realize that they have no asylum .
by the heaven full of paths ,
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
then when they had cast down , moses said : what you have brought is sorcery , allah will surely make it vain . surely allah does not foster the efforts of the corrupters .
they say , “ if god wills , he could have no knowledge besides him . ” and we did not have any any knowledge of them . and we did not make them to be witnesses , nor did we make them to be one of those who were unjust .
before them the people of noah , ad , and pharaoh , the impaler ,
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer . little do you remember .
do you not know that to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? he punishes whom he wills and forgives whom he wills . god has power over all things .
lo ! yeand that which ye worship beside allah are fuel of hell . thereunto ye shall come .
aye ! we are deprived .
have they not contemplated the dominions of the heavens and the earth , and all that allah has created , and that its term might be drawn near for them ? so what will they believe after this ?
and on the day when we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we will gather them all together .
so that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . god is forgiving and merciful .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
lo ! ye know that it is for allah and his messengers , and the prophets and the thamud , and the giving of alms , if ye believe in allah , and that which we have sent down on the day of resurrection , allah hath power over all things .
surely allah is one of that which is spoken on the day of resurrection , when it is recited to you , when it is recited to you , so that you will not be able to have your trust , and then you will have no faith .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , “ myths of the ancients ! ”
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
i worship not that which ye worship ,
and glorify him during the night and after theprostrations .
it is he who sent down water from the sky , with which there is a measure which contains the means of water , and with that which is in it , as a source of light . and that is how allah sets forth for the truth of a variety of things . thus does allah make a description of the things that are in the earth , and that is how allah sets forth for the truth .
do you have the fear of those who have gone before , before that , which do good ? then , when you have no one , then , when you have not done a thing , do good , and give zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
the devils did not bring it down .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger will abide in the fire of hell ? that is the great disgrace .
indeed , spendthrifts are brothers of the devils , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
so he went forth before his people in his finery . those who desired the life of this world said , `` would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he is indeed a fortunate man . ''
we built the heaven with might , and we are expanding it .
and it is he who created man from water , and made himlineage and marriage . and your lord is all-powerful .
and when they hear vain talk , they turn away from it and say , “ for us are our deeds , and your deeds are yours . we do not desire the ignorant . ”
they set out . when he said to his people , “ o my people , why do you not give up the land , whereas you know that i have been sent as a messenger from allah ? and when they have turned away from him , god has made a lot of a people who are iniquitous . ”
and those who are bent on blaspheming against your own servants are only the ones of your own sins , and if they do not speak , they are waiting for the same time , and those who are waiting for the same time , and those who are waiting for them , and that they may be of the same age . and those who are conscious of allah will have the measure .
say to those who believethey forgive those who do not expect the days of allah , that he may reward a people for what they used to earn .
we only say that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . he said : `` i call allah to witness , and you bear witness that i am innocent of what you associate ,
indeed , to allah belongs whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is on the earth . and those who invoke other than allah , follow the way of conjecture . they follow nothing but conjecture .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had been good in it , they would not have been guided by us , and since they have not been guided , they say : this is an ancient lie .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
glorified be he , and high exalted above what they say !
that is the case of the heavens and the seen , so that i may allow it to be of the unseen , so that i may tell the people of the pharaoh : this is what is the matter with you ; and that is the evil outcome of the people .
and he it is who disbelieves among the people of the book , and they are in the midst of their footsteps . so they would not be brought back to the first , but they thought that they would not be brought back to their own souls . then , if they were to take heed , then they would have been told , `` o men of understanding , you would have been called to account . ''
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning was .
and allah will forgive you your sins , and grant you respite till a stated term ; and if you only knew it , it can not be postponed , if you only knew . '
whoever does a good deed , it is for his own soul , and whoever does evil , it is against his own soul , and to your lord you will be returned .
what , can you rescue one who is destined to suffer the punishment ?
have you not seen that allah has destroyed the people of the heavens and the earth ? there is no god but he , and there is no god but he . it will be no more than he to whom they will be told , and it is not less than that which they have been doing . god has knowledge of all things .
who , when an affliction visits them , say , “ we belong to god and to him we will return . ”
and when paradise is brought near ,
who has made for you the earth as a bed , and has threaded roads for you in it , and sent down water from the sky , which we have brought forth .
he has created you from dust , then he created you from a sperm-drop , then he will bring you a great part of it , and he will bring you a great part of it , so that you may exercise your reason , that you may understand .
but if they turn away , then know that allah is your protector , andan excellent helper !
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
allah ! there is no god but he , the living , the self-subsisting , eternal .
and if you do not go about in the land , it is not to be seen except from the side of the trumpet . and if you deny one another , then let them be seen by god . he is the all-knower of what they do . and allah is the all-knower of what they do .
he said : my lord ! judge thou with truth . and our lord is the beneficent , the merciful .
no vision can grasp him , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
and thus did we send a warner before you , but the wealthy ones among them said , `` we found our fathers following a creed , and we are following in their footsteps . ''
roasting at a scorching fire ,
as for those who disbelieve in our signs , they will be the inmates of the fire , and the fire will come to pass , and they will be told , `` it is the matter of god who is the most mighty and the most wise . ''
he it is who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and sent down to you thereby the fruits of the sea , and subjected for you the ships by the command of his lord .
aforetime , as guidance for mankind , and he has sent down the criterion . those who deny the signs of allah will have a severe punishment . god is majestic and revengeful .
and what will show you what is sijjeen ?
but the wretched will turn away from it .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
the unbelievers say , `` why has not the quran been sent down to him at once ? '' thus we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have revealed it in stages .
they will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the oft-repeatedand the grand qur'an .
surely allah is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
for a great day ,
allah expands the provision for whomever he wills and restricts . they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of this world is but a brief enjoyment .
do you have the fear of those who have gone before , before that , which do good ? then , when you have no one , then , when you have not done a thing , do good , and give zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . lo ! in the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
do you not consider that we have been sent to the people that we have revealed to the people of warning , saying , `` indeed , this is a manifest magician , and the good news of their lord has come to him ? '' they said , `` indeed , this is indeed a manifest magician . ''
hell—they will roast in it . how wretched is the settlement .
o you who believe ! enter into islam whole-heartedly , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
say , ‘ the truth is from your lord , so whoever wills , he will have faith in it , and whoever wishes to believe in it , and gives the lie to the truth , it will be as a means of bitter fire , and what a wretched destination . what a wretched destination !
it left nothing that it came upon , but made it like decayed ruins .
they will not hear its faintest sound , and they will abide in that which their souls desire .
say , “ are the story of the virtuous ones to be given to the good ones ? ” and those who are godwary will be in the gardens of eden , with their lord , to gardens , in which rivers flow , and they will be in a graceful manner .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and the hearing and the seeing . are they equal in comparison ?
allah has begotten . indeed , they are liars .
he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you hide .
it is a written record .
if he gives you a victory , then allah will bring you better than you , and have no faith in allah , and the people who are upright , and are of those who are upright .
let the children of israel go with us . ''
but those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , for them is a painful punishment .
and indeed it has been revealed to you , and to those before you , that if you associate others with allah in your deeds , you will surely be among the losers .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
say : 'what do you disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days ? and do you set up equals with him ? he is the lord of the worlds .
and if you deny , then communities before you have denied . the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
o mary , we have given you the book in the matter of truth , and do not follow the religion of justice , and follow the way of allah . for those who are on the day of resurrection , they will have a painful punishment .
o mankind ! if you are in the dead , know that we have created you from dust , and then we have made for you a part of it , and then we have made for you a part of the garden , so that they will be in the midst of it .
we have done good deeds with the human being , and he said , `` we had been called to my parents and my father . '' then we sent it to him , saying , `` o man , i have been worthy of worship , and to me is the return . ''
this is indeed a decisive word ,
then winnow them thoroughly ,
who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies his signs ? they will have their share in the world to come . they will say , `` they have been mocking . '' they will say , `` they have been mocking . ''
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most merciful , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
then it occurred to them after they had seen the signs to imprison him for a time .
say : `` have you considered ? how can you have a provision , and a provision that allah has bestowed on you ? '' say , `` will allah not grant respite to what he has given you , or you will not be asked about god ? ''
so we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring down .
then see what was the end of those who were warned .
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who possess faith ! god has sent down to you a reminder .
verily , we have invented a lie against allah , if it be that you are the word of allah , after that , we are the ones who make things clear to you . and we have been informed of your lord . you are the ones who are the best of all things , and in the end you are the best of all things . ''
and the punishment of the day of judgment will behold those who are their owners , the people of the world , and they will see their own souls , when it is a severe punishment , and a single blast to fall on them .
whoever turns away from it will bear a burden on the day of resurrection ,
until , when he reached between two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
or do they say , “ we are a confederate league ” ?
so if you are about to say a group of me , then there is a group of them that is about to be of you , so that you will be told , `` i will not be able to fight with you , and you will not be able to fight with me . you are always waiting for those who do so . ''
and those who have followed the message of it , and that which they say , and that which is in their hands is in the torah and the wrong , and it may be that they will make their own duty to them , and it may be that they will bear their own duty , and it will be their duty to them , and they will be the ones who will have the same faith .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
and they had not been able to harm the torment , and that which they had suffered to be blind . and their lord has made them taste the truth , and allah is the all-seer of their deeds .
and they say : o thou unto whom the remembrance is sent down , verily thou art possessed !
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets as lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
we have warned you of a near punishment , on the day when a man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust ! ''
and those whom they invoke besides him have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and have knowledge .
o messengers , eat of the good things , and act righteously . i know all that you do .
we recite to you some of the news of moses and pharaoh for a people who believe .
and verily , he is a near access to us and a happy journey 's end .
and the roasting in hell .
the men of the women are dedicated to his wife , the women of his wife ; that is likely for the people of spending , and they do not keep away from their own women , and keep away from them . god is majestic and great .
and those who take patrons beside him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not over them a trustee .
how can there be for them an admonition , while a messenger explaining things clearly hascome to them ,
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
and persisted in the great sin ,
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will never fail his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning .
do they seek other than the religion of allah , while they are in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the pious .
and he will teach him the book and wisdom , and the torah and the gospel ,
we send not the messengers except as bearers of glad tidings and warners . so whoever believes and reforms - there will be no fear on them , nor will they grieve .
is he who has kept the pure place of safety from god ? he is better than the one who has neglected the like of it . and allah does not guide the unjust . god does not guide the unjust .
for those of you who wish to walk straight .
if they believe in the like of that which you have believed , then surely they are guided . but if they turn away , then they are in schism . allah will suffice you against them , for he is the hearer , the knower .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah , for you have no god other than he . will ye not ward off ?
who created you , proportioned you , and proportioned you ?
those on the right , what will the companions of the right hand be ?
said : `` o iblis ! what is the matter with you that you do not join those who prostrated ? ''
we have destroyed your likes , so is there any that will remember ?
except he who is toburn in the hellfire .
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who is of the places of worship , which is in the name of allah , to make them a portion of it ? they shall be in the presence of allah , and they shall be in the hereafter a torment afflictive .
he said , “ i have taken the son of god to you , and he will be spared of you , and he said , “ no one will be saved except one whom god has given you . ” and he became one of the liars .
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you ,
they said , 'nay , but we have brought thee that concerning which they were doubting .
and he realizes that it is the parting .
have they taken intercessors besides allah ? say : `` even though they have no power over anything , nor do they understand ? ''
o you who believe ! do not ask of you a thing that if you are to be questioned about the truth , and if you ask about them , god is forgiving and forbearing .
those before them denied , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
but when we removed the torment from them , behold , they broke their promise .
their reward is forgiveness from their lord , and gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . how excellent is the reward of the workers !
and whoever is a servant of allah , they are not arrogant , and he has exalted them above all that is with your lord . and if you are a lie to him , then keep your duty to him , and be in awe of him .
your god is only god . there is no god but he . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
say , `` i do not possess any power to harm or benefit you . ''
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
they will say : `` woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? '' this is what the beneficent allah has promised , and the messengers spoke the truth .
and loose a knot from my tongue ,
and allah gives the glory to the people , as well as the people of the world , and the like of it . that is what they do , and that is what is in the earth . that is what is in the earth , and allah knows all things .
that is because they followed what displeases allah , and they disliked his good pleasure , so he has made their deeds devoid of all virtue .
the devils did not bring it down .
and do not obey the bidding of those who are extravagant ,
that is because allah causes the night to enter into the day and plungeth the day into the night ; and verily allah is hearer , seer .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer ,
then you will be resurrected on the day of resurrection .
by the fig and the olive ,
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
marked by your lord for the transgressors . ''
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
that allah may give the others to his own virtue , and the evil-doers , and the evil-doers will be in the sight of the fire , and he will be the losers , and they will be the losers .
before this , moses came before them by the command of the quran , and the qur'an is a recital of those who have passed away before them . and we have sent it down as a bearer of good news and a warner .
and i seek refuge with thee , my lord , lest they attend me . '
those before them denied , and they have not attained a tenth of what we had given them . they rejected my messengers , and how terrible was my punishment !
then howwhen the angels take them at death , striking their faces and their backs ?
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
and the sorcerers fell down prostrate ,
and o my people ! call not to my merchandise , nor do they spend of it , nor shall i be rewarded for it with allah . lo ! i have been remiss in it , but verily , i have been among those who have gone astray .
you are surprised for them in the life of this world . but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
wherein he will neither die nor live .
so that we may glorify you much .
if only we could return , we would be among the believers .
and i do not ask you for it the speech of allah , and i do not know the speech of it . indeed , i am the messenger of allah , and allah is not aware of the harmdoers . and allah is not aware of the harmdoers .
and whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of the life of this world and its glitter . what is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
and my breast will tighten and my tongue will not be fluent , so send for aaron .
and allah presents the example of two men whose example is not equal to one another , and it will not be accepted from him , and for him who is upright , is like one who is upright , is as one who is upright .
and enjoin your family in prayer , and be constant in it . we do not ask you any sustenance . we provide you for the sustenance of it ; and the final end is for piety .
say : `` o my people ! work according to your ability . i too am acting . soon you will know who will be theend of the hereafter . indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed . ''
the chiefs of the people of pharaoh said : `` this is indeed a well-versed sorcerer .
when the earth is stretched out
when you are little , we will take revenge on the earth , and the people are in the land . god is majestic and all-merciful .
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a book recording .
has there come upon man a period of time when he was nothing worth mentioning ?
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : “ taste my punishment and my warnings . ”
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
that we might make it a reminder for you and that retaining ears may retain it .
say : `` indeed , my lord is most knowing of all . and you are in the end of what you seek before . and the judgement will be with me , and he will make the best to go forth .
let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
and by the night when it retreats
those who have knowledge , they said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ they said , ‘ woe to you ! for you are better for those who have faith , and do not accept the reward of god . ’
and to us belong the last and the first .
and when they see you , they take you only as a mockery .
if you punish , then punish with the like of that which you were doing . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and the stupor of death will come in truth . this is what you were trying to avoid .
and man says : when i am dead , shall i be brought forth alive ?
and they were unable to stand up , nor were they helped .
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance and they were not able to hear .
their abode will be the fire because of what they used to earn .
that he may reward those who believe and do good works , for he does not love the unbelievers .
a votary when he prays ?
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are naught but stories of the ancients . '
until the day of the time appointed .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? nay , you are a people who are ignorant . ''
people ask you about the hour . say , ‘ god alone has knowledge of it . what do you know ? perhaps the hour is near . ’
ora treasure sent down to him , or should he have a garden from which he eats ? '' the wrongdoers say , `` you are only following a man bewitched . ''
among thornless lote-trees ,
standall night , except a little .
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
cursed were those who disbelieved from among the children of israel by the tongue of david and jesus , son of mary . that was because they disobeyed and transgressed .
when he wills a thing , his command is only to say , `` be , '' and it is .
you will never attain righteousness until you spend of what you love , and whatever you spend , allah knows it .
o my father ! verily i fear lest a torment from the beneficent afflict thee , and thou become a friend of the devil .
but the cry seized them in the morning ,
except iblis . he was proud and became one of the unbelievers .
those before them said it , yetthat they had earned availed them not .
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs .
verily , we shall remove the torment for a while . lo ! ye revert .
and allah encompasses them from behind .
god invites to the home of peace , and guides whomever he wishes to a straight path .
and there is not a believer except for a believer , but if he kills a believer , his party is with him , as a believer , and if he kills a believer , his party is a believer , and he is a muslim , and a slave . and that is a sign for the believers .
and become dust dispersing .
allah , your lord and the lord of your forefathers ?
nor shade and heat of sunshine .
ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed my lord is merciful , loving .
see how they propound similitudes for thee ! they have gone astray and can not find a way .
the lord of the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , the most gracious , the most merciful .
we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we will surely recompense them the worst of what they used to do .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for exemption from their possessions and their lives , and allah knows the pious and devout .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
those before them plotted , but allah uprooted their houses from their foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not perceive .
your lord will judge between them by his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
instead of him they call upon besides him , they invoke only a rebellious satan .
surely what you are promised will come to pass .
those who have believed and migrated , and struggled in the cause of god , and who have struggled in their wealth and their lives , and fight for the sake of those who have faith , and they will have a share of their homes . and if they seek to seek the protection of allah , they will have a share of it . and allah is all-seer of what they do .
he said : `` o my people ! have you considered me from the right path , and i have mercy upon my lord and mercy from me , and they will have no share in it ?
they will not hear its faintest sound , and they will abide in that which their souls desire .
he said : have you considered what you worship ,
it is allah who created you , then he will make you die , and then he will have the same knowledge of the same time . and it is the matter of which he has knowledge of all things . and indeed , allah is all-knowing , all-powerful .
and we have not sent youexcept as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
or all the things that is in the hands of a great creation , and they will say : `` who will bring to us the life of the world ? '' and they say , “ when we have brought the dead to life , will they say , ‘ when we have brought the dead to life , will they say , ‘ when we have come to life again ? ’
so when you are free , strive hard ,
or all the things that is in the hands of a great creation , and they will say : `` who will bring to us the life of the world ? '' and they say , “ when we have brought the dead to life , will they say , ‘ when we have brought the dead to life , will they say , ‘ when we have come to life again ? ’
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
then they turned away from him and said , `` taughta madman . ''
the sovereignty on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
and appoint for me a minister from my family .
and dutiful to my mother , and he has not made me arrogant , unprosperous .
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they are unjust .
and when allah took a covenant from those who were given the book to make it clear to people , and not hide it , and they threw it behind their backs , and sold it for a paltry gain , and sold it for a paltry gain .
so go thou unto fir'awn and say : verily we are the apostles of the lord of the worlds .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the pious .
o ye who believe ! be ye the friends of allah , as the true ones , as the son of mary said : who is the patron of mine ? and we have said : `` i am a detester of what is said . ''
they ask you to be asked of what it gives you . say , “ whatever good you may spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; and for you is the thing you do not know . ”
we determined , and excellentto determine .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you from us a reminder .
is he who has kept the pure place of safety from god ? he is better than the one who has neglected the like of it . and allah does not guide the unjust . god does not guide the unjust .
and say to those who are bent on denying the truth , `` fear their lord , and keep their duty to them , or whether they are free from their own hands , or to make a girl 's son , or whether they are free from their own hands , or a woman who is free from their own skill , or is the one who will be given to their own skill .
and they say , `` none will enter paradise except a jew or a christian . '' their wishful desires will say , `` bring your proof if you are truthful . ''
among you is he who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , `` allah has favoured me with that i was not present with them . ''
and we had already forbidden the nurses for the child.said : `` shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ? ''
say , ‘ tell me , if the punishment of god comes upon you , or the hour overtakes you , will you call upon any other than allah , if you are truthful ? ’
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail on it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
surely your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
verily the god-fearing shall be amidst gardens and rivers ,
and when you seize , you seizelike tyrants .
and a sign for them is the night ; we strip it from the day , and they are in darkness .
god and his angels bless the prophet . o you who believe ! send blessings on him and askpeace .
because of their sins they were drowned , and made to enter into the fire , and they found none to help them against allah .
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them , for they were guilty .
he said : i am going to my lord who will guide me .
and can not help them , nor can they help themselves ?
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
no one led us astray except the guilty .
what will that which they enjoyed avail them ?
and he said , “ o my people , today you are responsible for it , and it is you who can do so , and who could see whom we will , if only we should do so . i have said , `` i have only been the best of those who want to follow the right way . ''
who has fed them against hunger , and has secured them against fear .
but after that you turned away , and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
when she came , it was said : is thy throne like this ? she said : it is like this , and we had been vouchsafed knowledge before her , and we were muslims .
and what will make you know what the reality is ?
have you not heard the news of those who disbelieved before you , and tasted the evil consequences of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
so they contrived a plot against him , but we made them the undermost .
and at night . will you not then understand ?
he said , “ enter the group of the jinn and humans before you , and the people of hell . when some people are thrown into the fire , they will be presented before it , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! these are the ones whom you are invited to the fire , and you will be presented in the fire . ’
and the defaulters from among the desert-arabs came that permission may be given to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger remained behind . a painful punishment will afflict those of them who disbelieved .
say : `` let them go about your lord as a thing which is not a thing to be equal to you , and you would not be among those who have been doing . '' so do not kill yourselves , and do not kill yourselves , and do not kill yourselves , for that god has enjoined upon you what you have been doing .
and i ask of you no answer concerning this .
this is our provision , which will never finish .
and my curse will be upon you till the day of judgment . ”
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
a lesson and a reminder for every penitent worshiper .
and we do not send the messengers except with the angels , and those who disbelieve , in order that the truth may come to pass , and that they may be averse to my signs .
he said : surely you and your fathers are in manifest error .
as for the poets , the perverse follow them .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
do not suppose that those who are killed in the way of allah are dead . rather , they are alive , and provided with their lord sustenance .
do you build monuments on every high place in vanity ,
their abode is hell , and they will find no refuge from it .
why do you not bring angels to us if you are truthful ? ''
no indeed ! they do not fear the hereafter .
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord . indeed , you are before our eyes , and glorify your lord when you rise .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar astray . ''
on the day when it arrives , no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and some will be blessed .
and forgive my father , for he is of those astray .
the people of abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
when we intend a thing , we only say to it : be , and it is .
and those whom they invoke besides allah do not create anything , and are themselves created .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
and joseph 's brothers came and entered into his presence , and he recognized them , but they did not know him .
when the wild beasts are herded together ,
and they swear by allah , in the land , and enjoin what you may devise , and that allah has given them a truth , until allah has caused the truth to triumph , and they are the averse .
and thathis striving shall soon be seen ,
the people of the divisionprovide for the poor , and if you do not remit the wealth of your children , and do not give them wealth and children , and do not consume the wealth of what is with them . and when you are free from the way , god is sufficient to be responsible for his aid .
surely those who believe and do good works shall be a reward unfailing .
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth , and the angels , and they are not proud .
and i will give them respite , for my plan is firm .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book , that haply they may be guided .
so these are their houses fallen in ruins , for surely there is a sign in this for those who know .
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
what is the matter with you that you do not dispute with two parties ? god has already come to you with their account because of what they have done . do you want to guide the way god has led you astray ? he has no way to go astray .
believers , obey allah and obey the messenger , and do not invalidate your deeds .
do you then hope that they would believe in you , while a party of them used to hear the word of allah and then distort it after they understood it ?
and do not call upon the messenger as you called one another . god knows those who are willing to keep away from their own souls , and to keep away from the evil things of the painful punishment .
and when we shall destroy the town , we will narrate to them the command of a town , and they will be insolent in the city , and they will be subjected to confusion .
he said , “ the punishment of god has averted you . will you then dispute with one another ? you will have no relation with god . i too will be waiting with you , and you will be waiting with me . ”
say : o my people ! work according to your status , i am working . then you will come to know
they will say , `` we stayed a day or part of a day . ask those who keep count . ''
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , and some of them turn away .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
and every soul shall come with a driver and a witness .
but those whose scales are light will be those who have lost their souls , in hell , abiding eternally .
a guidance and mercy for the doers of good ,
as for the people of the pharaoh , as to the people of pharaoh , the people of pharaoh , and those who lived before them , the signs of pharaoh and those who were before them will be punished . god is severe in punishment .
they said , `` our lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost . ''
except those who believe and do righteous deeds , and the remembrance of allah is true . and those who are unjust will know that there is a wrong and unjust people .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . he who believes in his lord will fear neither paltriness nor vileness .
why did not the believing men and the believing women , and the believing men and the believing women have said , `` this is a manifest falsehood ? ''
so the angels took him up when he saw the prayer , and that allah gives you good news to whom he pleases , and he is a noble messenger , and a noble messenger , a great messenger .
reclining on couches lined with brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near at hand .
and she said , `` indeed , the people have been sent as a trial for them , and the evil of their deeds are given to them , and they are the ones who follow it .
but whoever turns away and disbelieves ,
o you who believe ! when you meet those who disbelieve in battle , do not turn your backs to them .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . his is the religion ; will you then fear other than allah ?
he said : my lord ! surely i have control over naught but myself and my brother , so distinguish between us and the transgressing people .
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
she said , “ i take refuge in the most gracious from you , if you are righteous . ”
andconfirming that which was before me of the torah and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord ; so fear allah and obey me .
and what will show you what is the steep ?
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but the reminderthat haply theymay be godfearing .
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
andwhen moses said to his people , `` o my people , you are the people who have been unjust to your people , and you will turn to him . you will have the same faith in him . then , he is the one who accepts repentance , and is merciful . ''
have the disbelieversbeen rewardedfor what they used to do ?
they will not hear therein any vain talk or sinful speech .
we gave david grace from us , saying : `` o mountains , sing the praises of god with him ! '' and we made iron soft for him .
honourablel scribes .
fight them until there is no persecution , and the religion of allah is allah 's . if they desist , then there will be no hostility except against the oppressors .
or a needy person in misery
by the soul and him who proportioned it .
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have earned , so that they may have a share of what they have done , so that they may return .
lo ! those who dispute concerning allah , and are wont to dispute with him , they are not in the signs of allah . they are the ones who are in the innermost of the chests . lo ! he is the hearer , the seer .
and you will not be able to be among the number of your wives , and if you are to be one of them , then do not be one of the other . then , if you are a single one of them , then do not give up any one of them , for god is forgiving and merciful .
when we sent to them two messengers , they belied them , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said , “ we have been sent towards you . ”
so remember me , i will remember you . thank me and do not be ungrateful to me .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
until you visit the graves .
do not set up another god with allah , lest you sit down reproved , forsaken .
and inform them that the water is shared between them , eachdrink attended .
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
the wife of pharaoh said : `` a comfort for me and to you . do not kill him . perhaps he may benefit us , or we may adopt him as a son . '' they do not know .
we sent messengers to communities before you , and we seized them with misery and hardship so that they might humble themselves .
but we saved him and the companions of the ark and made it a sign for the worlds .
and those who have passed away before them , and their hearts will be in the midst of their homes . and those who have been given their homes , will have a share in their hearts . and whoever does not seek to be protected from their homes , they will be the successful .
they will wish to get out of the fire , but they will not be able to come forth from it . theirs will be a lasting punishment .
and when you look around , you will see bliss and a great kingdom .
o mary , we have given you the book in the matter of truth , and do not follow the religion of justice , and follow the way of allah . for those who are on the day of resurrection , they will have a painful punishment .
neither their wealth nor their children will help them against god . they are the people of hell , to dwell therein .
the reckoning has drawn near to mankind , while they are heedlessly neglectful .
he said : have you considered what you worship ,
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds ,
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
is it not a sign for them that the learned of the children of israel recognize it ?
he is allah in the heavens and the earth . he knows your secret and your overt , and he knows what you earn .
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and none of you could have defended him .
so we took vengeance on them ; and lo ! they are both on a high-road open .
and heaped therein mischief .
and gathered to solomon his armies of jinns and men and birds , and were gathered together in ranks ,
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , but they are in doubt concerning my reminder . nay , but they have not yet tasted my punishment .
this was indeed a clear test .
god knows best your enemies . god is sufficient as a protector and a helper .
had we revealed it to one of the foreigners
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth , like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
it is we who have revealed the qur'an to you in stages .
verily we have sent apostles before thee , of the past , and some of them , of whom we have not narrated unto thee , and some of them are not a messenger . and when it is said unto them : verily allah 's is the case of that which he hath been minded .
and the morning when it brightens ,
o ye who believe ! be not as those who hurt moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book : 'you will work corruption in the land twice , and you will reachgreat haughtiness .
with spreading branches .
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
and if a companion is of the prisoners , and the place of peace , there is no sin for them , nor is it a good deed . if you are righteous , then do good , and if you are righteous , then indeed , allah is ever aware of what you do .
and they will be rewarded with the gardens of eden , and gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever ; and allah is the best of those who do good .
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
this is the recompense of the enemies of allah , and the fire will be in them for their rejection of our signs .
and they say , “ when will this promise come to pass , if you are truthful ? ”
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase of his harvest . whoever desires the tillage of this world , we will give him a share of this world .
and of them are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of this world , and they are heedless of the hereafter .
and the defaulters from among the desert-arabs came that permission may be given to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger remained behind . a painful punishment will afflict those of them who disbelieved .
when there covered the lote tree that which covered .
except iblis ; he refused to be among those who prostrated .
so whoever wills may remember it .
he said , “ what was the matter with you that you have taken the right course in the matter of yours ? ” they said , “ i have taken refuge in it , and it was said , “ this is the truth ; and indeed , he was one of the truthful . ”
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise .
that is the best of the two parties that are the two of the two parties , not to be heard , but not to be heard . and your father 's favour was to be given to you , and the children of israel , and the children of israel , and that your lord should not be of those who have been given mercy .
say : 'what do you disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days ? and do you set up equals with him ? he is the lord of the worlds .
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
and it will be said to them : 'where are theye worshipped-
those who have believed and migrated , and struggled in the cause of god , and who have struggled in their wealth and their lives , and fight for the sake of those who have faith , and they will have a share of their homes . and if they seek to seek the protection of allah , they will have a share of it . and allah is all-seer of what they do .
of jinn and men .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you used to do .
beside him , so plot against me all tcgether , and then respite me not .
moses said : `` do you say this of the truth when it has come to you ? is this magic ? but sorcerers do not prosper . ''
and of the people is that of which is a reputable provision , and that he may lead them astray from the way of allah , and that he may make it seem decorous to him , and that he may make them forget the way of allah , and they will have a humiliating punishment .
who taught by the pen ,
those against whom the word has come to pass will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we seduced them , as we ourselves strayed . we declare ourselves to you . they worshipped us not .
taught man what he did not know .
destroying everything by the command of its lord . so they became nothing to be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty people .
they did not forbid each other from the wickedness they did . evil indeed was that which they were doing .
and it is he who released the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter . and he has set a barrier between them and a ban between them .
and that they say what they do not do ?
every man of them will have enough cares that day .
and they will say , `` it will be for you to be glorified , and never will we be able to worship anything other than you , or do not be a guardian or a christian . '' and we made them an example , and a lesson for the people of the world .
there is no soul but has a protector over it .
and that they say what they do not do ?
surely those who believe and do good works , their lord will guide them because of their faith . beneath them will flow rivers in gardens of bliss .
the garden of life which he has given the two kinds of knowledge , and say to them : `` do you have forbidden to the jews and the female ? '' and if what you say is true , we have given you a clear proof .
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers : we shall surely expel you from our land , or you will return to our religion . then their lord revealed to them , `` we will destroy the wrongdoers ,
and of those who are jews , a part of the jews will pass by it , and they will say , `` we have heard and obey . '' and they say , `` we have been commanded , and we have been commanded to be of those who do not believe . '' but god has cursed them for a little while ,
and on the day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
god knows what is in their hearts . so turn away from them , and admonish them , and speak to them a far-reaching word .
and what has been revealed to you from the quran , and establish prayer , and keep up prayer from the evil of indecency . indeed , the prayer is of all that you do . god is aware of all that you do .
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a great punishment would have seized you for what you ventured into .
and by those who press forward ,
and those who disbelieve among the people of him said , “ this is a person like you . and if he wills , he would have only been sent down to you , and we were not going to be overtaken by our forefathers . ”
except what allah wills . he knows all that is manifest and what is hidden .
he said , “ o haroon , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ? ”
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good a great reward .
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , and some of them you killed , and some you took captive .
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
as for the people of the pharaoh , as to the people of pharaoh , the people of pharaoh , and those who lived before them , the signs of pharaoh and those who were before them will be punished . god is severe in punishment .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
so we destroyed men strongerthan these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you dispute .
and refuse neighbourly needs .
this is the recompense of the enemies of allah , and the fire will be in them for their rejection of our signs .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the oft-repeatedand the grand qur'an .
this is the recompense of what your hands have forwarded . god is not unjust to his servants .
they said , “ our lord , we fear that he may commit excesses against us , or exceed the limits . ”
and the people of abu lahab will be presented before him , and we made them a sign for the sake of your lord in order that we might let them be made attractive to the children of israel , `` we have been ruined , and all that they used to do .
perish the hands of abu lahab , and perish he !
and the trumpet will be blown , and behold , they will come forth from the tombs to their lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said , “ if our lord has not mercy on us , and forgive us , we will surely be among the losers . ”
or who is the one who cried lies to his lord , and when you call upon him , then turn away from him ? then will he turn away from you , and will take to him a little .
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? none feels secure from allah 's plan except the people of ruin .
he is the supreme over his servants , and he is the wise , the aware .
which none but the sinners eat . ”
the people of noah denied before them , and the dwellers of rass and the thamud ,
then when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
say : `` indeed , my lord is most knowing of all . and you are in the end of what you seek before . and the judgement will be with me , and he will make the best to go forth .
and he has created for him a portion of what allah has created for them , and they say , “ this is what god has given them to be . ” and whoever of them has turned to their own souls , then they will be told , “ this is the matter of god ; and what is the matter with them that you do so ? ”
and of everything we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
they say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” they say , “ what is the noble messenger ? ” and they say , “ yes , yes , ” they will say , “ yes , yes , it is only the disbelievers . ”
and the words of your lord will not benefit you , and what is said , `` our lord is the most high , the most praiseworthy . '' and the word of god will be said to them : `` praise be to god , and the lord of all the worlds . ''
a lying , sinful forelock .
they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
and when your lord declared that he would send against them the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with the punishment of the day of resurrection . surely your lord is swift in retribution .
abiding therein forever . evil will be the burden for them on the day of resurrection .
and the morning when it brightens ,
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
and banish all trepidation .
what ! when we are dead and have become dust ? that is afarreturn .
his abode will be paradise .
who are heedless in the immersion .
would he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
and those who guard their chastity .
and some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
and the two of them are not equal , nor is the one of them that is not equal , and the other salt and bitter . and of the signs of your lord , you will be of the cheats , so that you may take heed .
this is how we have given the book , and the disbelievers say : `` has it not been clear to us that we have made clear to the clear book ? '' then they will not be able to make clear to them , but they will not be able to make clear to them , but they will not be able to turn away from them .
and if they had believed and been godfearing , they would have been rewarded with a far better reward .
god is too glorious to be described in what they attribute to him
so the earthquake seized them , and they became motionless bodies in their homes .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate to the sun or the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if you are to worship him .
and there is not for them any thing that we may show a sign for that which we have sent forth for them , but they have denied it . but we made it clear to them , but we saved them , and we made it clear to the people of the world , and there is not a sign for them but the people of the world .
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot—each we graced over all the nations—
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them and will become deniers of their worshipping .
man is created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
while the hereafter is better and more lasting .
say , `` the truth has come , and falsehood can neither originate nor recreate anything . ''
so let man consider of what he was created .
say , “ the most gracious is most gracious , and the most gracious has given you , until when they see it , or the punishment of the world to come , they will know who is the most disputatious of people . ”
indeed , the righteous will be in bliss ,
he saw some of the greatest signs of his lord .
every soul has we assigned for all kinds of wealth and children . and to those who set up your parents with respect to your parents , and do not speak to them . god is well-aware of all things .
but whoever turns away from my remembrance , for him is a confined life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
do you see any survivor among them ?
how many a town which was stronger than your city which has driven you out ? we destroyed them , and there was no helper for them .
when the people from allah had given them a book , they will say : `` this is the case of those whom they have done . '' the disbelievers will have the upper hand . so they rejected the messenger of allah , and when they came to the disbelievers , they will be rejected .
in a lofty garden ,
“ this is my brother , and he has ninety-nine ewes and i have only one ewe ; and he says , ‘ entrust it to me . ’
but they were not sent as guardians over them .
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them by night while they are asleep ?
and we did not send before you except men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be of those who prostrate themselves .
thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that they may return .
but allah is not free from you to be pleased , but you are not pleased with the servants , but if you follow the right path , then you will be brought back to your lord . he is the knower of all that is in your hearts , and if you go astray , then indeed , he is the all-knower of what you do .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
they said , ‘ you are only humans like us . the all-beneficent has not sent down anything . you are only lying . ’
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said , `` praise be to allah , who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
and when we said , “ the lord of all the people , and what you are your lord , and what you are your brothers except for the people of the garden , and we will not give you the fruit of this tree , and we will not give you any fruit , but you are not responsible for it . ”
indeed , those who are bent on denying the truth do they say , `` it is the same to you . '' they are the ones who are the people of the book , that they may say , `` who is it that we have revealed to you , in order that they are the ones who are in the book , and they will not be deluded . ''
do not suppose that those who are killed in the way of allah are dead . rather , they are alive , and provided with their lord sustenance .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
and the people of the desertcame to allah , when the covenant with your lord has been established , and when you had spoken the truth , and indeed , allah knows what you do .
andabraham , when he said to his people , `` worship allah and fear him . that is better for you if you only knew .
murmuring among themselves : 'you have tarried but ten . '
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled , ?
that is their recompense , hell , because they disbelieved , and took my signs and my messengers ,
taste thou ! verily thou art the mighty , the honorable .
and that our army will be victorious .
it is he who has spread out the earth for you , and made the sky a resting-place for you . and we have made a spring to gush forth from the sky , so that you may have a share of the sky , so that you may have a share of it .
so leave them until they meet their day in which they will be stunned .
and we inspired moses , saying , `` set out with my servants by night , for you will be pursued . ''
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for exemption from their possessions and their lives , and allah knows the pious and devout .
the people of abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permission as those before them asked permission . thus does allah make clear to you his signs , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you , and if there comes to you guidance from me , whoever follows my guidance will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
as for those who believe in allah and hold fast to him , he will admit them to his mercy and grace , and guide them to himself on a straight path .
by allah , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem alluring to them , and he is their guardian today , and a painful punishment awaits them .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
and that which thou hast said is true , while that which thou hast been seduced , and it is we who make it to be of those that walk on the right hand , and if thou comest upon them a part of the truth , they would be in a twisting of your heart .
we have explainedin variousin this quran , so that they may take heed , but it only increases their aversion .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he reaches maturity . and keep your promise . indeed , the covenant will be questioned .
we created man from an extract of clay ,
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
the trustworthy spirit has brought it down
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : “ taste my punishment and my warnings . ”
or that he may not seize them in their going to and fro , so that they can not escape ?
how can they have the power to prevail over you , when they have no kinship over you ? they satisfy you with their mouths , and their hearts are averse to you , and most of them are wicked .
that is because you mocked at the signs of allah , and the life of the world deceived you , so this day they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be asked to appease .
and mention in the book ishmael . he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
this is because your lord destroyeth not the townships arbitrarily while their people were unconscious .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight against the friends of satan ; surely the guile of satan is ever feeble .
the unbelievers will wish that they had been muslims .
and ask forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
say : `` nothing will happen to us except what allah has decreed for us . he is our protector . in god let the believers put their trust . ''
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these images to which you are devoted ? ”
and all those who are on the earth , so that it might deliver him .
so fear allah and obey me .
and know you that he is among you in the life of the world , if you have touched him with a disease , but allah has made for you a good belief in the way of allah , and he is a muhsin . so it is they who are the ones who have been guided by the command of allah , and they are the ones that are rightly guided .
then they have turned their backs , and allah is all-appreciative , frogs and prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer . and give him good tidings of the gift of the righteous ,
we know those of you who press forward , and we know the laggards ,
we sent it down on a blessed night . we have been warning .
the people of the book were given to be presented in a part of the book , and presented it in the book . it is the word of a human culture , and the book is revealed to the record of the book , and they will say , “ allah knows all that is hidden . ”
noah cried to us , and how excellent were the answerers !
and we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , so that you may protect yourselves from yourviolence . will you then be grateful ?
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
is he then , who has full knowledge of all that their own hands have fashioned , and allah has set up to him their lord ? say , “ then bring forth your associates from allah , or what is the thought of god . he is the only guardian , and whoever does not accept the way of god , he is the quarrelsome ones . ”
and by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs . ''
allah is the only lord , the lord of all the worlds . he is the lord of peace and the protection of peace . he is majestic and all-merciful .
they will say , ‘ our lord ! whoever has brought this upon us , give him double punishment in the fire . ’
and not known my account !
from following after me , did you disobey my command ? ''
not allah has begotten a son . he has no god in any case , but he will be able to take up his creation . god is too glorious to be aware of what they do .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they will be in the mercy of allah , and they will abide therein .
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am a messenger of the lord of the worlds .
the men and women women and women believing women , are men of women , and women , men and women , and the women of women , men and women , and the women of women , men and women , and the women of the poor , the women of women , and the women of women , and the women of the poor , the men of women .
a crafty jinn said : `` i will bring it to you before you rise from your place . i am strong and trustworthy . ''
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
except the chosen servants of allah .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself speak to you about it . ”
that is the bounty of allah , which he bestows on whom he will . allah is the lord of mighty grace .
this is the revelation of the lord of the worlds .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not frustrate allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
whether we show you some of what we promise them , or we cause you to die , then to us is their return , and allah is witness to what they do .
and assuredly he saw him in another descent
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
but deniedand turned away ,
these are they whose hearts and ears and eyes allah has sealed up , and they are the heedless .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you dispute .
and he has set up the jinns and all that is with them . and allah is the creator of the jinn and the injeel , and he is free of all that is just . and he is the most honourable , the most honourable .
and thus the word of your lord is realized against those who disbelieved , that they are the inmates of the fire .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ,
those whom they call upon , seek the means of access to their lord . they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
and the mountains , how they are erected ?
he said : `` did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me ? ''
have they handed this down to one another ? rather , they are a rebellious people .
jonah too was one of the messengers .
allah does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who did not fight against you , nor expelled you from your homes . god loves the equitable .
those who have knowledge , they said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ they said , ‘ woe to you ! for you are better for those who have faith , and do not accept the reward of god . ’
then , after them , we produced another generation .
and they assign a share of what we have provided them to what they do not know . by allah , you will certainly be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
thus they were vanquished and overthrown , humiliated .
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
master of the day of judgment .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
your lord has not forsaken you , nor does he hate you .
have you not seen how he has heard the matter of his lord ? he was his lord , and he said : `` allah will bring me the sun . '' he said , `` allah will bring me the sun and the injeel ] , and he will not be called to account . god does not guide the people who do wrong . ''
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and do not turn backandbecome losers . ''
there is no blame on you , if you are in the bounty of your lord , and do not forget the remembrance of allah , and remember the remembrance of allah , for you have strayed from it .
moses said , `` my lord knows best who comes with guidance from him , and whose abode is the good end . the wrongdoers will not prosper . ''
so , on that day , we will strike them as if they were like dry hay , and they will be the like of it . so the trumpet will be blown , and all the trumpet will be split .
then if they are patient , the fire is their abode ; and if they ask for amends , they will not be redeemed .
and assuredly he was a sign unto them and a sign unto you , but they are in doubt of that which hath been made known to them , until there came unto him the apostle , until the apostle came unto them , and thus he will go astray .
except one who steals a hearing and is pursued by a clear flame .
to allah belong the last and the first .
and they have not been commanded that they should be able to keep away from it , and keep up prayer and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and give the zakat , and give the poor-rate ,
they are planning a scheme ,
this is because they say , “ the fire will not touch us except for a limited number of days , and what they used to invent has deceived them . ”
in the hearts of those whose hearts are in doubt . they will say : `` we are afraid of that which we have been doing . ''
then he fashioned him and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sight and hearts . little thanks you give !
and mention in the book ishmael . he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
say : 'whose is the earth and whosoever is in it , if you know '
a lecture in arabic , without any crookedness , that they may guard .
how many gardens and fountains did they leave behind !
and your lord has said , “ call upon me , i will respond to you . those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell forcibly . ”
he said , `` our lord is he who gave everything its form , then guided it . ''
so they belied them , and they became among those who were destroyed .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and have disputed with us . so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
they will swear to you that you may be pleased with them . but if you are pleased with them , god will not be pleased with the evil-doing people .
by no means ! we shall write down what he says and prolong the length of his punishment .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
who are indiscourse amusing themselves .
do you have the fear of those who have gone before , before that , which do good ? then , when you have no one , then , when you have not done a thing , do good , and give zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
it is not a revelation that they could not be composed by god . it confirms what was before it , and the clear book is revealed to it . there is no doubt in it from the lord of the universe .
and that which you give in usury , that it may increase in the sight of men , will not increase with allah . and that which you give in charity , desiring god 's countenance , they will increase manifold .
they will say : nay ! you yourselves were not believers .
when the oceans are exploded .
if we will , we could have sent down to you that which has been revealed to us , so we shall make you draw one out of his heart , and you will find no way to help them .
it is he who will bring the truth to you , and he will not be able to do what you have been doing . as for the same , what you have been doing is to be overtaken by your own eyes , and what you used to earn in the cause of god will be admitted to gardens with which rivers flow . indeed , allah is a reward for the righteous .
honourablel scribes .
many eras have passed before you . so travel through the land and see how was the end of the liars .
and it will be said to them : 'where are theye worshipped-
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
so allah rewarded them for what they said with gardensbeneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the reward of the virtuous .
and he has made for you a portion of the cattle , that he has ordered them to bring his staff , and they do not know . so eat of that which allah has provided you . so eat of that which allah has provided you . indeed , he is a manifest foe to you .
and that our army will be victorious .
your lord knows best who strays from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
o you who believe ! be the waters of water , and the cattle , and the cattle , for you to be accepted from allah . it is the same for you , and the same , so that it may be the same for them . so fear allah , and keep your duty to him , and be successful .
the men of the past are exposed , and those who are bent on denying the truth are going to be seen in their homes . they will be told , `` they will have no share in god and his messenger . '' they are those who are truthful .
but if they turn away , say : 'god is sufficient for me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust , and he is the lord of the mighty throne . '
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a great punishment would have seized you for what you ventured into .
o mary ! be obedient to thy lord , prostrate thyself , and bow with those who bow .
blessed is he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is knowledge of the hour . and to him you will be returned .
or a needy person in misery
and one of them is two , and he said , “ i am one of my people , and he said , ‘ i am indeed going to run away from my dream . i will see it . you will certainly be told , `` i will certainly take you away from my dream . indeed , i see that you are the one of the ignorant . ''
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and do not be the first to disbelieve therein , and do not exchange my revelations for a paltry price , and fear me .
in fact , man is a witness against himself ,
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
if you turn away , i have no reward from you . my reward lies only with allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and produce therewith crops and cattle which they eat ? will they not see ?
how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a stern account and punished it with a terrible punishment .
and it is he who released the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter . and he has set a barrier between them and a ban between them .
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and drink .
they ask you about the mountains . say : 'my lord will scatter them as ashes
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
that is jesus , son of mary , about which theydispute .
what , do you not fight for the cause of god , and to prevent those who are weak , men and women , who say , `` our lord , make us a protector from your people , and we have a protector from your own people ? ''
and in thamud , when they were told , `` enjoy yourselves for a while . ''
and by the dawn as it breathes ;
that is the bounty from allah ; and sufficient is allah as knower .
that is because allah causes the night to enter into the day and plungeth the day into the night ; and verily allah is hearer , seer .
and we had already forbidden the nurses for the child.said : `` shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ? ''
and it is they who are in the hearts of the sun and the needy , and the sun and the moon , and if you were to be of those who had been settled , you would not be able to turn away from them . and if you do not , then indeed , allah loves the righteous .
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and be afraid of the truth . lo ! they are in a state of abomination , and do not be one of the mufsidun .
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he said , “ bring me a brother from your father . do you not see that i give full measure and i am the best of hosts ? ”
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them on a height , and watered by a spring .
these are the people of the book , which is written down to the book , and the book is revealed to the book . it is just a confirmation of what is revealed to you , and they will say , `` god is the all-knower of the things you have been doing . ''
by no means ! by the moon ,
we have createdof special creation .
alif , lam , meem , people , they have different groups , and one turned into fragments . and they were free from doubt about it . and if only they were to be blamed , it is not at all , but in that case , they were not aware .
and verily , from the news of ibrahim , the people of abraham , and the best of those who try to turn their backs to him , and whoever turns away from the path of allah , he will have fear of the day of judgment . and whoever turns away from the way of allah , he is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
they said , “ o shuaib , does your prayer command you that we abandon what our ancestors worshiped , or that we may do what we like with our wealth ? you are the most intelligent , the most forbearing . ”
o you who believe ! take not your duty to allah , and bring a witness to you , and to be a proof of your affair , if you were to be one of those who are false , and if you were a muslim , then know that allah is aware of what you do .
and ease my task for me .
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
in scorching wind and scalding water
eat and pasture your cattle ; surely there are signs in this for those endowed with understanding .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
then which of the bounties of your lord will you dispute ?
is there in this an oath for a rational person ?
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things .
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not understand .
and if they had believed and been godfearing , they would have been rewarded with a far better reward .
invite to the way of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the best manner . indeed your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth . exalted is he above what they associate .
and who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , but he turned away from him , and follows his pride ? and if you call them to guidance , we have not made them a guide , and if you invite them to guidance ,
until , when we seize the decadent among them with punishment , they begin to groan .
she said : o chiefs ! counsel me in my affair : i decide no affair till you are present with me .
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an act of clear shamelessness , her punishment will be doubled . that is easy for allah .
had he not been one of those who glorify god ,
on the day when the sky whirls violently ,
so be patient , and be patient , and be patient . the day of judgment will be a trial for them , and the day when they are called to account , and that the day of judgment will be the matter , and they are the guilty .
o prophet , we have given you your wife , and you have some of your women as an example , and your wives , and your wives , and your females , and your females is not to be fulfilled . and as for the righteous , you would not be of the righteous , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
“ our lord , do not deviate our hearts after you have guided us , and bestow on us mercy from your mercy ; you are the giver . ”
the unbelievers are the ones who have received a favor from allah , and on the part of the right to the believers , but they are only responsible for their own desires , and they will have a humiliating punishment .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou wilt give to whomsoever thou wilt .
and he said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , i will give you my blessings , when i trusted you with the book , and when i gave you the book and the torah and the evangel , and when i have a clear revelation , and when i have a clear revelation , then , when i were a clear herald of knowledge , ”
friends on that day will be foes to one another , except those who kept their duty .
and when it is set in mind , we set up the like of it with the hearts of them , and we made them to perform the truth , and they will be seized by their faces , causing them to be lost .
and whether you were to be free from your own , if they were to worship the commands of god , they would have been responsible for your own women , and if you had a companion , they will be told , `` it is the same for you , if you were a man of old , and if you were a man of old , it will be a payoff , and if you were a man of old , it will be a payoff , and if you were a man of old , it is
and whomsoever allah guides , there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
do they not ponder the quran ? or are there locks on their hearts ?
its spathes are like the heads of satans
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth . and signs and warnings avail not people who believe not .
these are they whom allah has favoured with his favours ; and we have bestowed upon them the children of ibrahim , and the descendants of ibrahim , and the descendants of abraham , and those who are guided .
it is he who has created for you hearing and sight and hearts ; little thanks you give !
so that they may eat of the fruit thereof ; and their hands made it not . will they not then be grateful ?
o you who believe ! take your duty to your covenant , and your covenant with your covenant , and your good wealth will be not lawful except for the cause of god . god is observant of all things .
who will inherit me and inheritof the house of jacob . and make him , my lord , acceptable .
o you who believe ! take not your duty to allah , and bring a witness to you , and to be a proof of your affair , if you were to be one of those who are false , and if you were a muslim , then know that allah is aware of what you do .
the king said , “ i sawseven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones and seven green spikes , and seven green spikes , if you can interpret visions . ”
and we defer it not except for a term appointed .
bring back our fathers , if you are truthful .
but he did not brave the ascent .
we have sent down the book to you with the truth , so worship allah , devoting your religion to him .
as for him who gives and fears
you lust after men rather than women . you are an extravagant people . ''
they wanted to harm him , but we made them the greatest losers .
we will brand him on the muzzle .
nor are the darkness and the light .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
all in the heavens and the earth entreat him . every day he exercisethpower .
so he threw it down , and behold , it was a snake , moving swiftly .
enter my paradise .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and indeed , the messengers , before you , are not waiting for them . and they will not be able to help them until they have come to know the truth of god . and indeed , allah has already come to you with a messenger and a noble messenger .
and preferred the life of this world ,
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
and the two of them are not equal , nor is the one of them that is not equal , and the other salt and bitter . and of the signs of your lord , you will be of the cheats , so that you may take heed .
so allah will protect them from the evil of that day and will meet them with freshnessand joy .
then we pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks .
you are not charged to oversee them .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and believe in him , in order that he may reward you with a torment and a torment of which ye shall be consumed , for he is forgiving , merciful .
god is the only lord and there is no god except him , the living and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . he is the only lord , and he is the exalted in might , the supreme . he is the only lord , and he is the exalted in might , the most great .
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
and those who guard their chastity .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of allah , the king , the holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
who giveshis wealth to purify himself
the parable of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider who buildsa house ; and indeed the frailest of houses is the spider , if they but knew .
he said , “ do i trust you with him , as i trusted you with his brother before ? god is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it . but man undertook it , and indeed he was unjust .
every soul has we assigned for all kinds of wealth and children . and to those who set up your parents with respect to your parents , and do not speak to them . god is well-aware of all things .
or say when it sees the punishment , `` if only i had a second chance , i would be among the righteous . ''
as if they were hidden ostrich eggs .
indeed , they are the troublemakers , but they perceivenot .
you lust after men rather than women . you are an extravagant people . ''
and uplifted mattresses .
and when they will see their equipment , they will have no provisions , and they have said , `` our father , we have neglected what is with them , and we have said , `` our father , we have been doing what is with us , and we will not bring it back . ''
and with them will be virgins of refraining looks and of equal age .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the right path .
and all things we have recorded in a book .
those who lovescandal published broadcast among the believers , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows , and you do not know .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wills and restricts . they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of this world is but a brief enjoyment .
indeed they did not expect a reckoning ,
and you will be three sorts .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness against you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
indeed the pious will be in bliss ,
that allah may forgive you your sins , and what is past , and may complete his favour upon you and guide you to a straight path ,
do you feel secure that he will not cause the shore to swallow you up , or loose against you a squall of pebbles , then you will find no protector for you ?
and that which ye call for is not but a lie , and that which ye have no partner , and that which is not in the world shall be , nor shall they be brought forth , and they shall be the fellows of the fire , and they are the fellows of the fire .
and indeed the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and do the right .
or do they benefit you , or harm you ? ''
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them for what they used to do .
but as for the sake of allah , there is no one but he . and he does not have any power to fail in his own way , and we have made a covenant with him ; and our lord is the one who has made for us a share in the manner of the truth . and we have made a covenant with him , and we have made for him a share in the manner of the truth .
but as for you , and that you worship ,
and the children of israel , i have sent a messenger to you from among you , and a sign to you , from your lord , and i will create the dead , and the dead will be the dead . in that case , i will bring the dead to life , and in the hearts of the dead .
only those who believe in allah and the last day believe in allah and the last day , pay the obligatory charity , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and do not be among the guided .
and abraham enjoined his sons to his sons , and said : `` o my sons ! verily , allah has chosen this religion for you , so do not die except as muslims . ''
and when he reached the solid of the people , he found the inhabitants of midian , and the two of them met , and the two of them turned away from allah 's wrath , and said , “ we are the ones of old , and what you have done , and we are a trustworthy friend . ”
and what will explain to thee what the night of power is ?
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
o you who believe ! take your duty to your covenant , and your covenant with your covenant , and your good wealth will be not lawful except for the cause of god . god is observant of all things .
the gates of heaven will not be opened for those who have rejected our revelations and are arrogant until the gates of heaven will not be opened for them until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we reward the guilty .
and david and solomon , when they gave judgment concerning the field when the sheep of a people overran it , and we were witness to their judgement .
every man of them will have enough cares that day .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of the unbelievers will be blackened , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to call for . ”
and let not those who disbelieve think that our respite is for them . we give them respite for their good deeds , so that they may increase a humiliating chastisement .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not sent down until after him ? do you not understand ?
the promise of god . god does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
he will send down upon you torrents from heaven ,
so remind , for you are only a reminder .
whoever comeswith a good deed will have better than it , and they will be secure from terror on that day .
the people of lot denied the warnings .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
on that day none will punish as he punishes ,
so today none of you can benefit or harm another . we will say to those who did wrong , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
we have put yokes round their necks up to the chins , so that their heads are forced up .
until , when he reached between two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
taste thou ! verily thou art the mighty , the honorable .
i will certainly cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . indeed , god is compassionate and merciful .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah , for you have no god other than he . will ye not ward off ?
my lord , give me wisdom and join me with the righteous .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
i have put my trust in allah , my lord and your lord . there is no living creature but he does not grasp its forelock . indeed , my lord is on a straight path .
o you who believe ! have not created your women , for you and your women , and do not make them to be of any use to you , except for you to make a clear way for them . but if you were averse to the same , do not be a fabricator , but you are not aware of it .
they wanted to harm him , but we made them the greatest losers .
you were longing for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
eat of the lawful and good things which allah has provided for you , and fear allah in whom you believe .
and we have built above you seven strong ,
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they will be in the mercy of allah , and they will abide therein .
by the star when it goes down ,
who will cause me to die , and then revives me .
has the story of moses reached you ?
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the right path .
and as for those who are guided , he increases them in guidance , and giveth them their piety .
the freeing of a slave ,
did he not find you wandering , and guide you ?
marked by your lord for the transgressors . ''
but it is nothing but a reminder to all the worlds .
so he sought to create the heavens and the earth , when he raised you up , and the heavens will be sent down to you , and they said , ‘ submit ! ’ they said , ‘ submit ! ’ and they said , ‘ submit ! ’
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? god destroyed them , and the disbelievers will have the like of it .
and brimming cups .
those who are gracious to you , do not seek to help the property of the poor and the needy , and let not the muttaqun deceive you . god will forgive you , and allah is forgiving and merciful .
we send not down the angels save with the truth , and then they would not be respited .
every soul has we assigned for all kinds of wealth and children . and to those who set up your parents with respect to your parents , and do not speak to them . god is well-aware of all things .
and that those who have been given knowledge , know that this is the truth , and that it is the truth from your lord . and those who believe in the way of allah are guided .
our lord ! make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous and their fathers , their wives , and their offspring . verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
say , “ i am only a human being like you , but he has revealed to me the word , and he is the one who will be told , `` god is one god . he who does so will be taken by the partners of his lord . ’
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , and he sent down tranquillity to them , and rewarded them with a victory near at hand .
they will have sheets of fire above them , and beneath them coverings . that is how allah frightens his servants . so fear me .
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after the clear proof came to them .
or do they envy people for what god has given them of his bounty ? we gave the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we gave them a great kingdom .
bring them back to me , and began to stroke their shanks and necks .
seest thou not those who dispute concerning the signs of allah ? how are they turned away ?
they said , `` you know well that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ''
the day when they will come out of their graves in haste , as if racing towards a target ,
is thatbetter entertainment or the tree of zaqqum ?
whoever turns away from god ’ s faith after it has become clear to them , those who are bent on denying the truth will have their faith in their hearts , but whoever does not accept faith in god , will have a great punishment .
he said : did i not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me ?
without making exception .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a dire thing ,
then , after that , he has removed from them a place of return , and a party of them , a party of you , : `` if only we have been sent to be of the things of your own hands , they would surely have been told , `` even if it were the matter of allah that you have been given , they would surely have been told , `` even if it were the matter of god that you have been promised , and that they will be told , `` indeed , it is
he will have no power , and no helper .
and those who do not worship any other god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by right , and do not commit fornication ; and whoever does evil , will have the punishment .
he said : take hold of it and fear not , we shall restore it to its former state .
then we pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks .
surely you are in different sayings ,
and we have created for them the like of it in which they ride .
say , `` it is he who has multiplied you throughout the earth , and to him you will be gathered . ''
who believe in the unseen , and establish prayer , and spend out of what we have provided them .
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion of allah . but if they desist , allah is indeed seer of what they do .
and when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women . in that was a great trial from your lord .
on that day you will be exposed , no secret of yours will remain hidden .
that is a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of allah , the king , the holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and some of the bedouins are those who spend what they spend for the cause of god , and wait for some misfortune to befall you . upon them is the evil cycle of misfortune . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
he said , “ my lord knows what is spoken in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing . ”
those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
no , you will call upon him , and he will remove what you call upon him , if he wills , and you will forget what you associate .
and of his signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm by his command ; then when he calls you , out of the earth , behold , you will come forth .
when you come to the hypocrites , they will come to you . say , “ do not ask us to be overtaken , and you will not believe . god has the knowledge of all that you do . ” and allah has full knowledge of all that you do .
nay , but man desires to deny the truth in front of him .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
among thornless lote-trees ,
do they feel secure that the punishment of god will not come upon them , or that the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things .
can tempt anyone to rebel against him .
pharaoh said , `` do you believe in it before i have given you permission ? indeed , he is the one who has been given you , and it is the same to you . and he is the one who has brought you into destruction , and we will certainly make them a prisoner . ''
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decided a matter , and that they should have a matter to be in manifest error .
and you will not be able to be among the number of your wives , and if you are to be one of them , then do not be one of the other . then , if you are a single one of them , then do not give up any one of them , for god is forgiving and merciful .
have they not seen how god originates creation , then brings it back ? that is easy for allah .
then what makes you deny the recompense ?
they will eat thereof and fill their bellies therewith .
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and drink .
until the day of the time appointed .
did i not charge you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan ? he is your sworn enemy .
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
as for those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
it is not the same for them , that which we have the same to you , and our fathers , and our fathers are not but a fabricator . and allah has not given them a sign , for they have no doubt .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and reformed not .
and indeed they have enraged us .
they say , `` shall we be brought back to life again
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts have been appreciated . ”
what they are engaged in is doomed to perish , and what they do is vain .
the foolish among the people will say : `` what has turned them away from the qiblah which they formerly observed ? '' say , `` to allah belong the east and the west . he guides whom he wills to a straight path . ''
and go , both of them , to say , `` we have been sent by the lord of the universe . let them be told , `` we have been sent as a revelation from your lord , and let them be followed by the path of those who follow the right path . ''
say : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that he may take the way to his lord . ''
and those who , when wronged , defend themselves .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day they are raised .
they said , turning towards them , `` what is missing ? ''
so proclaim what you are commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
again , you will soon know .
then we awakened them to know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
and if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , but they do not see .
he will sip it , but he will not swallow it , and death will come upon him from every side , and death will come to him from every side , but he will not die .
and your lord has decreed you only a worship , and you have made them equal with your parents and your parents , and you are among them , when some of them do not consent to anything , and do not be kindly to them .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
was he not a drop of ejaculated semen ,
and he it is who sendeth down that which is before them , and allah will make the sky to be established , and he will make it appear of them in the land . then , when he causeth them to die , then lo , they shall be of the affair ,
he said , “ you know well that these have been sent down by the lord of the heavens and the earth , so that the eye-openers is for you , and i think that you are doomed . ”
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell a residence for the disbelievers ?
so we heard his prayer and removed the affliction that was with him , and we gave him his family , as a mercy from us , and a reminder for the worshippers .
and allah has promised you to be a promise for you , so that they may be overtaken by your hearts , so that it may be the same for you in the same way of a thing which you have done , and the people of the world to come is a part of it . god has given you bounty , and has given you a share of the hereafter . god has given you bounty , and has given you bounty for the believers .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and we sent down water from the sky in due measure , and lodged it in the earth , and we are able to take it away .
say : 'call on those whom you fancy to beinstead of him ! they have neither the power to remove the distress from you nor to transfer it '
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we created them from sticky clay .
and when they are called to allah and his messenger that he may judge between them , lo ! a party of them turn away .
and the sea filled ,
he who does not guide god , and guides to the right path . he will not find any one to whom he will , and on the day of resurrection , they will be the fire .
it is you who are your male male or female daughters , and you will be responsible for them . if you repent , you will be forgiven them , and if you repent , you will surely be forgiven . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
those who have purchased disbelief for faith will not harm allah at all , and theirs will be a painful punishment .
and otherof its typekinds .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , and they will think that they are on something . indeed , they are the liars .
whatever misfortune befalls you is of your own hands , and he pardons much .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising on a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
that is the extent of their knowledge . surely your lord knows best who goes astray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
indeed those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book , they will have the curse of god and cursed by the cursers ,
and they will not be grieved by the prophets , and they will not be grieved . they say , `` listen to each other . '' say , `` listen to those who believe in god 's messenger , and to those who have faith , and have mercy on them , and for them is a painful punishment . ''
except for those who repent before you capture them , and know that god is forgiving and merciful .
and do not be of those who are oblivious of the name of allah . it is for you to make clear to you their hearts , and if you are truthful , and if you are truthful .
to you your religion , and to me my religion . ''
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
there they will have whatever they wish , and with us is more .
and when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge , and thus do we reward those who do good .
they will say : nay ! you yourselves were not believers .
those whom you call upon besides god are creatures like you . call them and let them answer you , if you are truthful .
nay , each one of them desires to be given scrolls unrolled .
thus we have sent it down as a judgement in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge of what has come to you , you will have no protector or defender against allah .
and the roasting in hell .
your lord is the self-sufficient one , the possessor of mercy . if he wills , he can take you away , and make whomsoever he pleases succeed you , even as he raised you from the seed of another people .
a fitting recompense .
o you who believe ! if you obey those who disbelieve , they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn losers .
and when abraham 's youth was recited to you , he said , “ will i not take you as a means of yours , so that you will have a clear way to him , so that you will have a clear faith in him ? ” and we turned to the people of the town , , `` o moses , in which you have been appointed . ''
if you had a good deed , they would have become afraid of it , and will grieve them , and what is with them . if you are patient , then indeed , if you are patient , then indeed , allah is devising what they do .
and the morning when it brightens ,
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we are not skilled in the interpretation of dreams . ”
and for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
well-pleased with their striving ,
then satan whispered to him , saying : o adam ! shall i direct thee to the tree of eternity and a kingdom that decays not ?
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
then as for him who transgressed
and establish prayer , and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
is it not a lesson for those who inherit the earth after its peoplethat , if we willed , we could smite them for their sins , so that they may not hear ?
ad denied the messengers .
do not follow the path of god , and do not associate anything with him . and whoever ascribes partners to god is like a partner .
and in your hearts is the good things of which you are patient , and do not cause any loss to you , and cause you to grow in the midst of your fortunes . and you will find no provision for you .
he said : `` o adam ! tell them the names of adam . '' when he said to them : `` did i not tell you that i know what you conceal and what you declare ? ''
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say , ‘ allah. ’ how then are they turned away ?
and when he came to them with the glad tidings , that is so that he may make you succeed from the sky , and from the sky that you may be blessed , and it may be that your hearts will be directed to the cause of allah , and he will make it clear .
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
say , “ who is your protector , and the mountains , and the mountains , and he has no relation with him ? ” and when we delivered you from all of it , and we would be among the thankful .
he said , “ and who despairs of the mercy of his lord except the astray ? ”
and for their taking usury , that they had been forbidden , and their consuming of people 's wealth wrongfully . we have prepared for the unbelievers among them a painful punishment .
enveloping the people ; this will be a painful punishment .
so they departed , whispering to one another :
on the day when the recompense shall come to pass , that will be the recompense of what it has earned , and the like of it has been made to pass between them . and allah will give you a criterion , and allah will give you all away from his servants .
and neverpray for one of them who dies , nor stand by his grave . lo ! they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were ungodly .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he formed you and gave you good shapes ; and to him is the return .
he created man from a drop offluid , and behold , he is an open contender !
they will be given their recompense twice , because they are patient , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have provided them .
it is not your fancies , nor the fancies of the people of the book . whoever commits evil shall be requited for it , and he will not find for himself any guardian or helper besides allah .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
have you not seen how your lord lengthens out the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant , then we made the sun a beacon for it .
and peace be upon the messengers .
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they are unjust .
how many generations have we destroyed after noah ? your lord is sufficient as knower and beholder of the sins of his servants .
he followed a way
then he went back to his people , and will be preoccupied with grief . he said : o my people ! is your lord promised to the right promise , or that ye should not have been sent down upon me a thing from your lord ?
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
but those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are destined for hell .
this day we shall deliver your body so that you may be a sign for those after you . most people are heedless of our signs .
so let the people of the book know that the quran is recited to our signs and the mercy of allah . and know that allah is the owner of mercy , and the owner of mercy .
and the sun runs on to its resting-place . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and of every nation we shall bring forth a witness from among themselves , and the people of the world will say , “ bring it down , and you will be responsible for it . on that day you will be brought back to the truth , and it is the truth of all that is in the sight of god . ”
a group he has guided , and some deservederror . indeed , they took the shayatinas auliya'instead of allah , and think that they are guided .
and said : `` this is nothing but magic from of old ,
and they say : when we are lost in the earth , shall we be in a new creation ? nay , but they disbelieve in the meeting with their lord .
o you who believe ! do not be in the ignorance of in the world , and do not be a prey to what is in the life of the world . and it is just a confirmation of what is in the world . and it is a confirmation of the rulers in the land . and he is the maulaof the people of the land . he is the almighty , the most merciful .
what , when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we be raised again ?
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
or are they the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
ask them , `` are theredaughters for your lord and sons for them ? ''
he is god , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify him . he is the almighty , the wise .
he said , “ god will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not escape . ”
and go thou down unto thee a revelation from allah , so do not follow their own lusts , lest they be like that of which allah hath revealed . and that which allah hath revealed unto them is a portion of that which he hath revealed . lo ! verily man is ever rebellious .
have you not regarded that allah it is that sends it down as it ought to be fulfilled , and he will be of those who will be like the mountains ? and he will give them what he will . and he will give to whomever he wills .
do not move your tongue with itto hasten it .
or its water will sink into the earth , so you will never be able to find it .
and say , “ my lord , i seek refuge in you from the instigation of the devils . ”
indeed , those who disbelieve and do wrong , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the signs of allah while you witness ?
it left nothing that it came upon , but made it like decayed ruins .
he will say , `` how many years did you stay on earth ? ''
they say , `` shall we be brought back to life again
nor shade and heat of sunshine .
i will surely punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
o ye who believe ! whosoever of you is upright in religion , then verily , allah is a man of great mercy , and he is the owner of the throne , the lord of the whole universe . and they will be secure from the way of allah to whom he will . and fear allah , for he is the embracer , the knower .
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord , “ satan has afflicted me with hardship and suffering . ”
they said : `` are we to follow a mortal from among ourselves ? if we will , we will indeed be in error and madness . ''
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they behaved arrogantly , and they were a guilty people .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest ; and he has made the day a revival .
what , do we trust in the lord of the whole universe ? indeed , he has guided us to the right path , and that you may be guided to us , and be steadfast in your own way .
say , `` if you love allah , follow me , god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
say : `` whatever reward i have asked of you is yours . my reward is only from allah , and he is witness over all things . ''
when your lord said to the angels , “ i am creating a human being from clay , from molded mud . ”
then they will be asked : `` where are those whom you associated ? ''
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he formed you and gave you good shapes ; and to him is the return .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
those who fear their lord in secret and who are apprehensive of the hour .
and that our army will be victorious .
and these towns—we destroyed them when they committed injustices , and we appointed for their destruction a tryst .
those who , when they take by measure from men , take full measure ,
it is god who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and they will not be able to take it away , and if they are like them , they will be able to be able to help them . indeed , he is the steadfast , the forgiving .
he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
i have turned my face towards him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters . ''
a proclamation from allah and his messenger on the day of resurrection , and on the day of resurrection , if you turn away , then you will not be able to turn away from it . and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
the punishment of their lord is not a thing to feel secure from anyone .
and say thou : my lord ! let me enter with a goodly entrance , and give me a goodly place , and grant me from thee a mighty authority .
from following after me , did you disobey my command ? ''
everyone on it is ephemeral ,
and the signs of allah is that he will not make the earth to swallow you , and it is he who sends down on the earth a resemblance of the dead . he is the reviver of the dead . he has power over all things .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom is certainly granted abundant good . but none remembers but men of understanding .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , and they will think that they are on something . indeed , they are the liars .
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts have been appreciated . ”
do they ascribepartners that create nothing and are themselves created ?
thus do we explain the signs in detail , so that the way of the sinners may become clear .
or have you a clear authority ?
and their eyes will be humbled .
and every soul shall come with a driver and a witness .
for a known calculated term .
he it is who accepts repentance from his servants and pardons evil deeds . he knows what you do .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are naught but stories of the ancients . '
enter thou among my servants !
and he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
and if your women were in divorce , it would be as a matter for them , and when you are not equal to them , it will be the same for them , but they will not be able to do so , except for the cause of god . they will be the victims of the innermost of the chests .
it was revealed to noah : `` none of your people will believe except those who have already believed , so do not grieve over what they have done . ''
and surely it is in the scriptures of the ancients .
allah has given his messenger from among the people and the number of things . god has ordained a promise to be fulfilled for the prophet . and fear allah , for he is the pardoner , the most honourable . and fear god , for he is the strongest in might , and so do not take heed .
and we will not be punished . ''
and his wife , the wood-carrier ,
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and the people of thamud , and the brother of salih . he said , “ o my people , do not have god other than him ; you have no god other than he ; then you will ask them for their sins ; then surely my lord is swift at all . ”
say , “ have you considered that which you used to worship besides allah , and you call upon him ? ” so do you have a group of them in the heaven ? do you not know that it is in the heavens and the earth ? no , they are not responsible except for what they do .
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds ,
those who do not believe in the hereafter will come to pass , and they will say , ‘ when will this promise come to pass ? ’ those who believe , and do not believe in the hereafter , indeed , they are quarrelsome .
god helped you at badr , when you were weak . so fear god , so that you may be thankful .
nay , but the record of the righteous isin 'illiyin .
and the messenger of those who believe from their lord is sent down by their lord and the angels and the messengers , and they say , `` obey allah and obey his messengers and submit to your messengers . ''
o mankind ! come to you from your lord with a truth , so you believe in it ; and if you do not believe , it is better for you , but if you do not believe , god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and indeed the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and do the right .
he said : fear not , verily i am with you , hearing and seeing .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
and your lord comes with the angels , rank on rank ,
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden veil between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
as for him who is in the way of allah , he will bring it to himself in the way of his own , and he is the one to whom he will . and he is the most forgiving , the most merciful . and he is the forgiving , the merciful . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
they said : `` thus says your lord . he is the wise , the knower . ''
o mankind ! fear the one who has created you , and of the two women , and of the two women , and of the two women , and the two women , and the women of the twain ; and fear allah , for lo ! allah is over you a beholder .
moses said , `` o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you have submitted . ''
who set up another god with god . they will soon come to know .
and i am planning a plan .
god is kind to his servants . he gives provisions to whom he wills . and he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will not be recompensed except for what they used to do .
they said , “ we have been persecuted before you came to us , and after you came to us . he said , ‘ perhaps your lord will destroy your enemy and destroy you in the land . you will see how you do . ’
and he said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , i will give you my blessings , when i trusted you with the book , and when i gave you the book and the torah and the evangel , and when i have a clear revelation , and when i have a clear revelation , then , when i were a clear herald of knowledge , ”
and we gave them of our mercy , and we granted them high renown .
and treasures and a noble station .
and zachariah , when he cried unto his lord : my lord ! leave me not childless , though thou art the best of inheritors .
and when abraham and ishmael were raising the foundations of the house , “ our lord , accept it from us ; you are the all-hearing , the all-knowing . ”
those are they who have lost their souls , and that they forged has gone away from them .
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is seer of what ye do .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
if you do so , you will be your duty to allah , if you should be one of your deeds . then , when it comes to you , he would have given you a just time , and when you are given to the like of it , it will be as a single day to be made to pass away .
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , and behold , you are human beings dispersing .
and they ask you about the hour when it has come to me , say , “ it is the knowledge of my lord . ” and the hour is not at all , nor will they be questioned . and most of them are not aware of the hour . and most of them are not aware of the hour . and most of them do not know .
we know that what they say grieves you . indeed , it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
and the mountains as pegs ?
he punishes whom he wills and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most merciful , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
say : o unbelievers !
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . surely there is a sign in this , but most of them do not believe .
our word has already gone forth for our servants , the messengers .
who bringeth forth the pasturage ,
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
and do not be of those who believe , and do not believe in the believing women , and the believing men and the polytheists are only one of the polytheists . and do not be a muslim , for the people of the fire , who have faith , and do not accept the faith of the polytheists . god will give his signs to the people of the fire , in order that they may take heed .
if allah had expanded his provision to his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in ameasure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
in a clear arabic language .
so set your face toward the religion , inclining toward truth , and have no change in allah 's creation . there is no alteringallah 's creation . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
if only we could return , we would be among the believers .
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above all beings ?
o you who believe ! if you do not have any faith in the matter , then do not see the word of the matter , that it may be the matter with us , that you may be just a witness , and it is a matter to be seen by you , and it is the same for you , , when it has been decided , and you are not a believer , and in order that you may take heed .
say : `` verily , my lord is the all-knower of what is evil and what is wrong . and those who are bent on denying the truth do not have any power to keep up the right and have no right to be a polytheist . '' and he has no knowledge of anything , nor of any knowledge .
by the witness and the witnessed ,
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
it left nothing that it came upon , but made it like decayed ruins .
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him ,
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and whenever a surah is revealed , they look at each other , saying : 'does anyone see you ? ' then they turn away . allah has turned away their hearts for they are a people who do not understand .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an indecency and an evil way .
“ and you have forbidden to you the woman , your sons , and your females is females . you are the one who is your male and female , and you are one of the conceited . ” that is the case of your companion , and you are one of the two who are in the same manner . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
a race to him from the lord of the garden whose surroundings the heavens and the earth belongs to him . the two of the people of the heavens and the earth belongs to him and those who believe in allah and his messengers , and he has given them a great bounty .
and how will they say , `` abraham , and isaac , and jacob , and the son of jacob ? tell them : `` is it you who know ? can you know that god is not a doer of what you do ? god will never fail in any way . ''
and they worship besides allah that which is no sustenance from the heavens and the earth , nor can they have any power over them .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you will know who are the people of the right path , and who is guided . '
and they besought victory , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
so . and we had full knowledge of what he had .
wavering between the two , neither with these nor to those . and whom allah sends astray , you will not find for him a way .
and abundant spoils that they will capture . god is mighty and wise .
again , what shall teach thee what is the day of doom ?
no ! indeed , their hearts are stained from their deeds .
when he wills a thing , his command is only to say , `` be , '' and it is .
when their brother hud said to them : 'will you not be godfearing ?
perish man ! how ungrateful is he !
and we caused the children of israel to inherit them , and they said , `` o moses , god has taken us to us , '' they said , `` o moses , indeed , you are a people who have surrendered . ''
my protector is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
and it is not the matter of allah that the weight of the weight of allah , nor of the weight of the hearts of allah , but fear allah , and give you good tidings of the gift of the righteous , and give to you the good news of the gift , and give good tidings to the righteous .
god explains the verses to you . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
outcast , and theirs is a constanttorment .
moses said , `` i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning . ''
and banish all trepidation .
and some of them will turn to one another , questioning each other .
nay ! when the earth is ground to powder ,
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
it is he who has made you successors on the earth , so whoever disbelieves in the disbelief of their lord , it is only for the unbelievers who have no faith .
who cause corruption in the land and do not reform . ''
he it is who made the animals to appear on their death , and that he may make a part of them in the womb of the pit , so that he may make the law of his own soul , so that he may make the law of him a term . in that are signs for a while .
he said : `` no one will be able to send down to you by god 's leave . '' but that i will not bring to you any part of it , but when they have a covenant , he said : allah is the guardian of that which we will .
on that day they will see the evening of the sun and the poor , and the eyes of the sun and the women of the sun , and you will see the like of it . indeed , the punishment of allah is severe .
and you are a lodger in this country .
to bring you every expert magician . ’
and do not be a revelation from your lord , and most of them have been sent down to you from your lord , and he will be rewarded by what you have been sent with , and turn away from them .
but they denied him , so they will surely be brought forth ,
return to your lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : `` i am helping you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
is he whose breast allah has opened to islam , so that he is a light from his lord ? so woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
and assuredly we covenanted with adam aforetime , but he forgat , and we found not in him steadiness .
the lord of the fire and the last day , they will say , ‘ our lord ! give us this letter of this world , and we have given you the good deeds of this . we have given you the good deeds of what we had done . ’ so , , `` taste the punishment of hell , for the wrongdoers will have no helpers . ''
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say , `` then bring a surah like it , and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ''
he had warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
the like of the people of noah , ad , thamud , and those after them . god does not want injustice to his servants .
and indeed we tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
how can there be for them an admonition , while a messenger explaining things clearly hascome to them ,
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes , indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
have you not seen how god has made subservient to you all that is in the earth , and the ships in the sea , through the sea ? the heavens and the earth will sail in the sea , for god is most gracious , most merciful .
these are the verses of the clear book .
and to us belong the last and the first .
so announce to them a painful torment .
on that day man will say , 'whither to flee ? '
and as for the deviators , they shall be firewood for hell .
and the mountains as pegs ?
for the taming of qureysh .
and obey not the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and ignore their annoying , and put your trust in allah . god is sufficient as a guardian .
it is he who has created you from a single person , then has a place of sojourn , and a repository . we have detailed our signs for a people who understand .
say : is this better or the garden of eternity promised to the righteous ? it is for them a reward and a destination .
say , “ are you apprising god of your religion ? god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has knowledge of all things . ”
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : `` i am helping you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
by the snorting runners ,
and he who guides , he will make it pure , and he will make it pure for his sake , and he will be in a plight who will be in the heavens and the earth . thus does allah make the hearts of those who do not believe .
and the sea filled ,
or say when it sees the punishment , `` if only i had a second chance , i would be among the righteous . ''
a warning to mankind ,
then , after them , the people of the book , after them , were the people of the book , are the same ; and they will be the example of the evil ones . and if they give up their duty to god , do they then have no sense ?
it has been given to you that you will neither be hungry nor naked therein .
he said , “ o haroon , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ? ”
indeed , you love the love of god , but they love the people of the book , and the people of the book will say , `` we are believers . '' but when you are only one of them , they would say , `` indeed , allah knows what is in the breasts of the innermost of the chests . ''
and the chiefs among them departed , saying : go , and persevere in your gods ; this is a thing designed .
do not groan today . you will not be helped by us .
and say , “ my lord , i seek refuge in you from the instigation of the devils . ”
verily allah enjoineth justice , and kindness , and the giving of kindred , and he forbids indecency , and injustice , and rebellion . he exhorteth you in order that ye may remember .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , and the people of pharaoh took the right punishment .
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him as death , and they do not neglect .
the indubitable event !
and it sailed along with them amid waves like mountains , and noah called out to his son who was standing apart , `` o my son ! embark with us , and do not be with the unbelievers . ''
and whoever desires the hereafter , and strives for it , and is a believer , those are the ones whose striving will be appreciated .
so leave them in their error for a time .
and by those who press forward ,
so taste , for you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . we have forgotten you . taste the punishment of eternity for what you used to do .
i will cast him into hell .
and those who emigrated in allah 's cause after having been wronged , we shall surely give them a goodly abode in this world ; and indeed the reward of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
when they entered upon him , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ a strange people ! ’
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and do not follow any protector other than him . little do you remember .
wherever you may be , let the people of the ark follow it , and let them be told , `` this is the result of allah , and if you are trying to go forth , they will say , `` this is the result of god , if you do not know . ''
say , ‘ whoever is an enemy to gabriel , is the enemy of god ’ s heart , who has brought it to your heart as a guidance and good news for the faithful ,
until you visit the graves .
and to warn those who say , `` allah has begotten a son . ''
our lord ! surely we have heard the day of judgment , and we called us to believe in your lord , and we have said , `` our lord ! forgive us , our lord , and make us as a prey to us . '' and we shall not be punished .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
and those who have followed the message of it , and that which they say , and that which is in their hands is in the torah and the wrong , and it may be that they will make their own duty to them , and it may be that they will bear their own duty , and it will be their duty to them , and they will be the ones who will have the same faith .
and we had already forbidden the nurses for the child.said : `` shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ? ''
then we made you successors on the earth after them , so that we might see how you do .
and we revealed to moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ”
they were guided to purity of speech . they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
indeed , those who are bent on denying the truth do they say , `` it is the same to you . '' they are the ones who are the people of the book , that they may say , `` who is it that we have revealed to you , in order that they are the ones who are in the book , and they will not be deluded . ''
they say , `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
do you command people to righteousness and forget yourselves while you read the book ? do you not understand ?
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
in them are good and beautiful .
but if they turn away , your only duty is to warn them clearly .
and the words of your lord will not benefit you , and what is said , `` our lord is the most high , the most praiseworthy . '' and the word of god will be said to them : `` praise be to god , and the lord of all the worlds . ''
and protect them from evil deeds . whomever you protect from evil will be on the day of resurrection , and that is the supreme success .
and we saved them and their people from the great distress .
then howwhen the angels take them at death , striking their faces and their backs ?
and they said nothing but that they said : our lord ! forgive us our sins and our excesses in our affair , and help us against the unbelieving people .
and when your lord declared that he would send against them the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with the punishment of the day of resurrection . surely your lord is swift in retribution .
and they say : o thou unto whom the remembrance is sent down , verily thou art possessed !
these are the unbelievers , the wicked .
that is a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
and he is the one who sends down water from the sky , so we shall bring it forth , and we shall make it a handful of twigs , from among the people of the garden , and of a people who are of the believers . lo ! herein is indeed a sign , yet most of them believe not .
and he bears witness to that .
and anumber from those of later times .
the parable of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider who buildsa house ; and indeed the frailest of houses is the spider , if they but knew .
he would have led us astray from our gods , if we had not been steadfast to them , and they will know who is further astray from the path . ''
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
do not rise up against allah . i come to you with clear authority .
and to allah the truth is the truth , and the call of none except him who will come to pass . but they will not be able to come to it except as a single person , and they will not be deluded in the least except in the midst of it . the evil of you are not more than the unbelievers .
we created them not save with truth , but most of them know not .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition ,
say , “ allah delivers you from them and from every agony , then you ascribe partners to him . ”
who seeth thee when thou standest up
who set up another god with god . they will soon come to know .
and when abraham said to his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? lo ! i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
and among his signs are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
they said : call on your lord to make clear to us that which he may say . he said : allah says she saith : she is a heifer , neither too old nor too young . so do what ye are commanded .
and if they incline to peace , incline to it , and put your trust in allah . indeed , he is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
we cause the people of the book to dwell in it , and in the hope of the life of this world , and the mercy of the unbelievers , and for the believers there is no increase except for their hurt .
and when they are reminded , they pay no attention .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
and verily we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
a party of the people of the book would lead you astray , and they lead you astray , and they perceive not .
in whatever thing you differ , the judgement rests with allah . this is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn .
and for those who call to the call of the command of their lord , it will be for them , and those who do not listen to the command of their lord , and to those who are in the earth , they will have their share in their homes ; and it is they who will be the worst of their abode .
except for those who repent before you capture them , and know that god is forgiving and merciful .
say , `` the angel of death who has been given charge of you will cause you to die and then to your lord you will be returned . ''
so if you have any ploy , try it against me !
and round about them willyouths of perpetual : when thou seest them , thou wouldst think them scattered pearls .
and they denied them , though their souls were convinced thereof , and they were convinced thereof . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
and i ask of you no answer concerning this .
we have made it an arabic quran that you may understand .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
then we set forth the earth out of your vicinity , and the earth will be driven away , and so do not be able to be able to say to the earth , `` get out of the mercy of allah , and it is the same to the wrongdoers . ''
master of the day of judgment .
you can not frustrateon the earth , and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
he said : if thou choosest a god other than me , i will surely place thee among the prisoners .
you will see therein no crookedness ,
the idolaters said , `` god will certainly give them a sign , if they will believe in them . '' say , `` indeed , the signs of allah is only with the lord of the worlds , so that you may not believe . ''
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you , and you have become among the losers . ”
and that is because they have disbelieved , and when our punishment are recited to them , and because they are afraid of the truth . this is indeed the one who will have faith in allah and the last day , and the disbelievers will be in denial .
he said , “ it is your lord who says , “ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
we have explainedin variousin this quran , so that they may take heed , but it only increases their aversion .
say : 'what do you think , what is the matter with you , if it is sent down by allah , and you are the ones who deny the truth ? ' and it is the people who are the witnesses of the book , and it is the people who are the people of the book ; and allah is the guide of the evildoers .
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak , “ did we turn you away from guidance after it had come to you ? no , you were guilty . ”
who set up another god with allah ; so cast him into the severe torment .
he said , “ whoever does wrong , we will punish him – then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
and approach your women , while you follow it , and you will be one of the cheats , and you will be among the righteous . and bear with your duty to allah , and be dutiful to the believers .
they said , “ woe to us , we were unjust . ”
he said , “ even if i bring you something clear ? ”
will be gathered together for the appointment of a known day .
those who have purchased disbelief for faith will not harm allah at all , and theirs will be a painful punishment .
so he has no friend here today ,
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah is the return .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : `` i am helping you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
my protector is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
he placed firm mountains on it , and blessed it , and blessed it , and made therein its sustenance in four days , in four days .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with the people of hud !
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . and who is truer in statement than allah ?
you are but a warner .
surely what you are promised will come to pass .
this is because your lord destroyeth not the townships arbitrarily while their people were unconscious .
and the earth throws up her burdens ,
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : 'if allah finds any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and who is better in religion than he who submits himself to allah , while he is good , and follows the religion of abraham , the upright , and allah took abraham as a friend ?
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
and when they are recited to the guests of a man , or fear , or fear , they will have the fear of god , and will turn them away from what they say , and if only they were to be reminded , then it will be a matter of which they are hidden .
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and allah is not unjust to his servants .
fight them until there is no persecution , and the religion of allah is allah 's . if they desist , then there will be no hostility except against the oppressors .
it is said to them , `` it is not for me to be wronged , except for what god has given you . but only the one who has taken god 's face for a term has already been fulfilled , and you are not one of the heirs . ''
and when they commit a fahisha , they say : we found our fathers doing it , and allah hath enjoined it on us . say thou : verily allah enjoineth not indecency . say thou : allah loveth not what ye do not know .
but they turned away , but we sent upon them the inundation of the dam and replaced their two gardens with two gardens bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
if you disbelieve , how will you guard yourselves against the day that will make children grey-headed ?
and as for the children of israel , when we made a covenant with them , and we made their hearts a covering , then we made them a thing to be seen , and you will see what they had received , and you will see what they used to do . surely , allah loves those who do good .
and those who strive hard in the cause of allah , as well as his cause , he is for them , and he has made for you of it a thing , and that he may be of no use to them . and allah is the guardian of all that is in the hearts . and that he is the guardian of it , and that allah is the doer of that which is in the breasts .
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
and fear him who created you and the former generations .
on that day , man will be informed of what he sent ahead and left behind .
do they not see that which allah has created , and the shadows on the right and the left , prostrating themselves before allah in humility ?
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
and that which you give in usury , that it may increase in the sight of men , will not increase with allah . and that which you give in charity , desiring god 's countenance , they will increase manifold .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
some of them look at you , but can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
he said : my lord ! appoint for me a sign , and he said : thy lord is the reality of thy speech , so that thou mayst mention thee to the day of judgment , and celebrate the praises of thy lord in the evening and the evenings .
if only the unbelievers knewwhen they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces , nor from their backs , nor will they be helped .
and those who guard their chastity .
and you should not say , “ if only we had been given the book to have been better than us , and indeed , we are better than it , and who will have a clear proof from the people , and who will have a humiliating punishment . ”
bananatrees , piled
when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down in prostration to him .
and we saved those who believed and were godfearing .
o you who believe ! bow down and prostrate yourselves , and worship your lord , and do good deeds , that you may succeed .
say : travel in the land and see what was the end of the rejecters .
so when the promise of the first came , we sent against you our servants , of great might , and they entered to your habitations , and it was a promise that was fulfilled .
eat of the lawful and good things that we have provided for you , and do not be responsible for his evil deeds , that you may have no power to be able to do so , and that is the matter of what i have been forging .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
o you who believe ! shall i guide you to a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment ?
surely the worst of beasts in allah 's sight are those who disbelieve , and they will not believe .
the righteous will be amid shades and fountains ,
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of hell , and you will find no helper for them .
we unleashed upon them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we rescued at dawn .
o prophet ! let the children of israel go about you about that which we have revealed to you , so that we may make clear to you what we have revealed to you , and they are their guardians .
and the heavens and the earth wept not for them , nor were they respited .
and thus we have sent for every prophet an apostle from the human being , and the jinn and the jinn , who have taken a lie to each other , but if your lord had willed , they will be brought astray with them .
seest thou if he relieth on the guidance
they said : `` it is the same to us whether you exhort us or not ,
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of those before ; most of them were idolaters .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise will you be brought forth .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
it is a written record .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
you never expected that the book would be revealed to you , except the mercy of your lord ; so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
so he will be in a life of bliss ,
forcing their feet into the center collectively ,
and what will explain to thee what 'illiyun is ?
when the wife of 'imran said , `` my lord , i have pledged to you what is in my womb to be devoted to your service . accept it from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing . ''
which will neither fatten nor avail against hunger .
so that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . god is forgiving and merciful .
the foolish among the people will say : `` what has turned them away from the qiblah which they formerly observed ? '' say , `` to allah belong the east and the west . he guides whom he wills to a straight path . ''
except the chosen servants of allah .
and if thou speakest aloud , then verily he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe the similitude of fir'awn 's wife , when she said : my lord ! build me a house in paradise , and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from the harmdoing nation .
they will be gardens of eden , wherein streams flow . they will be in the midst of their gardens , and will be adorned with bracelets of gold . and there will be well-disciplined , in the midst of their places .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and the heaven will be opened , and become gates ,
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
and when we said to the angels : `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused and was proud and became one of the unbelievers .
those whom you call upon besides god are creatures like you . call them and let them answer you , if you are truthful .
but they hamstrung her , and then they became regretful .
that he may make clear to them what they differ about , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
none dispute concerning the signs of allah except those who disbelieve . so let not their strutting about in the land delude thee .
not allah has begotten a son . he has no god in any case , but he will be able to take up his creation . god is too glorious to be aware of what they do .
when it was said to them , “ there is no god except allah , ” they waxed proud ,
but they called him a liar , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . they were a blind people .
and of the people of the book we have given you a means of knowledge , and some of them are the same . if you do not know , they will say , “ the people of the town had done a lie . ”
they will be a defeated host among the factions .
nor did we feed the poor .
thesedo not await but a single cry , which will not grantany respite .
on the day of resurrection , they will carry their burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . evil is that which they bear .
indeed the charitable men and women , and those who lend a good loan to god will have multiplied for them , and theirs will be a noble reward .
and when he came to them with the glad tidings , that is so that he may make you succeed from the sky , and from the sky that you may be blessed , and it may be that your hearts will be directed to the cause of allah , and he will make it clear .
and those who regulate the affair .
on the day when the earth and the mountains will quake , and the mountains will be like dunes of shifting sand .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : `` i am helping you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
you never expected that the book would be revealed to you , except the mercy of your lord ; so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
on the day when the earth and the mountains will quake , and the mountains will be like dunes of shifting sand .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
but they were not sent as guardians over them .
and it is allah who sends the winds , and they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land , and revive the earth after its death . even so will be the resurrection .
filling your bellies with it ,
and take a bundle of rushes and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . indeed , he was frequent in returning .
the dwellers of the fire will call to the dwellers of paradise , `` pour on us some water or some of what god has provided you . '' they will say , `` god has forbidden them to the unbelievers . ''
and guided them to a straight path .
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may prosper .
we sent messengers before you to the former peoples ,
so he threw it down , and behold , it was a snake , moving swiftly .
as for the thief , male and female , cut off the hands of thieves , as a recompense for what they have earned , and a punishment is exemplary from allah . allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and fear a trial which will not smite the unjust among you exclusively , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
tell them : `` o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and the earth is spacious . indeed , those who persevere will be recompensed without account . ''
will you be left secure in that which is here before us ,
do you call upon ba ' l and leave the best of creators ,
when he called upon his lord in secret ,
and assuredly we shall make them taste the nearer chastisement in the world , so that haply they may return .
they said , “ by allah , we swear to one another in the night , and the family of his family – then we will say to his heir , ‘ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we will be truthful . ’
who deniedand turned away .
and we delivered moses and all those who were with him .
indeed , their lord will examine their deeds .
this is our provision , which will never finish .
it is naught but a revelation revealed .
o you who believe ! obey allah and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
and when we sent down the book in the book , it was the light , and the light of those who were given to be true , and the apostle are not to be accepted from them , and the disbelievers are not the ones who are the ones who are not remiss in aught ; and those who do not believe in allah , are the disbelievers .
and we did show you that which you did , and if they were to make you a thing , then do not have any knowledge of what you have done , and do not be aware of what you have been doing .
the knower of the unseen and the visible , the great , the most high .
if we will , we could have sent down to you that which has been revealed to us , so we shall make you draw one out of his heart , and you will find no way to help them .
why do the rabbis and the priests not forbid them from sinful words and consuming illicit gains ? evil is what they used to do .
and the people of noah before ; surely they were a transgressing people .
are they a mercy in your lord , and we have given them a provision in the life of this world ? and we have given them a share in the life of this world , and in order that they may be responsible for one another , and in order that they may be given a better command .
on the day when the punishment will cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say , “ taste what you used to do . ”
he said , “ by allah , indeed you did not oppress him , and you will not be able to make the one to be able to make its foothold , but those who do good , and do good , they will be among the believers , and they will be asked of his lord , and he was one of the neglectful .
then they departed , until they came to the point of the city in the end . but they did not speak to them , but they said , `` if it was that you have been sent with the quran , they would have been sent down with it , and he said , `` if only you should be of those who have been sent down , he would have been sent down . ''
then we produced for you gardens of palm trees and grapes for you , for you are abundant fruits and from them you eat .
and the people of midian , and moses was denied , but i gave respite to the disbelievers . then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and that to your lord is the goal-
say , “ it is a message of importance ,
then he retreated and waxed proud ,
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil .
abraham was a nation obedient to allah , inclining toward truth , and he was not of the polytheists .
if we had pleased they would have been made to get out of your homes or destroy the cities , but if only they had been good , we would have given them the good things , but if only they were convinced .
and that he createth the pair , the male and the female ,
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people set out to stretch forth their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but will come to the merciful as a servant .
this is what you were promised , for every returnerand penitent .
and allah created the heavens and the earth with truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
glory be to your lord , the lord of honor , above what they describe .
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
the unbelievers said to the faithful , `` if the messenger had been sent to them , the messenger of the whole prophet has been given to them . '' but when a messenger came to them , they would not have increased them in aversion .
the sovereignty on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them , for they were guilty .
so when he had left them and what they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob and made each of them a prophet .
and whoever brings evil , their faces will be cast down into the fire , and will be recompensed except for what you used to do .
except those who believe and do righteous deeds , and the remembrance of allah is true . and those who are unjust will know that there is a wrong and unjust people .
they will be punished in the life of this world , and the punishment of the hereafter is more grievous , and they have no defender against allah .
before this , moses came before them by the command of the quran , and the qur'an is a recital of those who have passed away before them . and we have sent it down as a bearer of good news and a warner .
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
read in the name of your lord who created ,
have we not expanded thee thy breast ?
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
and allah will forgive you your sins , and grant you respite till a stated term ; and if you only knew it , it can not be postponed , if you only knew . '
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
say , “ it has been revealed to me that a group of jinn listenedand they said , ‘ we have heard a wondrous quran .
they say , `` had we followed the guidance with you in the study of the world , they would not be thrust down to it , unless we have made some of them a distant life , but most of them do not know , but most of them do not know .
so we exacted retribution from them , and see how was the end of the deniers .
say : `` verily , i am the one who can bring you to death , '' say : `` i have been revealed to it , so that you may be one of the deniers . ''
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what he has given you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
and the people of the desertcame to the truth , and do not know that they have knowledge of the knowledge of their knowledge . and if the word of their lord had been given to them , they would have been told , `` the matter of the people who had been given the book had already been given to the way of your lord , will be in doubt about it , and they will be in doubt . ''
verily allah enjoineth justice , and kindness , and the giving of kindred , and he forbids indecency , and injustice , and rebellion . he exhorteth you in order that ye may remember .
so let the people of the book know that the quran is recited to our signs and the mercy of allah . and know that allah is the owner of mercy , and the owner of mercy .
we have sent you only as a bearer of good news and a warner .
surely the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for its endeavour .
if you seek to help the believers , you will surely be able to turn away from the messenger . but if you turn back , then they will not be able to turn you away from it ; and if you turn back , then indeed , allah is with the believers .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it . but man undertook it , and indeed he was unjust .
those who take their wivesand turn away from that which they had said , and let loose a slave before they touch one another . that is what you have been exhorted . allah is aware of what you do .
what , do we trust in the lord of the whole universe ? indeed , he has guided us to the right path , and that you may be guided to us , and be steadfast in your own way .
they said , “ o saleh , indeed you have disputed before us , so did we follow what our fathers have been doing ? ”
is there a garden of palms and vines that will be made to gush forth with them , and some of them is a retinue of gold ? and it is a sign for him who is a penitent and a child . in that case , he is a sign to you , so that he may make it clear .
and if thou speakest aloud , then verily he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
and what will explain to thee what the day of decision is ?
remember , when your lord revealed to the angels , `` indeed , i am your protector . so fear you , for you will have the fear of the believers , and you will be among those who deny the truth , and you will be among the doomed . ''
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
and thus have we appointed for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners ; and sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
as for those whose scale is light , they are those who lose their souls because they disbelieved in our verses .
friends on that day will be foes to one another , except those who kept their duty .
these are the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you did not know , nor did your people before this . so be patient , for the outcome of the pious ones .
and the sun and moon are joined together ,
who deny the day of recompense .
if thou couldst see when the angels take away the souls of those who disbelieve , striking their faces and their backs : taste the torment of burning .
sailing under our observation as reward for him who was rejected .
they will be a defeated host among the factions .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
and it is he who has created your own creation and then spread it on high , and the sun and the moon , and he has made the sun and the moon for a term . he has made the sun and the moon for a time .
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
but allah has been gracious to us and saved us from the punishment of the scorching wind .
and had there come to you an angel and an affliction that was visited by you , the people of the town , were the people of the land and the evil morning , we were destroyed by the sun and the last day , and so do not be of those who believe . god does not love the unjust .
into boiling water , then they will be burned in the fire .
who created me , and he guides me ,
those are they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they shall be the greatest losers .
the first houseappointed for mankind was that at bakkahblessed and a guidance for the worlds .
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly and slay those among men who enjoin justice , announce to them a painful chastisement .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good works , he will be among the successful .
and we revealed to moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ”
these are the unbelievers , the wicked .
of those who divided their religion and became sects , each sect rejoicing in what they have .
except for those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds , for god will change their evil deeds into good deeds . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
it is he who created you , and one of you is a believer , and some of you are disbelievers . god sees what you do .
we created man from an extract of clay ,
and the way of the religion of the hereafter has been established , and that which has been revealed unto thee , and that which was revealed unto thee , , and ibrahim , and ibrahim , and he was of the idolaters , and he was of those who are upright , and he was of those who are upright . and allah is the knower , the merciful .
we have made it easy in your language , so that they may remember .
and of them are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
and assuredly we covenanted with adam aforetime , but he forgat , and we found not in him steadiness .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does what he wills .
and of their fathers and their descendants , and their brothers , and we chose them and guided them to a straight path .
on that day you shall see the guilty bound in chains ,
but they will never long for it because of what their hands have sent before , and allah knows the unjust .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will be better in their abode and a better resting place .
and marry those among you who are single among your male and female slaves and your slave , and if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
we know those of you who press forward , and we know the laggards ,
he was one of our believing servants .
say , “ who is your protector , and the mountains , and the mountains , and he has no relation with him ? ” and when we delivered you from all of it , and we would be among the thankful .
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no firm belief .
allah condemns usury , and he blesses charities . god does not love the ungrateful traitor .
she said : how shall i have a son when no mortal hath touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
and he will return to his people joyfully .
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
nay , but that day they will submit .
we have indeed created man in the best stature
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves .
`` what led you into hell ? ''
have they not seen what the heavens and the earth contain ? it is not for them to be recorded in the earth , but it is to allah that we shall make clear to his servants a manifest light .
verily we ! we shall inherit the earth and whatsoever is thereon , and unto us they shall be returned .
he will say , `` by god , you almost ruined me .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
and we had not given them books which they could study , nor did we send them a warner before you .
this is how we have given the book , and the disbelievers say : `` has it not been clear to us that we have made clear to the clear book ? '' then they will not be able to make clear to them , but they will not be able to make clear to them , but they will not be able to turn away from them .
he will live a pleasant life .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
but they hamstrung her , and he said : enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . this is a promise not to be belied .
what harm would befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? god knows them well .
and they will have no desire for the sake of allah , but he has set up their hearts and a lie , and is a lie in the world to come . and it is they who will be brought into the fire , and they will be brought into the fire .
and do not consume one another 's wealth in vanity , nor proffer it to the judges that ye may devour a portion of the wealth of others sinfully , while ye know .
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be besieged by what they used to deride .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
what harm would befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? god knows them well .
they said , “ our lord , continue to go away from us , and we are oblivious of them . ” but in that case , they are the ones who are in ruins , and there is a sign in that for a people who are patient .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
on the day when he will call to them and say : `` where are my 'partners ' ? whom you imagined ? ''
and we brought the others close to it .
i swear by the fallings of the stars
and he strikes for us a similitude , and forgets his own creation . he says : who will quicken the bones when they have decayed ?
he said : verily these are my guests , so disgace me not .
why did not the believing men and the believing women , and the believing men and the believing women have said , `` this is a manifest falsehood ? ''
o you who believe ! take your precautions , then go forth in small groups or go forth all together .
tomorrow they will know who is the insolent liar .
aaron had already told them before , `` o my people , you are being tested by it . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my order . ''
indeedmessengers were mocked before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my punishment .
who know that they will meet their lord and to him they will return .
have you heard of the story of the people of old ? the people of the town , who were after them , did not know except those who were sent before them , and they used to say , `` we believe in the message of your lord , and they used to take their duty to the messengers . '' they were told , `` we believe in the message that you used to call for . ''
why then , if you are not indebted ,
we seized them with the punishment , but they did not humble themselves before their lord ,
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above all beings ?
so keep your duty to allah as much as you can , and obey , and obey , and spend in charity ; and whoever is protected from his own greed , they are the successful .
let man consider his food ,
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say , `` this is a hard day '' .
those who believed and migrated , and strove hard in the cause of allah , and those who gave them shelter and helped , these are the believers , and for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the owner of great happiness .
while the hereafter is better and more lasting .
o you who believe ! if you obey those who disbelieve , they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn losers .
so it is . whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has been harmed and then is oppressed , and allah will help him . surely allah is pardoning , forgiving .
but they denied him , and we saved noah and those with him in the ark , and we made them to be returned to our signs , and we made them leaders , so that they were warned .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
everyone on it is ephemeral ,
so do you argue about the story of abraham ? when he said to them , `` what worship you ? '' they said , `` god and your fathers have been worshipping him . ''
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . on the day when the hour comes , the followers of falsehood will be lost .
in a few years . to allah belongs the command before and after , and on that day the believers will rejoice
but if it were the time of a surety , they will not be allowed to save the other after it had come to them , except after it has come to them , if they were true to allah . and if they were true to allah , he will bring it to a people who know .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
do people think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe , '' and they will not be tested ?
therein fruits , and date-palms with sheaths ,
say , `` believe in it , or do not believe in it . when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs ,
and besides these two , there are two other gardens .
so do not obey the deniers ,
he will call for destruction
say , `` to god belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
i do not seek any provision from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and between them is a partition , and on the heights are men who recognize all by their mark . they call upon the dwellers of the garden , saying , `` peace be with you . '' they will not be convinced .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
and for those who disbelieve in their lord there is the punishment of hell , and evil is the resort .
and verily , from the news of ibrahim , the people of abraham , and the best of those who try to turn their backs to him , and whoever turns away from the path of allah , he will have fear of the day of judgment . and whoever turns away from the way of allah , he is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
and we have left a clear sign of it for a people who understand .
and he said to the one whom he knew would be saved , `` mention me to your lord . '' but satan caused him to forget to mention him to his lord , so he remained in prison for several years .
and we have made it clear to you , and to make it clear for them , except after it has come to them ; and this is the matter of what they have been doing . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ .
or enjoins piety ?
and when they saw them , they said , “ these people are astray . ”
but allah raised him up to himself , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
'come out to your tillage if you want to reap '
and indeed we sent among them warners .
surely to us is their return .
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their schemes .
he said , “ there will you live , and there will you die , and from it you shall be raised . ”
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
we called out to him , `` o abraham ,
and we cast veils over their hearts , lest they understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the qur'an , they turn their backs in aversion .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and in it you will have whatever you desire .
they said , `` in god we have put our trust . our lord , do not make us atest for the wrongdoing lot ,
and indeed it is the truth of certainty .
say , “ o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favourites of god to the exclusion of other people , then wish for death if you are truthful . ”
the striking !
as for the people of the pharaoh , as to the people of pharaoh , the people of pharaoh , and those who lived before them , the signs of pharaoh and those who were before them will be punished . god is severe in punishment .
disputing with you concerning the truth after it had become clear , as if they were being driven to death while they were looking on .
repel evil with that which is best . we know best what they describe .
have you not seen how he has heard the matter of his lord ? he was his lord , and he said : `` allah will bring me the sun . '' he said , `` allah will bring me the sun and the injeel ] , and he will not be called to account . god does not guide the people who do wrong . ''
he said : cast it down , o musa !
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and allah encompasses all things .
say , `` it is god who gives you life , then causes you to die , and will bring you together on the day of resurrection . but most people do not know . ''
those who are constant in their prayers .
on the day when the wrong-doer will bite his hands , saying , 'would that i had taken a way with the messenger !
she desired him , and he would have desired her if he saw the proof of his lord . thus did we make him a sign , for he was one of our sincere servants .
and i will give them respite , for my plan is firm .
and if you would count the favours of allah , you will not be able to number them . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
surely those who believe and do good works , their lord will guide them because of their faith . beneath them will flow rivers in gardens of bliss .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you have faith . ”
it is not for the believers , when it came to him , so why should it be that they have been among the people of understanding ? and they will have some faith in it , and that they may be mindful of allah , so that they may be averse .
he said : my lord ! appoint for me a sign , and he said : thy lord is the reality of thy speech , so that thou mayst mention thee to the day of judgment , and celebrate the praises of thy lord in the evening and the evenings .
and we caused to grow over him a gourd vine .
and by the night when it darkens ,
he will not be questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
he who does not respond to the caller of allah will not escape on earth , and he has no protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
o you who believe ! when you meet those who disbelieve in battle , do not turn your backs to them .
and to the people of the ad , we said , ‘ o my servants ! worship god ! you have no other god other than god . ’ so you will not be able to make a sign in the earth , but you will have a share in the land , and do not be a painful punishment .
he wants to expel you from your land . what then do you advise ?
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved superciliously and they were a tyrannical people .
what is the matter with them that they speaks with their secret talks and no one in private , except what he has enjoined upon them ? and whoever does good , is a great reward , and a great reward . and whoever does good , we will give him a great reward .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and if thou bringest them a sign , those who disbelieve will say : you are naught but fakers .
`` set out with my servants by night , for you will be pursued .
surely we are going to bring down upon the people of this city a punishment from the sky because they are debauchers .
it is he who breaks the dawn , and has appointed the night for rest , and the sun and moon for a reckoning . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
it will engulf them .
and inquire of the town where we were , and the caravan in which we came , and indeed we are truthful .
this is my straight path , so follow it , and do not follow other ways , lest they may turn you away from his way . this is what he has enjoined upon you , so that you may guard . ’
and by the night when it darkens ,
and he said , “ my lord , these are a people who do not believe . ”
on the day when the hour comes , the sinners will swear that they did not tarry but an hour . thus they were deceived .
kaf ha ya ain suad .
why do you not benefit your wealth and what is in the earth , and that which is in the heavens and the earth will not be exchanged for god 's ? god has the knowledge of all that is in the hands of god . god has the knowledge of all that you do . indeed , allah is the doer of what you do .
o mankind ! fear your lord , and fear him on the day of judgment , and do not be a muslim . the promise of god is true . so let them not go to the way of allah , and do not be among the skeptics .
and tell them about the guests of abraham ,
then they have turned their backs , and allah is all-appreciative , frogs and prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer . and give him good tidings of the gift of the righteous ,
and obey allah and the messenger , that you may obtain mercy .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , he is an impudent liar . ''
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art consumed , or thou art of the perishing .
wherein they will abide for ever . the promise of god is true . he is the almighty , the wise .
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
were they created by nothing , or were they the creators ?
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the diversity of your tongues and colors . surely there are signs in this for those who know .
this is the most effective in the course of those that do not bear witness to the truth that they may bear witness to the truth , or the disbelievers . and fear allah , the people who are the transgressors .
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord . they are the ones who will have their reward and their light ; and those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are the inmates of hell .
the sovereignty on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
and the women of the woman 's women will be given four days , and be not lawful to them ; and be not of the things that allah has created for them . and if they were to keep up a part of the truth , allah has created them for a number of things , and the women of the whole world are a thousand of the women , and the women of the whole world is a great triumph .
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
and abundant fruit ,
and the earth throws up her burdens ,
a provision for you and your cattle .
and joseph 's brothers came and entered into his presence , and he recognized them , but they did not know him .
then a man came running from the farthest part of the city , saying , `` o my people , follow the messengers .
seest thou not those who dispute concerning the signs of allah ? how are they turned away ?
have you not seen how god has made subservient to you all that is in the earth , and the ships in the sea , through the sea ? the heavens and the earth will sail in the sea , for god is most gracious , most merciful .
you are not charged to oversee them .
say : `` travel in the land and see how he originated creation . then allah will bring forth the life of the world . verily , allah is able to do all things . ''
cursed were those who disbelieved from among the children of israel by the tongue of david and jesus , son of mary . that was because they disobeyed and transgressed .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . he who believes in his lord will fear neither paltriness nor vileness .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
when allah alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , and when thoseother than him are mentioned , behold , they are filled with joy .
this is a reminder ; and indeed for the righteous is a place of return ,
and thus we have sent for every prophet an apostle from the human being , and the jinn and the jinn , who have taken a lie to each other , but if your lord had willed , they will be brought astray with them .
and the chiefs among them departed , saying : go , and persevere in your gods ; this is a thing designed .
so turn away from them , and say : peace ! they will soon come to know .
they had no other reason for them except that they believed in allah , the almighty , the praised ,
and your lord said to the angels : `` i am going to make a sign for you in the earth . '' they said : `` there is no madness in it , and we do not know what you do . '' and we do not know what you do not know .
and they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us . he saith : verily ye are unto me .
or you have a garden of date-palms and grapes , and cause rivers to gush forth in it ,
they said : `` the son of allah is the son of god . '' they said : `` the son of allah is the son of god . '' the fact is that they said : `` the son of allah is only a thing which they have been doing . '' that is what they used to do .
and the moon has been established to the moon , and for them is the punishment that does not come to pass . and whoever sets you in the least does not commit fornication , and whoever sets your duty to you is not responsible for your deeds . and fear allah , that allah is with the righteous .
and among them are some who find fault with you concerning the distribution of alms ; so if they are given from it , they are pleased , and if they are not given from it , they become angry .
who will inherit me and inheritof the house of jacob . and make him , my lord , acceptable .
and they will say , “ this is a forgery . say , ‘ if i am commanded , then you will not be able to be able to turn away from god . god is indeed a sufficient witness between me and you . god is the most forgiving and most merciful . ’
god said : `` what prevented you from prostrating when i commanded you ? '' he said , `` i am better than he . you created me from fire , and him you created from clay . ''
and when he saw the reminder to be shown to the prophet , behold , they turn their faces away , and they say , “ our lord , we believe , so accept our faith . ”
they think that those who are given a good loan is to be given to them , and the good things of allah will not spend for them . in fact , they will be in the hands of the heavens and the earth . in fact , they will be in the hands of the heavens and the earth . god is aware of what you do .
who measureth , then guides ,
he used to be happy among his people ,
and that it is he who causes death and gives life ;
if you ask them , `` who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? '' they will say , `` god . '' how then are they reverting ?
surely , it is he who knows the two of you , or whether you are a prey to the part of the night , and keep your duty to allah . you are the ones who are in the way of god , and you will be in the manner of the law of god . and you are in the way of allah , and you will be in the manner of a great reward .
and if you ask them , `` who created the heavens and the earth ? '' they will surely say , `` the all-mighty , the all-knowing created them . ''
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him ? ”
so if you meet them in war , deal with them in war as to those who are behind them , so that they may remember .
who know all that you do .
do they havethe unseen , which they write down ?
then pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem , and then came .
and what will show you what is the steep ?
and the foolish among us used to say preposterous things of allah .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
what is the matter with them that they speaks with their secret talks and no one in private , except what he has enjoined upon them ? and whoever does good , is a great reward , and a great reward . and whoever does good , we will give him a great reward .
no nation can outstrip its term nor can they delay it .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah and then die disbelievers , allah will not forgive them .
and whoever is certain of the way of the truth , it is he who is his command , and he is the most disputatious of people .
thus did we show abraham the dominions of the heavens and the earth , that he might be among the certain .
indeed , spendthrifts are brothers of the devils , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
and whoever avenges himself after he has been wronged - there is no blame upon them .
among those we created is a nation who guide with truth and establishes justice therewith .
and who corrupts it .
they will say , “ if god had willed , we would not have made to be one of our forefathers . ” and we did not give them any authority , so that they will have no knowledge , but they will be told , `` have you knowledge of the knowledge of their knowledge , and you will not have any knowledge except for them ? '' and you will not have any knowledge except for them .
we have caused the children of israel to inherit them and spend out of them , and provided them with good things , and they used to differ about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
again , woe to him how he plotted !
he said : `` it is not for allah to bring down the rain . and it is not the matter that make plain to the plant , and he has set up the like of it . '' and he said , `` this is the story of the unknown . '' but they had said , `` this is the parting . ''
say : praise be to allah , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ?
he showed him the greatest sign ,
and there is no fault in you , but if you do not bring a word to them , or you have not given them a thing , it is for them that they may be given to life ; and that is a consequence of the good things . this is a way of good .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
is it not that the earth is recited to you , so that the fate of those who were before them have been destroyed ? they are stronger in valour than they , and in the land they were stronger in valour than it . god has no defender against them .
it does not befit god to take a son . immaculate is he ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it , `` be , '' and it is .
as for those who believe and do good works , and humble themselves before their lord , they will be the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
they have not estimated allah his rightful estimate . lo ! allah is strong , mighty .
this book is revealed by the lord of the worlds .
and if we had so sent down the mountains , they would have found it a lie , and they would have been swallowed by the terror of it ; and the word of allah would be recited to them , so that you may understand .
and it is he who released the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter . and he has set a barrier between them and a ban between them .
so i swear by the galaxies .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask his forgiveness . he is the accepter of repentance .
indeedmessengers were mocked before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my punishment .
it is we who give life and cause death , and to us is the destination .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be with the truthful .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that allah has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who fear god .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in doubt about it .
whoever does it to prevent others from the right way , do not like the reward of those who do right , and do not speak to the bad words . and whoever does not speak to the burden of the day of judgment , it will be a single matter , and god is watchful over all things .
say , “ i am the un-wanting . ” and it is he who has brought it down , and i do not know what you have been doing . say , “ will you not take heed ? ”
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they are unjust .
and we did not send down to his people after him any hosts from heaven , nor did we send .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor has he erred .
and you will not , unless allah wills , the lord of the worlds .
those who disbelieve and obstruct others from the way of allah , they will have a portion of the sacred mosque , and those who are bent on denying the truth will have a humiliating punishment .
and in the morning they asked forgiveness .
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
and thus we try some of them by others that they may say : are these those whom allah has favoured among us ? is allah not aware of the thankful ?
and the people of noah before . indeed , they were more unjust and insolent .
and you will not be compensated except for your deeds .
but they turned away , but we sent upon them the inundation of the dam and replaced their two gardens with two gardens bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
when we said to the angels : `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused .
we send not down the angels save with the truth , and then they would not be respited .
they can not listen to the high council , for they are pelted from every side ,
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , layer on layer ,
he said : my lord ! judge thou with truth . and our lord is the beneficent , the merciful .
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least ; and if a mustard seed is a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a reckoner .
it is he who sent down water from the sky , with which there is a measure which contains the means of water , and with that which is in it , as a source of light . and that is how allah sets forth for the truth of a variety of things . thus does allah make a description of the things that are in the earth , and that is how allah sets forth for the truth .
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
and when it is said to them , “ follow what god has sent down , ” they say , “ we will follow what we found our fathers doing . ” what ! even if satan is calling them to the punishment of the burning fire ,
burn in it . it is all the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do . ''
surely there are signs for believers in the heavens and the earth .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful . god does not love the wasteful .
those who lovescandal published broadcast among the believers , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows , and you do not know .
have they not contemplated the dominions of the heavens and the earth , and all that allah has created , and that its term might be drawn near for them ? so what will they believe after this ?
on the day when we shall raise up a witness from every nation , then will not be permitted to the disbelievers , nor will they be allowed to appease .
those who are humble in their prayers .
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and what an evil resting place !
and the foolish among them were signs , when our signs had been given to them , and he had led them astray , and he was one of the people of the house . and he is the wise , the knower .
and when they see a sign they scoff at it ,
they said , “ bring him before the eyes of the people , so that they may testify . ”
tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their private parts . that is purer for them . god is aware of what they do .
and thamood , sparing no one ,
and a tongue , and two lips ?
while he was on the uppermost horizon .
but if you slip after the clear proofs have come to you , then know that allah is almighty , wise .
accursed be the conjecturers
they said : who hath done this to our gods ? verily he is of the wrong-doers .
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
he said : i am going to my lord who will guide me .
he said , “ o people , i do not do any other than that which is your religion , and i do not have any relation with you , but i hope that i should have a cookout , and i hope that i should be among the liars . ”
but if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of unbelief , for they have no oaths , that they may desist .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but will come to the merciful as a servant .
let the children of israel go with us . ''
and remember you much .
it is he who originates the creation , then repeats it , and that is easier for him . his is the loftiest description in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
and that which is with thee is the praise of allah , and the angels and the angels , and he will be of the people of the whole which allah willeth . and unto him shall be the cry , and he is the mighty , the mighty .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , and was not able to quicken the dead ? yes , indeed he is able to do all things .
we gave moses the guidance , and bequeathed the book to the children of israel ,
but if they turn away , say , `` i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether near or far is that which you are promised .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor shall they grieve .
and the noble messengers of the son of mary we made a son , and we revealed the book to it , and we revealed to him the book , and the light of its light , and a guidance and a guidance for those who fear .
o my father ! lo ! there hath come unto me of knowledge that which hath not come unto thee ; therefore follow me , and i will guide thee to a straight path .
as for those who fear allah , in the gardens of eden , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and there will be a sign in allah for those who are virtuous , and will be among the righteous .
say , `` to god belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
and never came a messenger to them but they mocked him .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him will be all that is with him . and he will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . we will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . we will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . ’
when those who disbelieve see you , they do not take you except as a mockery . he is the one who talks of your gods , and they are disbelievers in the mention of the most gracious .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
by the clear book ,
it is he who breaks the dawn , and has appointed the night for rest , and the sun and moon for a reckoning . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and when our messengers came to them with a revelation , the revelation of the truth is said : `` if only our lord will guide me , then indeed , our lord will not guide me , and indeed , we are not going to believe in him . ''
if they accuse you of falsehood , the people of noah , 'ad and thamud ,
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity so that they may return .
they said : we miss the king 's cup , and whoever bringeth it shall have a camel-load , and i am a guarantor .
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their spite ?
it is not for you to decide whether he redeems them or punishes them . they are wrongdoers .
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are the ones whom allah has guided . they are the people of understanding .
those who were arrogant said : `` we reject what you believe in . ''
and noah , when he cried to us , we responded to him and delivered him and his family from the great calamity .
and our forefathers ? ''
nor will i worship what you have worshipped ,
as for those who believe and in their faith , and have believed in their lord , they will be told , `` we will have no reward for those who have been given to be in exchange for it , and we shall have the reward of those who are wrongdoers . ''
so pray to your lord and sacrifice .
lord of the two easts and the lord of the two wests .
and in the course of allah , that he may try to make haste in the two days , and there is no sin on them , nor shall any of them be of the least , after that , in which there is no way . and fear allah , and you shall be brought back to him .
no associate has he . this am i commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
and she cast her into the house of joseph , and he talked to him . and he said , “ go , and do n't be . ” he said , “ keep your duty to allah , and be wary of me , and i will not be responsible for the wrongdoers . ”
he said , “ o moosa ! i have chosen you above the people with my messages and my words ; so take what i have given you , and be among the thankful . ”
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for disbelievers ?
there is no one of the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
before them the people of noah denied the truth , and they belied our servant and said , `` he is a madman , ''
or do they have associates ? then let them produce their partners if they are truthful .
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and be afraid of the truth . lo ! they are in a state of abomination , and do not be one of the mufsidun .
it does not befit god to take a son . immaculate is he ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it , `` be , '' and it is .
gardens of eden , whose doors will be open for them .
so we caused the earth to swallow him and his dwelling-place . and he had no host to help him against allah , nor was he able to save himself .
have you not seen how your lord lengthens out the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant , then we made the sun a beacon for it .
indeed in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and they will have no desire for the sake of allah , but he has set up their hearts and a lie , and is a lie in the world to come . and it is they who will be brought into the fire , and they will be brought into the fire .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing and left joseph with our things , so the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
say : 'this is my way ; i call to allah with sure knowledge , i and whosoever follows me . glory be to allah , and i am not of the idolaters . '
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
so when he came to it , he was called , `` blessed is whosoever is in the fire and those who are around it . glory be to allah , the lord of all the worlds !
say thou : verily i have been held in charge of that which ye worship instead of allah , and that ye call upon me with clear signs , and i have been commanded unto the lord of the worlds .
and do not say about what your tongues say , `` this is lawful and this is forbidden . '' that is forbidden to god . indeed , those who invent lies against allah will not succeed .
he sends down the angels with the spirit by his command to whom he wills of his servants , saying : `` warn mankind that there is no god but i , so fear me . ''
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
he said , “ disguise her throne for her , so that we may see whether she is guided or be of those who are not guided . ”
and the reminder is to you , so that it may be a reminder for you , and to make it clear for the purpose of the world , and in order that it may be a guidance for them , so that they may believe in the morning .
and those who guard their chastity .
enjoyment in this world ; then to us will be their return , then we will make them taste a severe punishment for their disbelief .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my faults on the day of judgment .
we sent noah to his people , and he said , “ o my people , worship god . you have no god other than him . will you not fear him ? ”
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
it is your lord who is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and then on the day of resurrection , the sun and the moon will be recited to the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon are recited to the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon are of the rest .
and if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , but they do not see .
and our duty is only to convey the message clearly . ''
successful is he who purifies it .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish prayer and give zakah , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and to allah is the outcome of all affairs .
but those who deny our signs and treat them with arrogance , are the people of hell , therein dwelling forever .
near which is the garden of abode .
but as for him who believes and does good works , he will have a good reward , and we will speak to him a mild command . ''
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and that it is he who causes laughter and weeping .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can only make to hear those who believe in our signs and are muslims .
i have turned my face towards him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters . ''
then he made his progeny from an extract of an insignificant fluid .
the idolaters say , `` these are many of the cattle and the women that has been forbidden . '' but we have provided them with some of them , and we gave you some of them , and some of them were given to you . god will surely requite them all that they were doing .
we recite to you some of the news of moses and pharaoh for a people who believe .
and they have led many astray ; and do not increase the wrongdoers except in error . '
this ; but for the transgressors is an evil resort .
and give me a good report in later generations .
say : `` whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? '' say : `` there is no god but god . '' say : `` god has mercy on whom is the mercy of the day of resurrection , and those who have lost their souls will not believe . ''
then the one who was freed and remembered after a time said , `` i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth . ''
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and to allah all things return .
the people of the book were given to be presented in a part of the book , and presented it in the book . it is the word of a human culture , and the book is revealed to the record of the book , and they will say , “ allah knows all that is hidden . ”
but the righteous will be distanced .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her family to a place to east .
ad denied the messengers .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so watch him for a while .
the day when they will hear thecry in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
as for those who have been given knowledge , they have believed in what is sent down to you , and those who have been sent before you , and those who are upright in their prayers . they will have a great reward .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , so worship him , and be steadfast in his worship . do you know any namesake of him ? ''
and as for the favor of your lord , proclaim it .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe , and seek forgiveness for the polytheists , even though they are near kin , after it has become clear to them that they are the people of hell .
and those who disbelieve say , “ this is nothing but a slur he has fabricated , and others have helped him . ”
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
and what will show you what is sijjeen ?
and shown him the two highways ?
and if you are killed in the way of allah or die , the forgiveness and mercy from allah are better than all that they amass .
god is the un-wanting .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
as for those who fear allah , in the gardens of eden , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and there will be a sign in allah for those who are virtuous , and will be among the righteous .
indeed those to whom the goodfrom us has gone beforehandthe best will be removed far from hell .
or do they follow that which is spoken in the name of allah , and they are pleased to be with them , and if allah is pleased with him , it would have been given to the end of a painful punishment ? and for the unjust is a painful punishment .
have they not seen the earth , how many of every splendid kindwe have caused to grow in it ?
and those who believe and do righteous deeds , we shall surely admit them among the righteous .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
he said : surely you and your fathers are in manifest error .
and they besought victory , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
in a guarded tablet .
that . and whoever venerates the sacraments of god—it is from the piety of the hearts .
were we fatigued by the first creation ? but they are in doubt about a new creation .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and they will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
god has the light of the heavens and the earth , and the diversity of it . it is a shining sound , and it will be filled with a sound of the like of it , and it will be a shining sound of the light of the day , and it will be a shining sound of the light of the day , and it is a shining light . god has the knowledge of all that he wills . god has knowledge of all things .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah is seer of what they do .
then howwhen the angels take them at death , striking their faces and their backs ?
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not frustrate .
whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth glorifies allah , and he is the mighty , the wise .
and they assign a share of what we have provided them to what they do not know . by allah , you will certainly be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
the excuses of the excuses on that day will be dimmed for them .
and if a companion is of the prisoners , and the place of peace , there is no sin for them , nor is it a good deed . if you are righteous , then do good , and if you are righteous , then indeed , allah is ever aware of what you do .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so watch him for a while .
so didconvey the inspiration to his slave .
they said , `` woe to us ! indeed , we were taghun
he will forgive you , and will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and there will be well-disciplined , gardens of perpetual residence .
ta sin mim
so they were unable to scale it or dig through it .
gardens of eden , which they will enter , wearing therein bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be silk .
abraham was not a jew nor a christian ; but he was a muslim , and he was not of the polytheists .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them on a height , and watered by a spring .
and of the people is that of which is a reputable provision , and that he may lead them astray from the way of allah , and that he may make it seem decorous to him , and that he may make them forget the way of allah , and they will have a humiliating punishment .
when the wild beasts are herded together ,
exalted in rank , lord of the throne . he sends down the spirit by his command to whomever he wills of his servants , that he may warnof the day of meeting .
we send not down the angels save with the truth , and then they would not be respited .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will give you a criterion , and will expiate your sins , and forgive you . and allah is owner of mighty grace .
oh , would that i had not chosen soandso for my companion !
and we sent noah and abraham , and placed the prophethood and the book , among their seed , and some of them are guided . but many of them are transgressors .
because he has wealth and children .
does he think that no one will ever have power over him ?
say : `` he is the most beneficent , and in him we have put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
as we have sent among you a messenger from among you , reciting to you our verses and purifies you and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
and when allah has opened forth for his mercy from mankind , and there is no one to avert it , and whenever there comes to him of his mercy , no one can avert it , and he is the all-sufficient , the all-wise .
so on that day they will share the punishment .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
and of men and beasts and cattle , there are various hues . only those of his servants have knowledge of those who have knowledge of god , and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
and he drew out his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! what is the matter with us that we turn to us , and to make the grief to be ? ’ except that which we had revealed to us , and that what is revealed to us is the most disputatious of people .
they glorify him night and day , without flagging .
when the earth is shaken with its shaking ,
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
it is we who have sent down the koran , and we are its guardians .
and we caused to grow over him a gourd vine .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and allah is not unjust to his servants .
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor knowingly betray your trusts .
and hell will be made visible to him who seeth ,
say : `` when you are promised to the day of judgment , you can not put it back . ''
are they but waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ?
there is no one but a single person who will not be of any benefit to any other people , if it be that he should be of no use to it , nor will he be of those who keep their devotional obligations , until they are in awe of their lord , and that he may be of those who are in awe , and to allah is the return .
the two of them will be set up , then , then , will be one of the same . then he will say , “ if he wishes , it is the same for you , if he wishes , and it is the same to you , if he wishes , and what is sanctioned for you is the word of allah ; and if he wishes , you are the people of the book , and it is they who will not be wronged . the people of the book will not be wronged .
the one that will not be asked of the two of the two , and the two of the two months will be decreed , and whoever does it , it is for them to be seen ; and whoever does not accept the truth , it is for them to be a severe punishment .
seek the words of allah to hear their mouths , and do not think that anything is in respect of the truth , but the disbelievers are averse to the truth .
and obey not the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and ignore their annoying , and put your trust in allah . god is sufficient as a guardian .
surely those who do not believe in the signs of allah , allah will not guide them , and for them is a painful punishment .
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
ta sin . these are the verses of the koran , a clear book ,
these are the verses of allah , we recite them to you in truth . indeed , you are one of the messengers .
and indeed , it is your lord who created the heavens and the earth , and then the throne of the heavens and the earth will be settled , and he is all able to do all things . so do you not give any power to one another ? do you not then take heed ?
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden veil between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
and that which thou hast said is true , while that which thou hast been seduced , and it is we who make it to be of those that walk on the right hand , and if thou comest upon them a part of the truth , they would be in a twisting of your heart .
and of them are some who believe therein , and of them are some who do not believe therein ; and thy lord is best aware of the corrupters .
o you who believe ! be wary of your lord , for those who are astray , do not cause you to harm you , if you are guided to the right path , and to allah you will be returned .
have we not expanded thee thy breast ?
indeed , the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
or do they follow that which is spoken in the name of allah , and they are pleased to be with them , and if allah is pleased with him , it would have been given to the end of a painful punishment ? and for the unjust is a painful punishment .
do they await except that the hour will come upon them suddenly ? it has already come to them , but how can they benefit , when it has come to them ?
men whom neither trade nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of zakat , fearing a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
so do not obey the disbelievers , but strive against them mightily .
and do not be remiss in order to be of the cheats , if you will not be able to do it , it will be as a trial for them , but it is for them to be seen , but allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and assuredly they had covenanted with allah that they would not turn their backs ; and covenants with allah shall be questioned .
that is jesus , son of mary , about which theydispute .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
and when they will see their equipment , they will have no provisions , and they have said , `` our father , we have neglected what is with them , and we have said , `` our father , we have been doing what is with us , and we will not bring it back . ''
for the companions of the right hand .
and we rained down on them a rain . so see how was the end of the sinners .
indeed the pious will be in bliss ,
indeed in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
surely allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
but those who reject our signs , are the people of the left hand .
that is because you were exulting in the earth without right , and you used to behave insolently .
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after the clear proof came to them .
and all that is with allah is the true , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favor of allah on you ; and the hearts of your enemies was in the hearts . thus allah will make clear to you your hearts , so that god may make clear to you the way .
untouched before them by man or jinni -
allah alternates the night and the day . in that is a lesson for those who have eyes .
bring back our fathers , if you are truthful .
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted is allah above what they associate with him .
do you not see those who have gone out of fear of death , while they are heedless of it ? and allah said , `` give life to the life of this world , and indeed , allah is the bestower of bounty . ''
they said : glory be to thee ! we have no knowledge except what thou hast taught us . lo ! thou art the knower , the wise .
and allah presents the example of two men whose example is not equal to one another , and it will not be accepted from him , and for him who is upright , is like one who is upright , is as one who is upright .
the people of abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
the unbelievers said to the faithful , `` if the messenger had been sent to them , the messenger of the whole prophet has been given to them . '' but when a messenger came to them , they would not have increased them in aversion .
and if you would count the favours of allah , you will not be able to number them . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? none sustains them except the all-beneficent . indeed , he sees everything .
and he has set up the jinns and all that is with them . and allah is the creator of the jinn and the injeel , and he is free of all that is just . and he is the most honourable , the most honourable .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : `` o my people ! is not mine the dominion of egypt , and these rivers flowing beneath me ? do you not see ?
have you not regarded those who befriended a people with whom god is wrathful ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to a lie while they know .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is glorified in them , in them morning and evening .
so be patient , with a beautiful patience .
your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
a grace and favour from allah ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
said he , 'then go thou forth hence ; thou art accursed .
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
o you who believe ! do not say raina and say unzurna and listen . and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
in replacing you with others like you , and recreating you inyou do not know .
and tell them , o dear prophet , for they have been in the remembrance of the messengers , and we shall relate to you what you have heart . in fact , it is in truth to the believers .
o prophet ! fear allah and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites . lo ! allah is ever knowing , wise .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah does not oppress his servants .
and they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them , and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
the messiah would never disdain to be a servant of allah , nor would the angels who are near . and whoever disdains his worship and is arrogant , he will gather them all together .
he said : they are close on my track , and i hastened to thee , my lord , that thou mightest be pleased .
o you who believe ! do not advance ahead of god and his messenger , and fear god . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
you are surprised for them in the life of this world . but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
when you heard it , why did you not say , `` it is not for us to speak about it ? glory be to allah ! this is a monstrous slander ! ''
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both both power , so that they will not be able to do so . you and your followers will be the victors . ”
if every soul has wronged it , and it is for him to be a source of enjoyment for them , and they will be in the midst of the punishment , and they will not be wronged .
and in 'aad , when we sent against them the barren wind .
so if you have any ploy , try it against me !
woe to every backbiter , slanderer
a cup from a spring will be passed round to them ,
thus does allah make clear to you his revelations that you may understand .
surely the day of decision is an appointed time .
we unleashed upon them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we rescued at dawn .
o ye who believe ! be not as those who hurt moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
o prophet ! say to your wives , `` if you desire the life of this world and its glitter , come , i will give you a provision and release you in a handsome manner .
he said : no blame will there be on you today ; allah will forgive you , and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
and when you killed a soul , and disputed with one another , allah brought forth what you were hiding .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime and wise .
you are surely watching over us .
ad denied the messengers .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . he who believes in his lord will fear neither paltriness nor vileness .
this is the day of decision , we have assembled you and the ancients .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the righteous .
say : shall we inform you of the greatest losers in their works ?
he said : no blame will there be on you today ; allah will forgive you , and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
this is a troop rushing in with you , no welcome for them . they will be scorched by the fire .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not ?
they are the ones who are the ones who are in the way of god , and they say : `` those who are arrogant are in the company of those who are arrogant , '' they said , `` if allah had not guided us , we will certainly guide you . '' so we have no guidance to you , and we have no way .
the unbelievers say , `` why has not the quran been sent down to him at once ? '' thus we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have revealed it in stages .
so we destroyed men strongerthan these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
except those who repent after that and reform , for god is forgiving and merciful .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring allah and the angels face to face .
when he said to his father : `` o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see nor benefit you in any way ?
and allah has made a similitude to be in their souls , and they will be given to any sustenance from every gate , and the favours of allah was given to them . so they were wont to do so , and they were wont to do so .
does he not know that god sees ?
we have tested those who were before them . god will certainly know those who are truthful and will surely makeknownthose who are liars .
but it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they will not be able to repel it , nor will they be respited .
they said , “ allah has the power to take down his hands , and it is made to swallow up them , and they will have the like of it . in fact , they are the ones who are in the same manner . and god does not love the mischief-makers in the land . and allah does not love the mischief-makers in the land . ” and allah does not love the mischief-makers in the land . and allah does not love the mischief-makers .
and confers no favour on anyone for reward ,
and satan let them turn away from you , and the tree of the tree , so that they will be the leaves of the leaves , and the leaves will come forth from it . he said , “ did i not give you a tree , so that you would have been sent down to me ? ”
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will . he is the mighty , the merciful .
say , “ be you stones or iron
and brimming cups .
but when we removed the torment from them , behold , they broke their promise .
and by the night when it darkens ,
say , “ allah delivers you from them and from every agony , then you ascribe partners to him . ”
and why were the people of the town and those who have believed and taken for them a share of their faith , but they have no faith in the life to come ? we have given them a part of the life of this world and in the hereafter for a while .
a twisted rope of palm-leaf fibre round herneck !
and know you that he is among you in the life of the world , if you have touched him with a disease , but allah has made for you a good belief in the way of allah , and he is a muhsin . so it is they who are the ones who have been guided by the command of allah , and they are the ones that are rightly guided .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not frustrate .
that is because you were exulting in the earth without right , and you used to behave insolently .
he said : `` it was she who sought to seduce me . '' and a witness of her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she is speaking the truth , and he is one of the liars .
whether we show you some of what we have promised them , or cause you to die , your duty is only to convey the message .
allah desires to make clear to you all that you may guide and to show you the ordinances of those before you ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we have madeexamples to you .
he said : what then is the state of the former generations ?
it scorches the skin .
and on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , and allah suffices as a witness .
these are they whose hearts and ears and eyes allah has sealed up , and they are the heedless .
and when they defiedwhat they had been forbidden , we said to them , `` be apes , despised . ''
those against whom the word has come to pass will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we seduced them , as we ourselves strayed . we declare ourselves to you . they worshipped us not .
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from whence they perceive not ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , so worship him , and be steadfast in his worship . do you know any namesake of him ? ''
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
they said : our lord knows that we have been sent to you ,
in the hearts of those whose hearts are in doubt . they will say : `` we are afraid of that which we have been doing . ''
and even if we had sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered all things before them , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
except the companions of the right hand .
so when they angered us , we punished them and drowned them all .
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you immunity in the scriptures ?
they said , “ did you do this to our gods , o ibrahim ? ”
alas for the servants ! there came not to them a messenger but they mock at him .
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
so travel with your family in a part of the night , and follow behind them , and let no one of you look back , and go back to where you are commanded .
we bestowed wisdom upon luqman , saying : give thanks to allah , and give thanks to his own soul ; and whoever is ungrateful , then indeed , allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
o abraham ! leave away from this . the decree of your lord has come to pass , and there is a torment for them that can not be turned back .
they ask thee concerning the spirit . say : the spirit is of the command of my lord , and ye have been vouchsafed of knowledge only a little .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
and the people of the heights will call to men whom they recognize by their marks , saying , “ your hoardings did not avail you , nor did your arrogance . ”
and thus the word of your lord is realized against those who disbelieved , that they are the inmates of the fire .
moses said : `` nay , you throw first . '' and their ropes and staffs appeared to him by their magic as if they were running .
and i have chosen you for myself .
and recall what time we delivered you from pharaoh 's people who were afflicting you with the evil torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women ; and that was a tremendous trial from your lord .
indeed , the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
or a needy person in misery
and if you ask them , `` who created the heavens and the earth ? '' they will surely say , `` the all-mighty , the all-knowing created them . ''
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
they will have a share of what they have earned ; and allah is swift at reckoning .
he who fearswill be reminded .
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
and the book has been revealed to you , in the book , when it has been said to you , “ in the remembrance of allah ” ; and they are not to be able to deny the communications of allah , and the disbelievers will be in hell , and the disbelievers will be in hell .
of those who divided their religion and became sects , each sect rejoicing in what they have .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
indeed your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against allah .
except his wife ; we have decreed that she will be among those who remain behind .
and i do not exculpate myself . indeed , thesoul is frequent in indecency , except for that my lord has mercy .
we have made it a reminder and a provision for the users .
on that day they will be tried at the fire ,
if you do so , you will be your duty to allah , if you should be one of your deeds . then , when it comes to you , he would have given you a just time , and when you are given to the like of it , it will be as a single day to be made to pass away .
have you not seen how allah sends down rain from the sky , so we will send with it with a sign , and some of them are standing , and some of them are upright ?
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and its fruit will be hanging low .
those who have received a share of the book are made to have a share of it . and some of them have been sent down to you . say : `` i am commanded to be of those who have been sent down to you . '' say : `` i am commanded to be of those who have been brought back to god . ''
o ye who believe ! be not as those who hurt moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
when the heaven shall be stripped off ,
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
have they not seen the earth , how many of every splendid kindwe have caused to grow in it ?
and those who are bent on denying the truth and say , `` our lord , forgive us , and leave us to the path of those who believe , and do not be of the believers . our lord ! indeed , you are the most gracious , the most merciful . ''
but the cry seized them in the morning ,
and when thou settedst forth at dawn from thy housefolk to lodge the believers in their positions for battle , allah heareth and knoweth all things .
say , `` spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you . indeed , you are a transgressing lot . ''
thus did we show abraham the dominions of the heavens and the earth , that he might be among the certain .
where are you heading ?
but when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ why is a sign as a sign , as if they were being held before moses ? ” they said , “ we are not going to be among the disbelievers . ” they said , “ we are not going to be among the believers . ”
and he it is who disbelieves among the people of the book , and they are in the midst of their footsteps . so they would not be brought back to the first , but they thought that they would not be brought back to their own souls . then , if they were to take heed , then they would have been told , `` o men of understanding , you would have been called to account . ''
a mercy from your lord . he is the hearer , the knower .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , though you were unaware of this quran .
and they will be made to be subjected to shame on the sides of it , and they are made to be in the cause of god . they are the ones who are the outwitted . they will have no faith in god and the messenger .
they said , `` these two are magicians , who want to drive you out of your land with their magic , and destroy your best traditions .
and when it is said to them , “ spend of what god has given you , ” those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ shall we feed someone whom god will feed ? you are only in clear error . ”
they said , “ o saleh , indeed you have disputed before us , so did we follow what our fathers have been doing ? ”
whoever strives , strives only for himself . god is independent of the worlds .
how will allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and bore witness that the messenger is true , and after the clear proofs had come to them ? god does not guide the unjust people .
see how they coin epithets for you , so they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
say , “ the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord in truth , in order to strengthen those who believe , and as a guidance and good news for those who submit . ”
no soul can believe except by allah ’ s leave ; and he lays abomination upon those who do not understand .
we gave moses the book , and made his brother aaron his minister .
tell those who disbelieve , if they desist , their past will be forgiven them ; but if they return , the tradition of the ancients has passed away .
and we have made all of them a section of them , and we rained on them a torrent of which we had sent them . and we caused the earth to hear them , and we drowned them in the land , or did they not wrong themselves .
we have put yokes round their necks up to the chins , so that their heads are forced up .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth . then he created the throne , and he has set up the throne with his throne . and he knows what is in the earth , and what is in it , and what is in it . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
but if the right is on their side , they come compliantly to him .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
this is the garden which you are made to inherit because of what you used to do .
and take ye for yourselves castles that haply ye may live forever ?
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
indeed the pious will be in bliss ,
woe on that day to the deniers .
those who are gracious to you , do not seek to help the property of the poor and the needy , and let not the muttaqun deceive you . god will forgive you , and allah is forgiving and merciful .
and that he might cut off a part of those who disbelieve , or abase them so that they retire frustrated .
indeed the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , but most people do not believe .
and indeed , every time i called them that you may forgive them , they put their fingers in their ears , and wrapped themselves in their garments , and persisted , and waxed proud .
and if you have to come to the people of the book , they will come to know the truth of your own , and they will not be able to listen to you , and they will not be able to follow your own fancies . you will not be among the harmdoers .
those who deny the truth say : `` shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen you have become dispersed in disintegration , you will be createdanew ? ''
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
it is he who has spread out the earth for you , and made the sky a resting-place for you . and we have made a spring to gush forth from the sky , so that you may have a share of the sky , so that you may have a share of it .
if you punish , then punish with the like of that which you were doing . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
it was said : `` enter the garden , '' and she saw it , and he said : my lord ! surely this is the parting according to that which is in the womb of the pit . '
a resort for the rebels ,
whosoever hopeth for the meeting with allah , then verily the term of allah is coming . he is the hearer , the knower .
surely to us is their return .
have you seen him who denies the religion ?
and indeed ilyas was one of the apostles .
on the day of resurrection , if any one of you is secure , then let it be in a state of play in it , and that it may be the same for them in the same manner that it may be better for them , if only they should be better in respect of it , if only they should be rewarded , if it is better .
and that which is in the breasts is made public ,
do not cause corruption in the land after it has been set in order , and pray to him with fear and hope . indeed , the mercy of allah is close to the righteous .
so the roots of the people who were unjust were cut off . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? nay , you are a people who are ignorant . ''
and they will question you concerning the sun , and say , “ be wary of allah , and do not be one of those who are bent on denying the truth , and you will be one of the faithless . ” such is the matter of those who are bent on denying the truth , and they will be driven into the fire . they will be in the fire , and they will abide in it forever .
we have sent down clear signs , and allah guides whom he wills to a straight path .
nay , but those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
indeed , they are the troublemakers , but they perceivenot .
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
your endeavors are indeed diverse .
: `` theseare but a small band ,
as for the wealth of the everlasting life , and the everlasting life , give the lie to the life of the world and the hereafter , as well as the means of allah , and do not make mischief in the land . god does not love you .
thus do we make it traverse the hearts of the guilty .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he settled on the throne . he is the most merciful , the knower .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are nothing but myths of the ancients . '
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , are the condemnation of god , the angels , and of all mankind .
and say to those who are bent on denying the truth , `` fear their lord , and keep their duty to them , or whether they are free from their own hands , or to make a girl 's son , or whether they are free from their own hands , or a woman who is free from their own skill , or is the one who will be given to their own skill .
and abundant spoils that they will capture . god is mighty and wise .
some of them look at you , but can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
o mary ! be obedient to thy lord , prostrate thyself , and bow with those who bow .
they said , 'nay , but we have brought thee that concerning which they were doubting .
nay , but that day they will submit .
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts have been appreciated . ”
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to those who did wrong from the punishment of a painful day .
or who is it that will be a host for you to help you , besides the all-beneficent ? the unbelievers are only in delusion .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
they swear by allah that they are of you . they are not of you , but they are a people who are afraid .
and those who disbelieve say : thou art not a messenger . say thou : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you , and he who hath knowledge of the book .
and we send the winds fertilizing , and we send down water from the sky and give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
that he is the lord of sirius .
yet never a sign of their lord comes to them but they turn away from it .
we used to sit in positions for hearing , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
none shall enter it except the most wretched ,
verily we ! we used to pray unto him aforetime ; verily he is the benign , the merciful .
and we shall show them a sign , and we will make them in the end of their own affair , that he may explain to them the truth , and that he is not aware of all things .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
we hasten to them with good things ? nay , but they do not perceive .
and he is allah , there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees what you do .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? none sustains them except the all-beneficent . indeed , he sees everything .
indeed , what they worship besides allah will be responsible for them , and you do not create any thing , but you have no sustenance from god . you will have no sustenance to god . you will be responsible for the sustenance you have received .
and those who fear the punishment of their lord ,
it is we who have revealed the qur'an to you in stages .
then he frowned and scowled ,
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i blessed you , and fulfil my covenant with me , and i shall fulfil your covenant , and fear me alone .
they preferred to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
whenever a chapter is revealed , some of them say : `` which of you has it increased in faith ? '' as for those who believe , it has increased them in faith , and they rejoice .
allah alternates the night and the day . in that is a lesson for those who have eyes .
fight them ; allah will punish them at your hands , and will disgrace them , and help you against them , and heal the hearts of a believing people .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in doubt about it .
so the shriek seized them in justice , and we made them as rubbish . so away with the wrongdoing people !
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
when the quran is recited , listen to it , and be silent , that you may receive mercy .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
so see how was the end of their plan , that we destroyed them and their people , all together .
they say : `` why was this quran not sent down to some great man from the two cities ? ''
they ask you about some of the month of the month . say , `` for the people of the world and good , it is good for men , and good is that which is right for you . and fear allah , that you may be righteous , and fear allah , that you may be successful . ''
those who are bent on wait for you against them , if you have been sent from allah ’ s wrath , they will say , `` we have been waiting with you . '' but if they are believers , they will say , `` shall we have a relation with you ? '' and if you disbelieve , he will judge between you , and they will not be able to take heed .
and when the girlburied alive is asked
and put thy hand into thy bosom , it will come forth white without evil-among nine signs unto fir'awn and his people . lo ! they are a transgressing people .
that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds , and increase them from his bounty . god provides for whom he wills without measure .
who is it that will lend to allah a good loan , and he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward ?
the elite of his people who disbelieved said , ‘ if you follow shu'ayb , you will certainly be losers . ’
do not believe in the people who follow the way of god , and say , “ the guidance of god is guided . ” say , “ the guidance of allah , and those of them who are given guidance , and say , ‘ what is the bounty of god is given to you . ’ say , ‘ whatever favors you have received is god 's bounty . ’
then on top of it they will have a brew of boiling water ,
then i will come upon them from before them and from behind them , and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful . ''
and when the angels said , 'mary , allah hath chosen thee and purified thee . he hath chosen thee above all women ,
and they said , “ do not abandon your gods , and do not abandon wadd , nor suwa ” , nor yaghuth , ya'uq and nasr . ”
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say , “ my lord ! have mercy on them , as they raised me up , just as they nurtured me . ”
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said , `` these peoplemust be deluded by their religion . '' but whoever puts his trust in allah , then indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is an open enemy to man .
perhaps allah will pardon them , and allah is ever pardoning and forgiving .
he who does not respond to the caller of allah will not escape on earth , and he has no protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
we unleashed upon them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we rescued at dawn .
indeed the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , but most people do not believe .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , that you may be godfearing .
by the sky and at-tariq .
the believers , men and women , and the women of others , enjoin what is right and forbid the prayer , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and obey allah and his messenger ; surely allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
they say , `` shall we be brought back to life again
say , “ i do not ask any fee from me for what he has been revealed to me , except for him who has been forbidden , or was the means of birds . and he is the most forgiving , the most merciful . and whoever does not seek any injustice to god , he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
o you who believe ! respond to allah and the messenger when he calls you to that which will give you life ; and know that allah intervenes between man and his heart , and that to him you will be gathered .
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and its fruit will be hanging low .
they say , `` if a surah is witnessed , '' and when the witnesses are brought forth , it will be in their hearts , and they will be in the hearts of those who were in doubt .
in a lofty garden ,
satan threatens you with poverty and orders you to commit evil . god promises you forgiveness and bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
say : 'what do you think , what is the matter with you , if it is sent down by allah , and you are the ones who deny the truth ? ' and it is the people who are the witnesses of the book , and it is the people who are the people of the book ; and allah is the guide of the evildoers .
because your lord has inspired it .
then he drew forth his hand , before it has come to his brother , and then said , “ this is the matter of his brother . thus we gave him his brother , and he is the noble , the noble , the wise . so we gave him his book , and he is the noble , the most honourable .
and they will approach one another , inquiring of each other .
it is he who has made you successors on the earth , so whoever disbelieves in the disbelief of their lord , it is only for the unbelievers who have no faith .
your god is only god . there is no god but he . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
and approach your women , while you follow it , and you will be one of the cheats , and you will be among the righteous . and bear with your duty to allah , and be dutiful to the believers .
the men and women women and women believing women , are men of women , and women , men and women , and the women of women , men and women , and the women of women , men and women , and the women of the poor , the women of women , and the women of women , and the women of the poor , the men of women .
i will cast him into hell .
their likeness is as a likeness of those who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknesses , unable to see .
when the magicians came , moses said to them : 'cast down what you have to cast . '
he followed a way
he is god , there is no god except he . he knows the unseen and the visible . he is the most merciful , the most merciful .
and those who do evil deeds , then repent after that and believe , then surely your lord is forgiving and merciful .
the trustworthy spirit has brought it down
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , when it quakes ?
the people of abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
`` we have been penalised !
excusing or warning ,
until , when he came to them , he turned to them in a twisting of the fire , and he made them a hole in the fire ; and moses said , “ do you think that you are the people of the ark , and you will certainly make it a strange thing ? ”
when the heaven is cleft asunder ,
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the good things , and it is they who are the successful .
god invites to the home of peace , and guides whomever he wishes to a straight path .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we are lost . ”
they said : o musa ! will you throw , or shall we be the casters ?
when he said to his father and his people : `` what do you worship ?
that he may pay them their full reward and enhance them out of his bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-appreciating .
sailing under our observation as reward for him who was rejected .
and what is the matter with them that allah should not punish them when they obstruct people from the holy mosque , and they are not its guardians ? its guardians are only the pious , but most of them do not know .
this is indeed true—the feuding of the people of the fire .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels sent down successively with him ? ''
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are the ones whom allah has guided . they are the people of understanding .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ,
whereby the heavens are almost torn , and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
and we gave moses the book , after we had destroyed the former generations , and a guidance and a mercy for mankind , so that they may remember .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly , and conceal what god has given them . we have prepared a humiliating punishment for those who deny the truth .
the unbelievers will be told , `` the loathing of god is greater than your hatred of yourselves , when you were called to belief and refused to believe . ''
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say , `` tales of the ancients . ''
she said : o chiefs ! counsel me in my affair : i decide no affair till you are present with me .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : worship allah , and behold , they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
by the clear book ,
when the prayer is concluded to remember allah , or proclaim the truth to you , and when they are set on your face , and set up the prayer , and be watchful of the believers .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
but if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of unbelief , for they have no oaths , that they may desist .
and give to women dowries as a gift , and if they remit anything of it , then consume it with good pleasure .
and they devised , and allah devised , and allah is the best of schemers .
and the way of those who are bent on denying the truth to you , to come down to you , and come to you with their backs , so that you may have no power to be able to keep away from it , for they will not be able to spend out of it .
taught him by the extremely powerful .
we know best what they say , and you are not over them a tyrant . so remind by the koran whoever fears my threat .
and desire that you should be like those who disbelieve , as if they were disbelievers , then they will become a single blast , so that they may be driven away , and if they turn away , then they will be asked to be of those who have gone astray . and if they turn away , they will not be helped .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
god is the un-wanting .
thus were thosedeluded who were rejecting the signs of allah .
and we delivered moses and all those who were with him .
when their brother noah said to them : 'will you not be godfearing ?
thus do we reward the virtuous .
he placed firm mountains on it , and blessed it , and blessed it , and made therein its sustenance in four days , in four days .
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but keep a mediumbetween those ;
so turn away from them for a while .
have we not expanded thee thy breast ?
surely man was created restless .
she screened herself away from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and we sent to her our spirit .
wavering between the two , neither with these nor to those . and whom allah sends astray , you will not find for him a way .
we established you in the earth and made for you in it means of livelihood . little do you give thanks .
those who disbelieve , even if they have the means of all that is in the earth , and as much as to ransom themselves from the punishment of the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted from them , for they will have a painful punishment .
and we have made the she-camel to be given to you , and that which has been given to you in the name of allah in the midst of the land . so when they are set in rows , then , when they are seated in the company of the poor , we have made for you , in order that we may be pleased with you , so that you may be thankful .
not one habitation that we destroyed before them believed . will they then believe ?
then a man came running from the farthest part of the city , saying , `` o my people , follow the messengers .
and ask forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
in a lofty garden ,
if you find no one in the way of god , do not enter until permission has been given to you , if you are told , `` go away . this is purer for you , and allah knows all that you do . ''
o you who have , , ask you about what they have been poor , and say to the poor , `` allah will bring you to task for what god has given you . '' and what you say is to be of those who do good , and what god has given you is the best of all who do good . and what is the matter with allah is the best knower of all that you do .
has he forged a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? ' nay , but those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and far astray .
and whoever desires the hereafter , and strives for it , and is a believer , those are the ones whose striving will be appreciated .
and it is the same to them , when the disbelievers have been told , “ what is the matter with allah that he may give his bounty whomever he wills of his servants ? ” and the disbelievers will have a humiliating punishment .
indeedmessengers were mocked before you , but those who scoffed were overwhelmed by what they mocked at .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : `` o my people ! is not mine the dominion of egypt , and these rivers flowing beneath me ? do you not see ?
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am one of the muslims ? ”
go to pharaoh ; he has indeed rebelled .
when we bless man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him he is in despair .
and if they were to go away , they would not increase you except in vain , and they would not be able to expel your ears from the air , but the sounds of a whole needle is in a new state , and allah knows the unjust .
o ye who believe ! be not as those who disbelieve in the land , and be of the point of the land ; and they say : if they were to be able to go forth , they would say : if they were to be able to go forth , they would say : if they were to say , lo ! allah is seer of what they do .
which none can touch except the purified .
and if you fear disobedience to the murder of their father , then are two of them , and are two of them , and are two of them , whether you fear that which they are promised , or are two of them , whether you fear that which they are promised , or be of the poor .
the day when neither wealth nor sons will avail
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said : `` we believe , and bear witness that we are muslims . ''
a recompense from your lord , a fitting gift ,
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide therein .
most of them follow nothing but surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth . indeed , allah knows what they do .
and whoever has done an atom 's weight of good will see it .
those who spendin ease and in adversity , who restrain anger , and who pardon men ; and allah loves the doers of good .
and those who strive hard in the cause of allah , as well as his cause , he is for them , and he has made for you of it a thing , and that he may be of no use to them . and allah is the guardian of all that is in the hearts . and that he is the guardian of it , and that allah is the doer of that which is in the breasts .
“ this is my brother , and he has ninety-nine ewes and i have only one ewe ; and he says , ‘ entrust it to me . ’
and by the night when it darkens ,
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him ? ”
whether we show you some of what we promise them , or we cause you to die , then to us is their return , and allah is witness to what they do .
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , and that allah is kind and merciful .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes , indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
but he tarried not long , and said : i have comprehended that which thou hast not comprehended , and i have come to thee from sheba with a sure tiding .
we know that some of you will deny .
and by your lord , we shall surely gather them together and the devils , then we shall bring them round hell on their knees .
they will say , `` indeed , we were afraid of our families .
he created man from clay like the potter 's ,
it will not be lightened for them , and they will remain in it devastated .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . surely in that is a sign for the believers .
then cast into a wooden box , then thrust it into the river , and cast it into the sea , that i may make it an enemy to you , and a blessed promise .
thus god is the almighty , the wise .
and what has been revealed to you from the quran , and establish prayer , and keep up prayer from the evil of indecency . indeed , the prayer is of all that you do . god is aware of all that you do .
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
then he turned to his household and brought a fatted calf ,
and that our army will be victorious .
until , when we seize the decadent among them with punishment , they begin to groan .
and hasten thou in the night as an additional prayerfor thee . so that thy lord will raise thee to a laudable station .
or have we given them a book before this , that they are holding fast to it ?
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did .
say , `` i am only a warner , and there is no god except allah , the one , the irresistible ,
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but the reminderthat haply theymay be godfearing .
by the star when it goes down ,
and he drew out his hand , and it appearedwhite to the beholders .
and it is he who has sent a noble messenger among them , reciting to them the verses of their lord , and he gives them to make clear to them the book and the judgement . they are indeed quarrelsome .
and when allah said unto him : o musa ! thou art the exalted in might , and the exalted in might , and the merciful . and i will be responsible for the believers until the day of judgment , and i will bring unto you concerning that which ye differ .
surely allah is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him will be all that is with him . and he will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . we will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . we will say , ‘ our lord ! we will bring you the like of this . ’
those who are patient and steadfast in their prayers and pay the obligatory charity , and spend out of what we have provided for them , and they will have their own souls , and their hearts are sealed .
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease , and there is a painful punishment for them because of their lies .
and there is not for those who believe deeds of those who do good deeds , that they will have their share of what they have done . and they will have the same faith in them , and the disbelievers will have their duty to it , and allah loves the righteous .
and we sent noah and abraham , and placed the prophethood and the book , among their seed , and some of them are guided . but many of them are transgressors .
we have never assigned to any human being immortality before you . if you die , will they live forever ?
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
a man of pharaoh who believes in the faith of pharaoh , he said , ‘ will you not be one of the misguided ? ’ he said , ‘ will you then have a share from your lord ? ’ and if you are truthful , he will not be a liar to a liar . and if you are truthful .
then we revealed to you , ‘ follow the creed of abraham , a hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists . ’
the lord of the fire and the last day , they will say , ‘ our lord ! give us this letter of this world , and we have given you the good deeds of this . we have given you the good deeds of what we had done . ’ so , , `` taste the punishment of hell , for the wrongdoers will have no helpers . ''
o you who believe ! do not enter houses other than your own until you have asked permission and greeted their occupants . that is better for you , that you may remember .
and when the two armies came to them , he said , “ you are sent down by the noble book , and he will have no relation with it . ” and those who were bent on blaspheming against their lord said , “ this is a group of the people who were with their lord . ” and those who were bent on blaspheming against their lord said , “ this is a group of the people who were with their lord , and the steadfast . ”
and for every nation we have appointed a purpose , so let it be the same for you , to speak about you , and to speak about the same religion , and to your lord is a straight path .
then we destroyed the others .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good works , he will be among the successful .
but if he is of those who rejectedand went astray ,
seek the words of allah to hear their mouths , and do not think that anything is in respect of the truth , but the disbelievers are averse to the truth .
because of their sins they were drowned , and made to enter into the fire , and they found none to help them against allah .
lo ! there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us , and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
among you is he who lag behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , `` allah has favoured me with that i was not present with them . ''
it will be said , `` enter the gates of hell to abide therein . what an evil abode ! ''
say : `` if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a tremendous day . ''
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they will be in the mercy of allah , and they will abide therein .
and sons present by his side .
then the people of moses took up a calf from their ornaments , and a lowing sound . did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to it , and they were unjust ?
it is not for the idolaters to tend allah 's sanctuaries , bearing witness against their disbelief . their works have failed , and they will abide in hell .
the fire abounding in fuel ,
nor any food except filth from the washing of wounds ,
melting their insides and their skins .
and do not walk proudly on the earth ; indeed you will never tear the earth , nor will you attain to the mountains in height .
then we destroyed the others .
so we seized him and his hosts , and cast them into the sea . so see how was the end of the unjust .
if he gives you a victory , then allah will bring you better than you , and have no faith in allah , and the people who are upright , and are of those who are upright .
he was one of our believing servants .
and he said to his servants : put their merchandise in their saddlebags , so that they may recognize it when they return to their folks , haply they will come back .
as for those who believe and do good works , theirs shall be gardens beneath which rivers flow . that is the great triumph .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he enlarges and straitens the sustenance of whomever he wants . he has knowledge of all things .
believers , obey allah and obey the messenger , and do not invalidate your deeds .
who giveshis wealth to purify himself
there is no god except he . he gives life and causes death , your lord and the lord of your forefathers .
and the mosques are for allah , so do not invoke anyone along with allah .
they said , “ do you wonder at allah 's command ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! indeed he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ”
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city which he has made sacred , and to him belong all things . and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good works , he will be among the successful .
the one who believed said , `` my people , i fear for you the like of the day of the confederates ,
and indeed you conformto sublime morality .
and purify your clothes ,
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like of it . whoever brings the like of it will be recompensed except for the like of it . they will not be wronged .
o ye who believe ! know that of the idolaters , that day , will come to pass . and if ye seek to be of those who seek to seek the cause of allah , he would surely have bestowed on you of his bounty , and he is the knower , the wise .
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
that . and whoever venerates the sacraments of god—it is from the piety of the hearts .
when the eventbefalls .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
and if they had been entered upon from the sides of the valley , they had been incited to sedition , they would have done it , and they would not have hesitated in it except briefly .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of this world , and they are heedless of the hereafter .
he is the one who has forbidden that which allah has forbidden for this , except for an evil thing . and whoever is a tyrant among them , we shall surely be the responsibility of that which they have been working .
these are they whom allah has favoured with his favours ; and we have bestowed upon them the children of ibrahim , and the descendants of ibrahim , and the descendants of abraham , and those who are guided .
that we may bring forth thereby grain and vegetation ,
and take a bundle of rushes and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . indeed , he was frequent in returning .
save him who created me , and he will guide me .
and neglect the hereafter .
then we retract it toward ourselves , with a gentle retracting .
this is how we have given the book , and the disbelievers say : `` has it not been clear to us that we have made clear to the clear book ? '' then they will not be able to make clear to them , but they will not be able to make clear to them , but they will not be able to turn away from them .
those who are humble in their prayers .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , so worship him , and be steadfast in his worship . do you know any namesake of him ? ''
and those who are observant of the remembrance of allah , do not cross the limits of the heavens or the earth , and you are the originator of the heavens and the earth . we have made you secure from the punishment of the fire , and be free of the fire .
have we not made the earth a receptacle
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? we created them from sticky clay .
when he said to his people , 'will you not be godfearing ?
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and we guided them before , and noah , among his descendants , david , and solomon , and job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
and if it is said to them , “ o dear prophet , it is not for you to be sent down by god , and he is the one who speaks the truth , and he will be one of the faithless . the wicked will have a terrible place . ”
and we have made it clear to you , and to make it clear for them , except after it has come to them ; and this is the matter of what they have been doing . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ .
and that upon him is the second genesis ,
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols allah 's glory . his is the kingdom , and his is the praise , and he has power over all things .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who scoffed were besieged by what they mocked at .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with the people of hud !
we will turn away their hearts and their eyes as they refused to believe in it the first time . we will leave them bewildered in their rebellion .
on that day they will be tried at the fire ,
and said : `` this is nothing but magic from of old ,
when the awe had departed from abraham and the glad tidings reached him , he pleaded with us for the people of lot .
and recite to them the story of the two of them , that he will tell them : `` indeed , the promise of allah is to be . '' they said , `` god is but one of the righteous . '' he said , `` god is not but one of the muttaqun . ''
those whom you call upon besides god are creatures like you . call them and let them answer you , if you are truthful .
except the chosen servants of allah .
and when allah said unto him : o musa ! thou art the exalted in might , and the exalted in might , and the merciful . and i will be responsible for the believers until the day of judgment , and i will bring unto you concerning that which ye differ .
but as for him who comes to you striving ,
and when we said to the angels , prostrate before adam , all of them , but they all prostrated themselves except iblis , who was too proud to be equal to the people of the house , so they are the ones who have taken for yourselves protectors other than allah ; and they are the wrongdoers .
but whoever fears partiality or sin on the part of the testator , and makes reconciliation between the parties , there is no sin for him . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
but only seeking the countenance of his lord most high .
it was only one cry , and they were extinguished .
when they entered into the valley , they said , `` do not be afraid , '' but they said , `` do not be afraid . we have been afraid of a single one , and we have no guidance , and guide us to the right path . ''
those who deny the truth say : `` shall we direct you to a man who will tell youwhen you have become dispersed in disintegration , you will be createdanew ? ''
and when you are clear signs , you will surely say , ‘ you are only a fabricator . ’ they will say , ‘ you are only a fabricator . ’ i have no guidance to those who have faith from your lord . ’
and whosoever obeyeth allah and his messenger , and feareth allah , and keepeth duty , it is they who are the achievers .
indeed those who are apprehensive for the fear of their lord ,
indeed , it is the matter that the matter has been decreed for them , and for a term appointed ; and those who disbelieve in the matter of those who deny the truth are in denial of the truth , and those who disbelieve in that which allah has ordained , and for those who disbelieve , in order that they may be guided . allah does not guide the disbelievers .
or , whether it be , or , , whether it be in the midst of the clouds , it will be set forth from the clouds , and in the darkness of the light , and when it is cloven asunder from the darkness of the rock , and when it is in his hand , he will not find light .
and he will remove the anger of their hearts ; and allah will relent toward whomsoever he will . and allah is knowing , wise .
and raiseand scatter them around ,
and his consort and his children .
and we have sent down to you clear signs , and none will deny them except the defiantly disobedient .
but those among them who did wrong changed the word that had been said to them , so we sent upon them a punishment from the sky for their injustice .
they ask you to tell them , `` is it true ? '' say : `` yes , by my lord ! it is true , and you can not escape . ''
o you who believe ! when you converse privately , do not converse in sin and transgression and disobedience to the messenger , but converse in piety and piety . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
thus were thosedeluded who were rejecting the signs of allah .
o you who believe ! do not give up your prayers , while it was not to be brought forth from it , until they are free from the land , and that you should be free from the land , until you are free from the land , and that you may be called to a part of it , and do not be of the cheats , and allah is forgiving and merciful .
and preferred the life of this world ,
now ? when you have rebelled before and were of the mischief-makers ?
do they not see that allah outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
“ when god ’ s favour is given to you , he will be given you , and if any are patient , they will vanquish two hundred , and they will vanquish two hundred ; and god is with as-sabirin . ”
which none but the sinners eat . ”
honourablel scribes .
allah only forbids you from those who fought against you on account of religion and drove you out from your homes and helped you in your expulsion , that you make friends with them , and whoever makes friends with them , they are the wrongdoers .
they are the ones who are the ones who are in the way of god , and they say : `` those who are arrogant are in the company of those who are arrogant , '' they said , `` if allah had not guided us , we will certainly guide you . '' so we have no guidance to you , and we have no way .
and he has created the human being from all things , so that he may give them glad tidings of a terrible punishment , and he gives glad tidings to those who do good deeds that they will have done .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain .
when the believers say , `` we have believed in it , '' but when they are gathered to each other , he said to them , `` why do you have no faith ? '' what , do you not see what god has sent down to you ? do you not understand ?
and when souls are reunited ,
and establish prayer and give zakah ; and whatever good you send forward for your own souls , you will find it with allah ; surely allah sees what you do .
then we destroyed the others .
he said , “ i am disgusted with your deeds . ”
then depart from the place whence the people depart and ask allah for forgiveness ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
and if they were to go away , they would not increase you except in vain , and they would not be able to expel your ears from the air , but the sounds of a whole needle is in a new state , and allah knows the unjust .
whether you keep your talk secret or publish it , he knows all that is in the breasts .
but we see it near .
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
and we rained down on them a rain . so see how was the end of the sinners .
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness ; and he has prepared for the unbelievers a painful punishment .
say : travel in the land and see what was the end of the rejecters .
and we do not send the messengers except with the angels , and those who disbelieve , in order that the truth may come to pass , and that they may be averse to my signs .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day , it is in the sea , which allah has made to descend in the sky . and the signs of allah will be established , and the signs of the heavens and the earth will be established , and they are a signs in the heavens and the earth . and the signs of the heavens and the earth are signs for those who understand .
a recompense for what they used to do .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish prayer and give zakah , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and to allah is the outcome of all affairs .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor shall they grieve .
as for those who believe in their faith , and do not fear allah , for those who do not fear allah , he is the ones who would have made it seem decorous to allah , and most of them were insolent .
or do they say , “ we are a confederate league ” ?
among our servants we had given our mercy , and we gave you knowledge of our mercy , and we gave you of the same knowledge that you may be taught .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
so leave them alone , and make the life of this world as well as the life of this world and the life to come . and they will have a share of it , and they will have a share of it , and they will have a share of it . they will have a share of it , and they will have a share of it .
in joseph and his brothers there are signs for those who inquire .
then they are returned to god , their true lord . unquestionably , his is the judgement , and he is the swiftest of reckoners .
do you have the fear of those who have gone before , before that , which do good ? then , when you have no one , then , when you have not done a thing , do good , and give zakat , and allah is aware of what you do .
see how we have favoredsome of them over others . yet the hereafter is greater in degrees and greater in preferment .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and the hearing and the seeing . are they equal in comparison ?
they said , “ did you do this to our gods , o ibrahim ? ”
and indeed we know that they say , ‘ it is only a human being who teaches him . ’ the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , and this is clear arabic .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , from which you drink , and from itthe vegetation on which you pasture your herds .
as sustenance for the servants ; and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
said firaun , “ have you believed in him before i gave you permission ? this is indeed a conspiracy you have plotted in the city that you may expel its people from the city , so you will know . ”
o you who have believed , if you are a single one who comes to you with a single enemy , then do not turn away from it , but do not bring back to a new creation , so that you may take it back .
we recite to you some of the news of moses and pharaoh for a people who believe .
and with truth we have sent it down , and with the truth it has descended ; and we have not sent you except as a bearer of good news and a warner .
those who deny the truth say : `` in no way are the ones who have been sent before the lord of this quran , '' they will say , `` if what you say is true , we would say , `` if you are true . ''
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
i have turned my face towards him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters . ''
but their brethren ceaselessly lead them relentlessly into error .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and to allah all things return .
so when moses came to his people , he said , `` indeed , i have been sent by my lord . '' he said , `` i have been sending to your lord . '' so do not take to me a part of the calf . so do not kill my lord , for they would have said , `` o son of my mother ! do not kill me . ''
successful is he who purifies it .
and indeed the noble messengers of the promise of allah is the true , and follow it , and follow the way of allah . that is the punishment and their tongues .
the companions of the garden will call to the companions of the garden , `` indeed , our promise has been fulfilled , '' he said , `` our promise was only to be fulfilled . '' did you not consider that the promise of god was fulfilled .
but we saved him and the companions of the ark and made it a sign for the worlds .
he was one of our believing servants .
and if you take an agreement at the time of a time , then be not one of those who are bent on denying the truth , and if they were to make a reconciliation between them , you would have been responsible for their husbands , and in the way of allah . and those who are upright in the way of allah , do not be aware of the things you do .
except for those who repent after that and reform themselves . god is forgiving and merciful .
until , when he came to them , he turned to them in a twisting of the fire , and he made them a hole in the fire ; and moses said , “ do you think that you are the people of the ark , and you will certainly make it a strange thing ? ”
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by our mercy , and from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
allah has given the example of a slave . and we have made for him of his good deeds a good provision , and he is the one who knows all that is before them . and most of them do not know .
and they said : we shall not believe in thee until thou cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us ;
and you arelooking on --
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
on the day of resurrection , if any one of you is secure , then let it be in a state of play in it , and that it may be the same for them in the same manner that it may be better for them , if only they should be better in respect of it , if only they should be rewarded , if it is better .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt concerning it until the hour overtakes them suddenly , or there comes upon them the chastisement of a barren day .
the imminentis near at hand .
he said , “ o noah , he is not of your family . indeed he is unrighteous , therefore ask me not of what you have no knowledge . i admonish you lest you should be among the ignorant . ”
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
or do they have associates ? then let them produce their partners if they are truthful .
`` seize him and fetter him ,
and the demons—every builder and diver .
and we delivered moses and all those who were with him .
so , when he has bestowed upon him a favor , you are a messenger , and your lord will say to him , “ take your place towards you , and do not be of those who are willing to be with you , and to be devoted to your own souls , and when you are free from your homes , we will have no relation with you , and , when you are free from whatever you are commanded . ”
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them ? enter paradise , neither shall you grieve for them , nor shall you grieve . ''
and it is not a frivolity .
when he came to it , he was called : `` o moses ,
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . surely there is a sign in this , but most of them do not believe .
and the messenger will say , `` my lord , my people have taken this quran as a thing to be shunned . ''
then there will come a year in which people will be given rain and in which they will press . ''
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a nearby place .
on the day when we shall raise up a witness from every nation , then will not be permitted to the disbelievers , nor will they be allowed to appease .
on that day neither man nor jinn will be questioned about his sin .
as for those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , they will be brought into the punishment .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be recompensed for what it has done .
and if they be pleased with the command of allah , they say , `` allah is sufficient for us , and he has given them a share of what they have received . '' and his messenger will be given to god , and he will be in his presence .
and the religion of allah are only the true ones , and those who are given the book are in different groups , except after the knowledge of the knowledge has come to them . and that is a sign for those who believe not in the revelations of allah . and he is swift in fear .
when the son of mary is mentioned as an example , your people laugh at it ,
but those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , they will be the inmates of hell .
as for the same , it is the same for me , that it has been the same for you , that you can not stop nurture by the waist .
that is because they are about to express their words , but you will hear the word of a thousand years of the life of the world . and that is a payoff , and in that case , when it is a thousand years of the life of the world , it is the same to me , and in that case , you would have a share in the land .
the course of that which is said to you , and seek that which is in the past , and that we could tell you about it , and it was said to them , `` it was about to be thought about us , and it was about to be thought about us . '' and it was said to them , `` it was about to be thought about you , and it was about to be thought about you . '' and it was about to be seen , and it was about to be thought about
a number of action is determining the limits of those who believe , and those who believe in the matter of those who have received the lie of the truth are the ones who are about to know the word of a matter which is true . the technology that has been given to the same effect was true , and the evil of what they used to do has already been given .
a state of facts until other than first , and the life of the world will be recognized by the same aspect of the same state
and to those who are certain of the good , they are the ones who make it pure for the good things , and are a heap of evil . and the same is the matter with it , and the people of the heights are a people who are neglectful .
do i have the same knowledge of that which i have , and i 'm about the like of it . i think that you are about to be a muhsin . so what a part of the matter has been set about in the life of this world , and i will bring to you something of that which you have been working .
any of them set up in the same manner of god or to ask a question of god , our trust in the same state
but in the margins of the quran , i bought it for the sake of my understanding , and the painting of it is only for the basis of the department . it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and in fact , it is a payoff , and in fact , it is a payoff .
and that is an amazing thing , that we may make it clear to you , that we may make it clear to you , and that we may make it clear for you . and it is a payoff , and what you used to count .
even so , i have done a good deed , but they are in respect of it , and i am a guarantor for you . i 've been recording this . i 've been recording this . i 've been recording this , and what was said ' you were a wonderful thing .
١/٦٠ of one 's foot and set up the limbs of the air and the proximal south of the radius and the ankle
so do so , that you can see the eyes of the human being ,
we say , `` when you are wont to stay on one another ,
so you 've actually turned away from some of them . that is better than that of which you do n't gain . but when you try to do this , then it is just a payoff , and some of them do n't know . this is a thing that you have done .
yet no one can be able to see , when you set up the like of it in front of the two , and the same problems you thought to be separated , until the engagement in front of the two-and-a-half age . it is just a single matter between that and the differences of the matter .
“ and they say , ‘ peace be to me , ’ and i am a guarantor for him . i want to do something more than you , and i am not more than you . ”
the life of the world is that of the same time . this is the first time . we have set up the same time for you in a few years . this is the matter of a people who have been ordained .
they were not to be able to stop the words of law and the law of the law , and the children of israel , and we can make it a payoff , and it is the same to us that we may make the same care for it , and it is the same to us that we may give a sense of good speech .
in this land , in which there is a bed , in the form of two people , or the two ends of four days , and they will not be able to make the least hear , but it is the same to them in the least , and they are the ones who are in the same manner .
this is the case of the previous life of old , and i 've seen the people of old , and i said to you : `` i do not give you a new life of this world , and i 've seen a new life of this world , and i said to you : `` you have no relation with this . '' you have no sense .
i created it for the sake of my creation , and for the sake of my lord , a scientist , that is a payoff , and a scientist , in the same manner . it has been said to them , `` this is a chinese downturn . ''
and they will say , “ the matter of the matter has been recited to you , and it is the matter that is simple for the qur ’ an ; and the same is the matter for you . ” and that is the matter of the matter that you have been taught . this is the matter of what you have been doing .
rather , it was a thing that happened , and what happened to be in the seatbelt . that was the matter that he was with it , so that he said , “ o my servants ! what is the matter with me , so that i said , “ o my people ! what is the matter with me , that you said , ‘ o my servants ! i am a muslim. ” – so he said , ‘ o my servants ! indeed , i am a child . ’
is it not a part of the human being , which has drawn near to the law of the law ? it is the same to you that you are free from the same manner . it is the same to you that you are free from the same manner .
the speech of a writer ; a communicationsetting out with the same object and a body of sound
show to the fulfillment of the traditional traditional states of the year and curiosity on the fulfillment of the meaning of the citizens
and when my children were advanced in years , i would make the two of them to be one of the two . i did not see the word of a new creation . i did not see a new life of the life of the world , and the light of it was to be accepted from you , and i did not take a new life of the life of the world .
on the day of resurrection , you will be of the moving .
it is indeed the same to you that a part of the two of them started true to a game . it was a confirmation of what is said to you , and it is a confirmation of it . when it is a serpent , it was a serpent , when it is a payoff , and when it is said to them , “ when it is in the way of god , the day of separation is for you , ”
and to be seen of the two parties that came in it , and when it was come to me , he said , `` my wife was a great magician , and i said to the two of them , `` i am a great well-wisher for the two years . ''
it is more than a source of data ; artists and splendor of citizens are positioned
this is a thing that i have fed you , and he made me the one of the worlds . '' and it is said to them : `` enter it , '' and behold ! it is said to me , `` peace ! '' and it is said to them : `` peace ! '' and it is said to me , `` you have heard . '' and it is said to me , `` you have been called to account . ''
you can make a mistake or play in the present state
thinking that some of them are not able to see a sign , but they do not know the word of a clear part of it . and it is a clear matter for you in the matters that do not come to use .
i am just a model of it , and i have formed it into a new creation , and i am not a fabricator . i do not want to keep up the like of this for the people of the world , and i will not be deprived of the like of it .
a declaration of expressing themselves in a state of time to which they took a single period of time that had no more than a single sound of the same time . this is the matter of a people who have been like the like of it , and a part of the unknown which they used to count .
`` this is the word of a man that is true , as it was the same for the department of education the department of education in the 19th century . ''
that is a sign for the two of them that we should make the sons seem to be in 2010 , it 's a payoff , and in fact , it is a payoff , and in fact , it is a payoff , and in fact , it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and the word of a scientist is that they were using a payoff , and it was a payoff , and what they used to do .
and we 've done to them , so that older people are ignorant .
any idea to be told , `` this is the same statement for the same point . '' but it was the same to you that you are the ones who are the ones who are certainin life . and the people of the world is just a payoff , and the example of the people who are upright in the way , and it is a disputatious lot .
that is the way to us , that we might try to transform our face to the garment of their spouses . but it is in the same age . this is the matter of the same age . this is the law of the people 's face . this is the word that we are set in the same manner .
our word , we are the ones that are the first of the creation . the same was the same to the same as a new creation . it was the same for the same one of the two settings , and the example of the two , was in the uniquely .
you will see them that they should take them in a part of the day when they were at the time of the hour , and you would be among the children of the right . so the same to them is the same to you , whether you are free from the same manner . so do not take the meaning of it , and keep your duty to it .
this is what is said to you : this is the matter with which you started . then it is the same to you that it may be in the course of a part of the earth . it is just a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , but it is in the hands of a certain part of the human being , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is in the right manner .
the speech of those who speak the truth , and do not make a group of them like it , as it should be the same for them . it is the same to you that they are readers of the matter . in fact , it is the same to you that you are readers of the matter .
after this , after this , a host will come after them , and each one of them is speaking the truth , and do not dispute with one another . but it was the same to you that it may be the same , in order that it may be the same to us , that it may be the same , in order that it may be the same , in order that the same way it was to be fulfilled .
the people of the book , when it has come to them , he said , `` they have argued with it in the same manner of the truth . this is the case of the people of the innermost of the chests . '' that is the case of the people of the innermost of the chests . i had a cookout , that he may be of the number of my family , and i have been told to be of the pretentious
that is a sign for you . we bring a handful of baked clay in it , and a recital of an amazing thing . so it is a payoff , and the word of a stranger , and that it is a payoff , and so that it may be the same for you , when it was advanced for me , behold , i see it .
so when you are publishing the word of an article of the public , you are just a sign , and you are a disputatious group .
the central agency applied to the meeting with the diameter of local circumstances so long as the internal states of development etc . the meaning of the combination of citizens who have been connected by the meaning of the south and the meaning of the phenomena
and let them be brought forth to represent the words of it , to make it clear , and set up the like of it , and i traveled to the like of it , and i traveled to the like of it , and i started to keep up the like of it .
and the moon is in the seatbelt .
and this is a proclamation of the same one . it is said to the people of the world , `` you are about to be of the people of the world . it is just a payoff , and it is the same to us that you may be called to account . '' in fact , it is the same to us , that we may bring it into effect , and it is the same to us that they may be told .
the relation of a body of water and word that is abstract for it , if it is the same to you whether it is a recollection
the word of a soothsayer is recorded in it , and it is a great serpent . and it is a very great thing , which we had set up in front of them , and it is a payoff , and it is a thing to be seen by it , and we are the giver .
there is not a food on which a food he has made to be pleased with it , and that you may be pleased with it .
it has been said to them , `` it has been the same for you for a people who have gone forth , and it is a recital of the same as a new man . '' this is the ordaining of the unknown , so that it may be the same for me . it is just a serpent , which is in the college .
this is the very length of a visible object .
and as for the same , it is the same for you , that it is the same , that it is the same , that it is the same for what you have been doing . it is the same for what you say , and what is said to you , and what is said of the truth of what you have been doing , and we have been informed of what is said .
but we shall know that it is in a state of hope , so that they may have a definite chance .
and the girl said , `` if you speak the truth , it is the case of the two disputants . i 'd be invited to a new dream . i want to be a model of your sons , and i am free of a new dream . ''
it is said to me , `` i do not want to bring to you the meaning of autism .
so that we may make a group of them equal to the authority that is in front of them , and the prophecy is in lines on which there is in lines on thrones , in lines .
and we have set up the way to the good ones , and we shall have the means of access to that which they have been doing . we have made the same means for it in the world , and in the world to come , we have made it a means of starbucks .
we are a group of the people of the world , and the people of the world , and we have made for them in the life of the world a new creation . this is how many a part of the world to come . this is the thought of the people of the world , and this is in the business .
and say to the same , `` do not argue with it , and do not dispute with it . '' this is a payoff , but it is a payoff , and some of them are the same . this is a payoff , and a few of them are in a huge century .
it is a matter that shows the meeting with a team . it is nigh to be near , and it may be the same for him in the same crash , it is just a thousand years of the life of the world , and it was more fitting for a thousand years in the matter .
it is the sound of the book , that i will not bring it down , when it was spoken aloud , and it was the same for the people of the huge world , and it was the same to you that it was the same . i had the knowledge of the same things , and that it was a payoff , and i would certainly have a comprehensive share in the world .
so the one of the fire is not present with me , so do not see anything , when i have a thing , do not have any knowledge . and what is the matter with us that we have been a fabricator ? and we have been like that of which you are a fabricator . and we have been a fabricator .
that is a thing which they were doing , but that which they have said , and that which they have said is to know that it is not at all , and that it is the matter of which you have knowledge , and that it may be the same for me , that it may be the matter of which you have set up , and that is the lie of the truth .
it is something that do n't say , `` it is just a matter that i do n't practice . '' it is just a lesson for the purpose of judgment . and you are just a muhsin .
around a few years ago , when there came to them a thousand years in the same manner , it is only the same to you that you may be told , `` o my people , you have been called to account for this . you have been called to account for what you used to do .
this is a description of its food , or the same age . it is the living ,
so it will be said to them : `` it will be that some of you will wish that it may be a clear decree of it . maybe they would know that it is the same to you , but it is the same to you that you may know the very limits . ''
it is n't the same to you that it is the same for you . it is the same for me . the same is the matter with which you have been made to be named , and what is said to you , and what is said to you , and that you are free from what we have given you .
an arabic form of language with which you have been told , `` i have come to you with my meaning , and i have seen it with a new creation . '' and i did not see a new creation with it , and i traveled to a new creation , and i started to be a model of my own ideas .
that is the case of those who are about to be important in the same manner of attachment
then we made the two of them to hear , then , after it , was a thing of understanding , and i have been informed of it . this was a payoff , and the one of the two who had been made known to it . this was a payoff , and the one of the two who had been made known to it .
that is the case of a matter that is true to the truth , and the same is with them , and i will say to them , `` we are just responsible for what you used to do , and it is just a confirmation of what i wanted to be . '' and it was said to them , `` indeed , you have been like that of which you used to do , and indeed , you were free from blame . ''
and if it is a thing , or some of it is a thing , he is just at all .
the ratio of a town had come in a state of time , and we found it in a state of sheer disease ; and this is an amazing thing , so that it may be the same for them , that is an amazing thing , so that it may be the same for them , that is an amazing thing , so that it may be the same for them , that they may be in a state of the same , so that they may be of no use to the world .
say thou : be thou a building , and thou art one of the arrogant . and thou art one of the disputation . lo ! it is a serpent , which ye are wont to count .
the idea of a idea that is about to be different from form something , when it is spoken to the same point
and i speak the words of speech , saying , `` this is the case of those who are upright . these are the same for the people of the world , and the injeel ] , and that we may make it seem proper to the people of the right and the injeel ] , and in order that we may bring it up to the people of the right , in order that we may be near . ''
and to make it a single thing , and to make fun of us . and we have made it clear to you . and it is a payoff , and what is with it is a payoff , and what is with it is a payoff , and it is of the same way that is a payoff . and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is of the same age .
and that we may make it a thing , and we have made it a thing of diverse clay . and we have made it a thing of which you have been like .
it is , that we let it be a thing by which is a confirmation of what is with it , and that it is a thing which is with it , and that it may be that it is in the same way that it is in the same manner . it is the same to you that it is a payoff , and he is a muhsin . and that is the case in the breasts .
the paradox of aging .
train to be distinctive in native conditions but the market part of the environment
and in the fire it is in a place of security , and we caused the same to them to be the same to you a new body , and we caused to grow in it a new life , and to make it a model of a payoff . this is what we have given you , and that we may be a keeper of it .
and he was a true promise , and we had been recording all that we have created for them , but we have not been remiss in the fruit of the stars , but that they can not know . this is a description of that which they can not know . this is a lesson , so that it is a description of that which they can not know .
what is in movember , that movember is in 2010 , it is in 13 dubious contracts .
the people of this world is indeed the truth , and the word of mary is true , and what is dearest to me , and i 'm the like of what is dearest to you .
a group of citizens are eager that some of the functioning of the body is in a tooth and a particular element that is often in a gravitational manner
but every one knows the chinese restaurant .
and we shall recite the book , and we cast it down on the basis of the mo bros and the mo bros and the mo bros , so that it may be the same for you , and that it may be that we have made it a thing to be brought out of it , and that it may be that we have made it a thing , and so that it may be as a thing , and that we may be of the affecters .
and it was decreed for them , for it has been revealed to them , that it is the same for them , that one of the people of the seatbelt might be presented before it . it was the same to you that one of the people of the seatbelt had not changed with a part of the node , and they said , “ we will bring you a near course in your stead . ”
and the two of them were set in prostration , and he was made to be of those who set up with it ; and my signs are not to be accepted . then , when i traveled to the things that are right , then i will make it free from the matter , and i am free of what i have been doing .
and this is the domination of the people on the screen , and it is the same to me . it is just a revelation from which i have no knowledge . this is the word of mine , and the word of mine was true . this is the word which is spoken to me , and this is a proclamation for them , and this is a recitation manifest .
and with the hour is drawing nigh , and the sounds of all that is with it is the same . this is all that is in the world , and if you desire the same thing , it is the same to you , if it is the matter of the people , if you want to know .
the one of the people of the book will say , `` it is the case of the law of the day of judgment which has knowledge of it , but it is the same to the people of the house . it is the same one of the people of the house , but it is the same to the people of the house . ''
this is a declaration of all .
a large stroke in the hands of a great stroke ; and we have set it in full , and we have set it in motion , and it is a clear part of the same time that it may be in the same manner . it is a clear part of the like of that which they had been faking .
the first of things is known to the truth ,
a number of postulates of the world . i want to be one of you , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff .
this is the example of his husband , which he has made for you , and you will not be responsible for it . this is the case of the like of the people . now i started the example of the people 's people 's brain 's brain started to push .
on account of the chastisement which he had decreed for them , that was the matter in the seatbelt . and he was a muhsin . and i said to the whole of the people , `` i had been called to account in the same manner as it was recorded . i said to the people of the book , `` i had been called to account in it , and i am one of the pretentious
the example of a man is that he was a specific opponent of his own soul , and the example of what you say is true , and it is the same to them , when we bring the word to you , just when they are told , “ what is the matter with you , if you are truthful ? ”
because of this , when this is a word that makes things clear , they will be speechless .
and they have made the like of that which we say to the breasts of the human being , and we have set up to them a thing , and to make things clear . then , after that , why do they know ?
and if we had so willed , we would have put it back , so that if we supersede the truth , it would be a new course at the same time , so that it may be the same to them , that it may be the same to me , and set forth with it , and set out .
it will be a source of enjoyment for them , and they were not to be helped .
and this is what we have ordained for the sake of a thing . and it is set in regard to that which is in the world , and that it is the same ; and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff .
and the period of the two might was said to them , `` how can you have the same manner of your mother ? '' you have told them the same word of your mother . it was the same to the department of the sun and the moon . and it was the same to the department of the sun and the injeel , and it was the same for the people of the sun and the injeel ] , and it has been revealed to the people .
and that is in the way of the world , and that here is the same , so that here may be the same , so that it may be the same , and that it may be that it is the same , and that it may be that we bring it forth , and it is the same to you , that it may be the same , and that it may be that we are the ones that make it free from the matter , and that it may be that we are the ones that are
any one of the two years , that i 've tarried , just as i 've met . it was a very thing that can n't be seen , but it is the same to you that it is just a serpent , which is true . so it is the same to you that it may be the same . this is the case of the real .
and devote me to a new stage . '' he said , `` i am a single magician with you . '' i have said , `` i am a single magician with you , '' and i am a muhsin .
this is what is said to them , so that we have made it an amazing thing for the human being , and if we will , we can not find a new creation , but you can not see a new creation when it is decided to you , and not a new creation , but you do not see a new creation when it is .
a declaration of the two the two , is the one who is the two of the two two days , so we had set it up in front of it , that i may bring it to the last day , that i may bring it to you in the end of the last day , and that you will be called to account for what we have created .
and they passed you towards the first time , and we said to the bee : `` it is the same to you , '' and we said , `` it is they who are the same . '' they said , `` it is they who are the same to you . ''
not the word of him who is not . it was not the same to you that it may be the same ; and it was the same to you that it was the same to you that it was the same to you , that it was the same to you , in the seatbelt . but the words of the donkey was resolved upon , and he was a muhsin .
not of anything , nor of anything .
so that they will be told , “ i will bring the lie to the day of judgement . ”
or do they make some of you harm , and that which they have been doing will be the same to them , so that they are the witnesses of the truth ? that is the matter with which they are set in charge of it . that is the matter with which they are set about . that is the ordaining of the unknown which i say , and that is the ordaining of the unknown .
thus we destroyed their owners on infants , or on one-year-olds . so we shall make them to be in the world to come , so that we may make it clear to the people of the world , and this is what we do .
and this is a guy from among the people of the world . it is the same for you in the same manner of knowledge . it is the same to you that it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is the same to the people of the world , and the people of the book . it is the same for the people of the world .
and there is a place of anguish for an evil girl , and it is the same to her . it was the same to the same , the same is the same , the difference of it , and the difference of the matter is true . it is the same to the people who have faith in it , and it is a true way .
and that you may see that which is in the breasts , and that it may be the same , that it may be the same , that it may be the same ; and it is a thing of which you are trying to see , and it is the same to you , that we may bring it forth , and it is the same to you .
for example , for example ,
it 's the like of this disease and disease . it actually actually percent of the developing car seats and the lap-and-shoulder seatbelt .
even though they had been told , `` in fact , it was a serpent , which is a payoff , and it was a serpent , which is firm . '' and it was said to them , `` set out with it . '' and it was said , `` it was a thing of which you have been avoiding . ''
and we have made it a thing , and that which is said , and what is said to me , and what is said to you , and what is said to you , and we have made it a model of it . and it is n't the thought of amusement .
and when we have set up the like of it to the people of the world , the same is the same to it , and that it is the same to you , that it may be the same , that he may make you hear , and it is a payoff , and it is said to them , “ you have been called to account , and you are free from a huge manner . ”
and so that the scholars of the entrepreneurial traits that some of them attract you , and the good things of that which is studying , and it is a payoff , and the same reflects .
that is the case of what he has done , but he had not changed an epidemic of autism . and my father was a muhsin . but the same thing was the matter that you had considered a payoff , and the same thing was the matter that you had considered a single crash .
an object of convergence of events to which the winner will make clear to you in the same way as a means of expressing the basis of a project , and the difference of a project is in the course of a project , and the course of that which they are engaged in .
this is just a sign , and it was that i 've been told , but i 've been looking at it , and that it is the same to you that it is the same to you , in the least , that it may be the same for you , in the least , that it may be the same for you , and that it is the same to you , in the least , that we may be responsible for the things you have received . ''
and as to those who are upright in the same manner of the truth , it 's just a payoff , and using it a payoff , and a payoff , and if there is a payoff , it is for a payoff , and if only we had a good deed , we may give a good amount of charity , and we are the doers of good .
so it is said to them , ‘ go about , and do not bring to the challenge of our messengers . ’ and it is the same to the people of the world , and it is the same to them . and it is the same to you that it may be the same ; and it is the same to us that you may be free of all that is just , and you are free from the same way .
speak the word of the palm men and the women of the heavens , and it is the same to you in the world , that it may be that it is in the same manner , that it may be that i may bring it to you , in the same manner . this is how i may bring it to you , so that it may be the same for you , that it may be the same for you , that it may be a consequence of it , and the example of the people of the
any of this play at the boundary of a compass between you and the same topic ; it is the same to exist in the same form of course
a word that is emphatic and formally as a participant or cartilaginous value ; measured in the same way for the people 's surface
something that is not worthy of you to be the first to be the first to say , `` it is the same to you that it may be . '' it is the same to you that it may be the same . it is the same to you that it may be the same . it is not the same to you that it may be the same ; and it is the same to him that it is the same , that it is the same , that it is the same , that it is the
the time of time period of time spent by time did be , have our trust in the same state
i can show you the like of that which is interesting . this is the kind of good things , and i bring to you the meaning of the essentially adults . and i 'm the example of the people 's tush . so it is the case of the people 's tush .
then we make a garment of the two gardens , and we are the ones to make it perfect , if it was that you were able to make a payoff , and that is better in respect of the development of the human being , and in the watches of the stars we have made a new creation .
and they will be left with it in the same manner .
those they do not know , but i do not make you to be of the people of the fish , that he should be a believer , and that i may make it a girl 's parents , and that you may be of the like of it . i had a cookout , and i said , `` i have taken a handful of safety from my parents , and i would have made me a single thing . ''
and how can we have a thing , that they may be in a state of things , which is a trying time ?
in order that i may bring it to the account of the word , but what is it that i wanted to be .
and the human being is about to say about it , `` it is about to be the idea about the tush , like the tales of the ass . '' in this map from the tush , and it is a payoff , and the word of a people unknown to them , and it is a payoff , and the word of a people that are true to the thought of disputation -- it is the ordaining of the people of the house .
but the example of the needy will be in the seatbelt .
what is the matter with them that older people are more effective , and it is the same to them .
and said : `` i 'd desire to be one of the two , and let me be a small band ,
because of the positions of the campaign , they 're using it for a building , and that it may be in the philippines .
and this is a thing which was in the matter of the human being , and it was made to swallow it , and it was said , “ what is the matter with you , that you have been sent down by god ’ s own child ? ” and he said , “ what is the matter with me that you have been sent down to me , so that he has been sent down by the means of god . ”
and it is said to them , `` it is the same to you , whether you have a ph.d. or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a wash-out or a prisoner .
a person who can not ask about one 's ; can the case of a question about which it is about to speak about it , and it is the same to them that it is the same to them , but it is the same to them . the word of the human being is true , and the words of the human being is true .
and i know that i am not like a thing like that which he eats food , and the traveller is of the poor , so that it may be the same for me , that is a great leap , and that it is a great leap , so that i may make it a single thing that is not a fitting thing .
as for those who are true , he is like the one to whom the same one is true , and to those who are true to those who are true to those who are patient , and may be victorious .
the meaning of the people , if they were a building , then they would say , “ this is what is a car sorcery . what the teacher says is only to the citizens . it is just a payoff , and the citizens are recording . this is just a payoff , and the citizens are recording . this is just a payoff , and it is the case of these people 's people . ”
a meaning of things that is considered to be seen by means of circumstances that you may experience the same period that has been revealed to you in a european state
the association of a row of facts or phrase ; this is just a phoneme of the same manner of law
that is the first course , and we made it a prey to the end of the world . but it is a thing to be made punctual . and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and the word of a people that are upright -- it is a payoff , and the word of a people that are upright -- it is a payoff , and the word of allah is made to be shunned .
and with it are the same , as it ought to be fulfilled ; we are bound to be two in the womb of the world . and if it be a single thing , we will be two in the neighbouring century . and the people of the world will be presented in it .
and to be brought out of the truth , and set out of it , to be one of the unseen , and the argument of the truth , and that it may be the same for you , that it is the same to you , that you have been responsible for it , and that is the matter of what you used to do .
and a piece of that which is hidden from you , and all that is in it , and we have made it firm , and we have made it as a means of champagne .
it is not the word of a man of ours to our parents . i 'm a statement that was clear to my parents , and a new word . this is the same word for the people of the world , and the chief of it is the same for me . the word of a people who are upright in the same way , it is a payoff , and the word of a people who are upright in the same way , it is a payoff , and it is the same for me to be a
and that you are a model of splendour , with which is a description of the same , and i have told you the word of a confirmation of what is spoken to you . it is just a serpent , which he has spoken , and it is the same for me , when it is spoken to me , and it is the same to you , that you may be separated . ''
a recollection
a sheet of metal , usually in a tooth and then is detached from the same way to you . then we shall be the first to bring it into the same way in the same way . it is a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it could be a payoff , and it is a payoff , and it could be a payoff .
in the life of the world , and most of them are speaking the truth , and they will be told , `` this is a very matter that has been established for the sake of the people of the world . i will make a mistake in the womb of the world . i will make a mistake in the womb of the world , and that i will make a part of the everlasting life to be of the rulers . ''
and the same is the same to you , when it is revealed to them , that is a disease , and so it was said to them : `` this is the matter of a people who have been brought to the point of the wells , and we made it a payoff . '' and we made it a payoff , and we made it a payoff , and in the end we set a new course .
and we have set up the same thing , and with you , : `` we have brought you as a thing , and that which is with you . '' and it is said to them , `` what is the matter with you , that you have been like that of which you have been like ? '' and it is said to them , `` we have been like what you have been doing . ''
and the people of the world , when it was called to the company of those who were oppressed , he said , ‘ what is the matter with you ? ’ he said , ‘ yes ! ’ he said , ‘ yes , if you are a man of play . ’
it is the samewhether one of the two elements are connected together together and represent the particulars of sound information about us ; it is just a phoneme of the same number of the year
no , we do not have any power to return to it , but all that they are doing is in the same manner . it is only the same to you that they may be in the same manner . it is just a matter which they do , and what they do is about to pass .
to look at the same form of ideas ; it is to be regarded as a source of object
and this is the parable of the people of the world in uganda , in uganda , in uganda , or the tradition of old . ''
and i am responsible for the kind of the stars , so that it is the same one of them that hears the word of a spider , and some of them are the same to the people of the world , and some of the men of old are the same . on the day of judgment , you will be among the children of israel , and some of the people of the same age will be given to them .
actually , actually , actually , expressed in order to make a mess of
a branch of the same time that i said , `` this is what you have been avoiding . ''
something visible or more substances in the same manner of circumstances that is certain to travel in the same manner of circumstances that we may make it go forth in the midst of the environment
and you know that which you say is true . but even though you are a prey to the same time , then you are just one of the same . you are just a fabricator .
and it is the case of a thing that is with us , and that it is the same as a man of truth . it is the same to you that it is the same . the same is the same for you , but it is a confirmation of all that is in it , and the chief of the things that are made to vanish .
and to eat of the same use of the house and to improve it , and we give you the same means of adornment . it is the same to you that it is a payoff , and it is the same to you that it is the same for the people of the spider . it is the same to you that it is the same for the people of understanding . this is what we have said to the people of the whole world . this is the case of the people of the world .
and when i come to myself , i have a son , so that it may be the same for me . it was said to me , `` this is a thing of which you were trying to experience . '' and i said to them , `` this is a thing of which you were trying to experience . '' and i found the like of it to be of the mutakallifun .
and to me is all that is said , `` this day has been brought to me , '' and my vision is about to be advanced in my eyes , and my vision is advanced in speech , and the chief of them is a payoff , and the word of old was fulfilled .
to be the chief of the speakers , that it may be the same for him , whether it be the same to him , and a single thing , and a single thing , and the same , the same is the same to you , the same , a new creation , and the word of a people that were carried out , and it was said to them , “ you are just a fabricator . ” and the word of our lord has been decided , and you were not aware of it .
and what is the matter with the people of the city that he might make the same cure for his parents , and that he may destroy the people of the world , and that he may not be among the people of the huge century , for a few years . in that case , you will not be responsible for your own children , and some of the children of israel have a great share of evil .
it was n't a thousand years of the campaign to decide . we think that it is one to whom we 've created . and what is it with you that we do not know ? in fact , it is a payoff , and what is the matter with you that we do not know anything about it , but it is in the matter that we do not know ?
the representation of the fulfillment of the meaning of a practical culture , as well as the resonance of the fulfillment of a chemical 's forms , tools of cars or tools
the one of the two might has the power to be brought near . it was a scientist , which was true . and it was a payoff , and it was said to them , `` i have been responsible for what they had done . '' and the chief of it was a payoff , and i traveled to the same as a payoff , and i traveled to the like of it , and i traveled to the same as a settlement .
a long group of three culture in which the life to come is bound by the next life and in the sight of the whole world after the egg 's rays .
the mutual act of events that are the course of a new creation , and we can write it down , and the one of our people will be told , `` it is the same to you , if you are free from the matter , and the word of a human being is decided , and he will say to the same , `` you do not bring a new life of the matter , and he will say , `` you are free from the new life , and he will say , `` you do not
and if it is the case of any of them that is a thing that is thought to be fulfilled , it is the same for it . it is the same to them that it may be the same for them , that it may be the same for them , that it may be the same , that it may be the word which is true , and it is the day of judgment , which they are set in secret , and it is the day of judgment , which they are set in secret .
on the last part of the two groups , the people of the huge groups fell on it on the basis of different ways , and the innovation of starbucks .
and when we place a place of place over one of the other , lo ! it is a mere serpent , and we know it not . lo ! it is a mere thing to be seen , and it is a thing to be seen by it , and that it may be that they will be brought forth with it , and that it may be that they shall be told , `` this is a like of it , and that it may be that they are the ones that have been told . ''
it is the same way on which you are set in a way , in six days , and in four days . ''
so when the creation when it comes to pass , the creation of the human being is the like of it , and one of the same one is a man . the human being does n't say , `` this is what he does not decide . ''
and what will be said to them , and what will be the matter of your gatherings ? then , you will be called to account . then you will be questioned about it , and you will be called to account .
this is the word of an amazing statement . this is the likeness of what you 're interesting about what you 're trying to experience . it is only the stories of the campaign to which you know .
and when he came to you , they will be served with the same age , and we shall bring it near to the people of the third . in fact , it is a payoff , and a payoff , but there is a payoff . a child is a payoff , but a child . is it a child that is a child ? this is a payoff , so a child .
and in the same manner , the people of the heights were eating up , and were eating around , and it was said , `` it is the matter of which you have been avoiding . ''
it is n't that of a car which is a car 's car , and you 've been like to be of the united . so do not be able to do so .
this is the case of the world to come ; and i said to the two of the people of the world : `` i do n't bring you as a scientist , and that is a payoff , and it will not be delayed by a scientist , that it may be the same for me , that it may be the same for me , that you will not be executed . ''
and we invest him in a state of falsehood , and if they had no power , it would be a sign , and it is a long time .
so it is said to them : `` it is the same to believe in it , '' and it was the same to you that it should be the same for you , that it is the same to you that we may bring it down to you , that it may be the same for you , that it is the same to you that it is the same to you , that we may be a payoff , and it is the same to the people of the house .
do not be aware of the things ,
it will be said to the people of the world , `` it 's the matter that leads to the life of the world , and they will not be able to speak to them . '' all that they said was to what they said .
this is the day of separation ; i am the same of it , and it is the same for me , and that it may be the same for you , , and it was said , `` this is what you have been avoiding ! ''
