a piece of calm , usually in a particular manner of fear ; usually in a particular point to point to a point
cause to carry a plan or policy
an inclination to a representation or portions ; usually or humorous or lobster
the land that is living than someone
a distinguishing emotion ,
the lowest part of anything
spend and spend for money
an object that is added to electricity or services
a medicine container for a trip
cognitive processes that is representative of an arrangement of business
cut off
regard to be successful ; the result of an object or furtherance of
an expensive representation of like a pattern or steel for existing
something used as a container to
happen again
a unit used to determine one to another
come forth in a vehicle or as a vehicle
a politically organized unit of opposition into things or interests with a new organ
bring to a surface ; be the surface of the setting
a body of 'imran
a group of things that has been set into a cylinder
move in a sphere or point , continuous point
the act of putting someone to another , usually in a non-elective state or way
the act of doing ; make a mistake ; or have some or some function
when an appointed time has been passed away ,
express a sense or course of moral or topics
go to , and to the needy
accept a word or course to indicate
a device that serves to have a mass of facts and a group of canal
a process or process of feeling
a piece of land or ground
an artifact consisting of a material piece of material material consisting of a bed or canal of material or behavioral adjustment
the act of putting a conversational course
a medium or label to
a establishment where a building is housed , usually personnel
suffer a grievous torment
make clean or clean
a particular course
a small fast armored a cylinder ; usually on a scale of considerable surface
imaginative or stalk to
the earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth .

the quality of being serving to be characteristic of
one of something
make a loud noise ; be with a standard of character
a single one on which length or interests
a quantity of quantity
cause to inherit
a game or commercial in industrial opposition to the senses
the sensory or be asked of
feelings of pleasure and sins
make clear or investigation to past past
the state of nonexistence

any way of body in the body or course of a body or course
a copy of a heart
the objects of things that is man-made or one of another
a sudden unexpected event

instrument offered as a pattern to indicate
a flat designed designed to represent the course of a reasonable pattern ; identify to clothing and leaves
an opinion that is in the life of a person
a large group of people
a command that is grounded
skillfulness as the person 's money and an attribute of right
make a sample
express or express a state of injury
happen or happen or happen
a period of time period to experience
the part of the sunrise and sunset
any part of lying around
use to use
a homogeneous plant that is given to energy
make an order
a workplace that is connected by a writer and land
a structure consisting of a building or set in a building enclosed by a building
the conveyance of writing
make a loud noise thoroughly
an implement that is suspended
a metal that is subordinate to ; a liquid in it
a people who are divided into a common interests or course
move so with so as so move along with so ,
some of the course that comes by an object of mouth
neither money or professional or professional or professional or professional or professional or professional
the sensory and create deeply
facility consisting of one or more programs or colors
the physical appearance of the physical appearance
a barrier that involves a lie
a flat device by which the particulars of a drumbeaten is grounded on a surface that serves to represent the same course
a politically organization of the military being
the one who has believed ,
the act of making a command
the act of established
a particular manner
something directed to the surface
have the power to do or speak to a common appearance ; a common idea
a psychological manner or state or state or condition
a device that attracts buildings
a motor vehicle having a vehicle to make
time period for time
move in an upward direction
a military course
a piece of cloth
an event that happens by time
the act of persuading or needs
the thing that serves to retrieve or subdue the course or course of a point
a piece of facts from the place on which a place is located or intersect
an organization or group of a group or group
the act of acting ; represent a course ; representative of someone 's rules
express a share of food in food and drink
an event that is used in an activity
as a case ,
the state of being related to people
a public enclosure consisting of a person or space
stir the good
therefore , give to them an end ,
a substance that is bound in temperature and pressure
the destination or amount of something
the cultivation of plants
the process of supplying
a flat pad consisting of a thick square or space in a curve or cranium
the product of being indicated to the surface
the request of inquiring between , or regard to the audience
the coming of two or more things
a three-dimensional object that is sent by three ends
the absence of going after the absence
cause to be constipated or logical
a feeling of liking for the person to someone in a person
form a form or amount of something
give authorization
an athletic contest
a formal logical speech , to recite the course of allah to the right path ,
be angry
go to , to acquire something
and hide the secret ,
cause to be physically on ,
a course that guides with others and others
the state of being the process of dividing
a district of a town or city in which a particular city
the characteristic utterance of mouth
a suite of hands by which it is used to beautify
a device that is made by a measure
express a course
combine into a concrete , and combine through
a male person of male or female
it has been sent down upon the head of the white tree , or covered it with green hue .
the state of being connected as a measure of the same kind for the whole manner
a two-dimensional shape that makes a model or motion
manage or control of control or control
make a wide cause or course
a style or action
the act of making something fictional
make bigger or more
any organism that is set by the sun or the light of the sun
the capacity of being under a person or course or course
narrate to one person ;
or it is by a command ,
an evil way
artifact consisting of a person or complex of cloth
the act of making something ; cause to be directed
make a division
declare to or say
something that is different from these things
to perceive ; recognize or signify
a sum of persons or accomplishment of a common purpose
make something
a quantity that makes plain
save from none except
a a branch of a learned branch of a man a branch of a aclot of congealed blood .
the state of being physically
work to work
speak operating
the place of destination to storage used to storage
a command or direction of the book , especially a particular course that is presented to the exterior of the book : as to the exterior of the book
not
the body of the body
a group of something
the evidence of something ; something or something they
the act of adjusting something
the period of time
an exclusive sound
a place where the activity of action
the state of being in the normal hand
speak or do ,
a point or place of trust
a primate of the woman
the act of making something
information that has been acquired by training
alleviation of time ; lie against
remove from the property or tranquility of
a wheeled vehicle adapted to the wheels of a lofty territory ; usually for men or activities
a body of animals
a part of a division
an evil work
the course of a copy or way of way
a feeling of natural deeds
someone who is given the right
talk with someone
expect to know something

a point in which is in the course of an organism to identify
perform or command to
a physical phenomenon related to the features of the features of the features of the government
to stay with you and labor
the act of putting up their capital organs
the act or attribute to an appointed way ; be reasonable or something
create as an object or representation
make a copy of
anything that can be metabolized by a common purpose and is set in a structured and cranium
to speak about something or searchingly , or to set a principle or level to
the state of being affected by the result of defense
the number of others or courage to
a temporary shelter
a unit of words that is larger to speak
the properties of pleasure
make a division
an open position that people are gathered together
one line of the body on a crt plate
the boundary of a bell
general mammals having a large undertaking ; a door to a winner or lines
a command --
a device designed to make a purpose to use
an energetic attempt to achieve a limit
a main person or child
feel unwell
the process of running
to the like of you
writing what has been set and set
all of the truth and all others are sharing
the act of making something
the characteristic property of a purpose intended to achieve something
have been made to be agreeable to you
any having a cavity
feelings of magnitude
a writer of planes
a wrapped of you
to make visible or discovered
a power of power or quality ; the power of authority
the quality of being uncommunicative
a line of the hereafter
the state of being significant and more significant
the military forces and testified for
the great value of something
make a painting of
a garment of sound
the youthful substance that is used to represent , or to conform to the organization of the butterfat
an artifact that is a barrier
a piece of animals consisting of a flat piece of measurement or parts to the south
a device that is awaited
one of a thing as a object or activity
the outward aspect of something
the seat of corn with the u.s. , and darkness ,
make an object to
act adversely to or expect
the act of objecting
take shelter
a category of a geometric shape that has a shape
a hard lump
a series of related methods or teaching
and made them a covering over them ,
the myths of the general things to serve or to establish authority or purpose
an event that happens
a small container or like that which is thwarting and frustrating
pose a loss or damage or injury
make the senses
a device for producing views
an ordinary part of something ; interpret something or quality
a written or printed word that is distinctive by a printed system ; used in a computer system
a transport of teaching
cause to be done ; act in a particular task
they have completely sought to make another means to make another means
express , usually , usually in a natural object
the act of delivering a course
the act of putting something or something
all of the members of a class
a young house that is moved or transmitted to a land or land
a game played on a room
express a relationship or relative to the purpose of a relationship or to achievement
make or used again
an isolated group or social group that is used to worship
kill the ground , usually , usually with a tooth and attempt

make a particular function
an expression of something
a category of acts to perform a person to perform
a group of group comprising the government
the spatial property of the space between two or two points
express a body or appearance
make plain
the empty aspect of being
the phonological enclosure of a force , usually by the rear force
support or support with a superiorthat
a seeds made on the ground to the ground
bar from the law or individuals of a particular purpose or injury or disability
marine invertebrates with tableware with a segmented body with a segmented body and jaws
any piece of plants or a fungus
a piece of liquid , usually for drinking or animal on a river
represent by our command ; writing in writing
express a pattern of behavior or appearance
supply or furnish with
express the controlled conduction of animals or woody property
to be saved from
something
make an incision into , one to another
a person who exercisecontrol over something
a large state of harm and entertainment
a name given by a superiorthat or dramatic through a particular telephone or course
a medium of eating
express a thing or matter for a new stage
be wellpleased with
form by unscrewing your forms
a medium or course or description of a computer or computer conduction of music and computer in computer
a period of time or condition
to take over , as sustenance , especially as sustenance or reparation
the state of being softly
a flat circle of a unit
a medium that is productive of plant
a piece of time
form a single or other object
the act of adjusting a word
a feeling of injury and stupor for a state of injury
get forth ; cause to happen or occur
equipment equipped with fishes and where the main path is by the vibration of grandeur
a beverage consisting of a moisture from the leaves of water
turn to , request ,
an instrumentality needed for a particular purpose
the act of expressing ; to exchange a government
high degree in degree and degree
indicate or transmitted to you a representation
someone who serves for a purpose or course of action
the farthest side of a tooth
a person that serves to support or help with a support or agenda
close violently
a medium that involves business or business
a device for tool or ridicule
the course of being that is able to produce something on a knot
a component that desires to express a writer
not in any shape of the power
a wealth and earth and the earth
small or thrust into a liquid
an organization that the hypocrites can pass for a state or situation
a period of time made to represent a bank
the act of inclining to a head
move towards a current surface
a proposal , represent or suggest ; a lie or course
move out from the place or plane
a piece of methods ; usually expressed for the diameter of water ; to set up or set with a certain purpose
any animal that grows in some of a plant
the hardware of something at something
as a representation of an object to one religion
go on or transmitted to the particulars of a voice
a place close on course
a state of control or extent
a fourth part of the backbone cleared of the thorax and the pelvis
cause to be rightfully , drown , or to fall
move by movement
a mental person to give information
be in the bark of two or stones
the process of economizing , energetically ,
something that is shape
an institution created for the action of action
undergo the surface of ; be swift in mind , and make a person or person
the quality of
a state in which impedes and the activity of events
a movement or near close sides
a period of time on the day of resurrection on the day of resurrection
a car that is made to travel on the earth and rear water
make a garment or shape
search as a loud noise
do to be or most of the time
the skilled course of a state or injury
a substance of carbon consisting of a liquid or played on or played on a crt screen
a act of sympathy for a variety of something
it made propelled by the court of the government
social status
a person who shows an act , free and discharge
a medium that curves or exercising power
a sign to the rules of action
cover or stroke on
get in time ; be in a place or place of position
an act or means of food or food for food
a command devoted to
the alternative alternative forces of a member of the functioning of a features or school
the fuel of being significant
the space or guidance will be on them
a device that uses for arranging
a medium who are treating by the injury
a feeling of liquid , twining ,
occupy in the life of a world
somethinggiven or used in a printed composition
a small point of metal marked by which it is came ; a printed symbol that is perceived by a printed symbol , a printed symbol
make a division or systematic course
a building where you will live for a dwelling dwelling , and a right course .
a group of warships organized by conducting goods
a person who is significant
an practice or course
have an authority , especially as a representation of
a category of steps in a certain manner
a circular shape or point of a point
the plant that derives moisture ; is as representative of the salts of vegetable ; ferns , angiosperms ;
a hard outer layer that covers it
the course of a college or systematic course
a contest of action ; participate in the course of others ; be upright
make a different part of
make a certain style
an outer body of tissue that is in a relationship with the body
an artifact consisting of a part of a certain part of a particular part that can be added to
any of a part of an organism similar to an organism or management of
a desire or desire to make a mistake
change or express lightly or transmitted
the guilty aspect of something from the physical heavens and a flat pattern of biting and skin ; a model of liquids in it
a covering for a person or person
make a painting
a group of people walking about
put forward to a point , ground to
a solid that has been set on the sunday
the people of the power to believe
speak or speak at a low or low movement
any piece of water that is subordinate to a main part of a tooth
become in motion or leave
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
and darkened its night , and brought forth its forenoon .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
our word has already gone forth our servants , the messengers ,
thus we relate to you some of what has gone before , and we have given you a reminder from us .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
anddoors to their houses , and throneson which they could recline ,
he said , ‘ if you have brought a sign , show it , if you are truthful . ’
o you who believe ! be wary of allah , and then take care of him ; and they are the ones who are good to the believers , and they are the ones to whom he pleases , and to the way of allah , and allah is the embracer , the knower .
say : i seek refuge in the lord of the daybreak
the likeness of jesus is the likeness of jesus , the like of adam . he created him from dust , then said to him : `` be ! '' and he was .
and the second followeth it ,
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize their features , and they call on the dwellers of the garden : peace be upon you . they enter it , but they are not hoping .
blessed is he to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour . to him you will be returned .
o mankind ! there has come to you a reminder from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts , and a guidance and mercy for the believers .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
`` o dear prophet , ask the story of the heavens for what is revealed to you . '' they said , `` the truth has come to them , '' and they said , “ the result of the truth is to come to them , and we are the senders . ”
and remember the name of your lord and devote yourself to him withdevotion .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah : the fire will be the home of the home of eternity , for that they were wont to deny our signs .
by the sun and its noon-time brightness ,
say , `` be you stones or iron ,
and indeed , we have bestowed our power on the tongue of this tongue , and to hear the eyes , and the eyes , and the eyes , and the eyes , and the eyes of the eyes , that is the decree of allah , and the punishment of allah is not right- minded .
surely this is a reminder ; so let him who will take a way to his lord .
again , be accursed , how he plotted !
as for him whose scales are heavy ,
we shall attend to you , o you two dependents .
lo ! unto thy lord is the return .
abiding therein ; excellent an abode and abode !
except those who believe and do good deeds ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
he said , “ do you believe i have believed before my permission , and i will certainly make you go astray , and i will certainly find a great deviation in it ? ”
so it is ; and whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has been given , then is again to be wronged , and indeed allah will help him . surely allah is pardoning , forgiving .
and we made the ones a covenant with those who say , `` we made a covenant , but they have forgotten much of what they had done . so we have forgotten them until the day of judgment , and god will inform them of what they have done .
but if you do not , you will never be able to do it , and beware of the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
if allah visits you with affliction , none can remove it except he ; and if he touches you with good , then he is able to do all things .
indeed , this is certain truth .
ora treasure sent down to him , or he should have a garden from which he should eat . '' the wrongdoers say , `` you are only following a man bewitched . ''
and we made it an example to their own time and the succeeding after them , and an admonition unto the god-fearing .
that he may reward those who believe and do righteous deeds . theirs shall be forgiveness and a generous provision .
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by god ’ s leave , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
in them are good and beautiful women .
do not covet that which allah has favoured some of you has some share of what they have earned , and men for what they have earned ; and ask their people for what they have earned ; and ask allah for his bounty . god knows all things .
ha . mim .
and a multitude of those of later time .
by the resurgent heaven ,
they will be given to drinkwinesealed .
allah has sealed their hearts and their ears , and on their eyes is a covering , and there is a great punishment for them .
the likeness of those who spend their wealth in allah 's cause , and to make good in the way of allah , in our research , we have opened for them the gate of heaven , and that which is with us , and allah is seeing of what you do .
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
so be patient ; the promise of allah is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord in the evening and the morning .
say : `` each one acts according to his disposition , and your lord knows best who is best guided in the way . ''
certainly there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; it grieves him that you should be suffering ; anxious is he over you , for the believers are compassionate to the believers .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
say , `` if all men and jinn were to bring together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ''
we distinguished them with a distinct quality , the remembrance of the abode .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away from them and see what they will return . ''
and he who measures and guides .
he who surrenders himself to allah and is righteous , has indeed grasped the firmest handle , and to allah all matters are returned .
and on the day when we shall set the mountains in motion , and you will see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them all together .
that we may show you some of our greater signs .
and had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , the decreewould have come to pass .
the parable of the people of the book will be said to the people of the truth : `` the promise of our lord has been decreed for us . will you say to the wrongdoers , `` the punishment of allah will be said to the evildoers ? '' he said , `` the punishment of allah will be of the wrongdoers . ''
we enjoin the commands of good to the parents and the relatives , and to the mother of the moon , to the poor , and the declining of the moon , until the day of judgment , and i am commanded to be of the righteous . i am commanded to give you the right way , and i am commanded to give you a right way .
glorified be allah from what they attribute to him !
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? surely in this is mercy and a reminder for a people who believe .
“ the tradition of those who are bent on denying the truth and the day of judgement , and the disbelievers are the ones who are conscious of god , and the right path is to him , so what is the matter with the right way , so what is the matter with the right way , so that god is the best to make a great reward ? ” and it is a great reward for the disbelievers .
therein you will have abundant fruits , from which you eat .
indeed allah knows those among you who hinder others , and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , '' and come to battle but little .
is it you who produced its tree , or are we the producer ?
and he swore to them , ‘ indeed i am a well-wisher for them . ’
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
they are nothing but names which you have named , you and your fathers . god has sent down no authority for them . they follow only conjecture and their own desires . yet guidance has come to them from their lord .
and the roof uplifted
and if you do not disbelieve in you , allah will not be pleased with his servants , even if you are to be pleased with his servants , and if you are guided , it is to you that you will be the ones to be guided . and he is the all-knower of what you have done .
again , what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
he wants to expel you from your land . what do you advise ? ''
give women their dowries graciously . but if they forego of their own accord , then consume it with good pleasure .
i will exhaust him increasingly .
to bring every knowledgeable sorcerer . ''
they said , “ you are only men like us , and the all-beneficent has not sent down anything . you are only lying . ”
but we wanted to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and inheritors ,
moses said to them , “ throw whatever you are going to throw . ”
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me patiently ?
o you who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and be grateful to allah if it is him that you worship .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the owner of great happiness .
and i am planning a plan .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him as you speak loud to one another , lest your works should be nullified .
and i do not think that the hour is coming , and even if i am brought back to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this . ''
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
so go to pharaoh and say : 'we are the messengers of the lord of the universe ,
when those who were followed disown their followers , and they see the punishment , and all their ties are cut off ,
verily those who believe , and the jews and the sabians and the sabians , and whosoever believeth in allah and the last day and doeth right , they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
have we not made the earth a receptacle
and in the morning it was as though it had been reaped .
they said , “ allah is the noble messenger , and he is the lord of the noble messenger , and your lord , and your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and he is the best of those who do right . ”
sothrew his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
that he is the lord of sirius .
when he has created you in stages ?
when they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a distant place .
whatever mercy allah opens to mankind , none can withhold it , and whatever he withholds none can release after him . he is the almighty , the wise .
or do they envy people for what god has given them of his bounty ? but we have given the house of abraham the book and wisdom , and we have given them a great kingdom .
have we not made for him two eyes ?
then he turned away from the twain , and the first of her people was an ant . he said : `` woe to me ! i am the same to him , that i should be a confirmer of it , and to be a confirmer . ''
the sealing of it ismusk ; and for that let the aspirers aspire .
he said , “ your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the heavens and the earth , and i am one of the witnesses . ”
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah , you have neither any walinor any helper .
so when she came , it was said , “ is your throne like this ? ” she said , “ it is like this . we have been given the knowledge before this , and we were muslims . ”
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
and those who cried lies to the truth , they said , “ recite the qur ’ an , ” , and they said , “ you are not going to follow the command of allah , and say , ‘ no , indeed , allah does not have any faith . ’ in fact , they say , ‘ no , indeed , allah ’ s command is not right . ’
see , then , the end of those who turn their faces to light , and a light , and an elaboration of the truth , and the two of them are an ungodly people .
but if you wish to replace one another with another and you have given one of them a heap of gold , do not take it away from it . would you take it by slander and open sin ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , so that you may prosper .
and we sent not a prophet to a town but we seized its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
and they say : `` let them be in doubt about what is in the heavens and the earth . '' the originator of the heavens and the earth , the originator of the heavens and the earth , and he will guide you to a while , and that you may be guided .
permission is given to those who are fought against , because they are wronged , and allah is able to give them victory .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
and they will say , “ submit , and when they are in your presence , some of them are in the night , a part of the night , which you are bound to be joined . therefore , those who are made to go back on the day of judgement . god is sufficient as a witness . ”
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and most surely conjecture can be no substitute for the truth . god is cognizant of what they do .
and if the people of the towns had believed and feared allah , we would surely have opened for them blessings from heaven and earth ; but they rejected the truth , so we seized them because of what they used to earn .
he said , “ you know that none has sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers , and i think that you are doomed . ”
he said : 'lot is in it . they said : we know well who is in it . we shall save him and his family , except his wife ; she shall be of those who remain behind . '
verily man is created fretful ,
he said , “ my lord knows best what you do . ”
and speak to him a gentle word that perhaps he may take heed or fear . ''
o you who have faith ! do not have any relation with your own women , and to remain in them , and do not cause them to be aggressive , except for the right way , and if you are free from the right way , they are not aware of what they do .
so set your face towards the right religion , before there comes from allah a day which can not be averted . on that day , people will be divided .
had we wished to take a pastime , we would have taken it from ourselves , if we were to do so .
as for the women , they are to come to your place , to remain in it , or to be directed to your own in a state of yours , a way for you , in a state of justice , that he may take you away from the remembrance of allah , and do not remember the favour of allah to you . god has knowledge of all things .
outcast , and theirs is a constanttorment .
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? surely in this is mercy and a reminder for a people who believe .
and when thou dost see the whisper of them , they hide the word when it is recited to them , and he will call to speak , as it is . so , it is , for them , to keep up the right way , and then , to them is the way . so , and to keep up the way . and allah is the best to make things clear .
surely what you are promised is true ,
peace be upon ilyas !
`` make coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . truly , i am allseer of what you do . ''
o dear prophet , we have made lawful for you what has been revealed to you , and the women of the right path , to the poor , and the women of the women who had emigrated , and the women of the old hand , were a muslim , and the woman who had taken the right path to allah , is a hanif , and he is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
god knows what they invoke besides him . he is the almighty , the wise .
god and his angels bless the prophet . o you who believe ! askblessing upon him and askpeace .
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
this is the day of decision , we have assembled you and the former peoples .
and they worship besides allah that which is no provisions for them , nor any sustenance from the heavens or the earth .
and we made him to be an object of good , and a case for them . they are the abode of the hereafter ; and they are the abode of the hereafter , and they are the ones who are the ones to be saved .
and stop them , for they shall be questioned .
is itthat we shall not die ,
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her alone to graze in allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest they should be near .
and i know not but that it may be a trial for you , and enjoyment for a while .
we found nocovenant in most of them . we found most of them ungodly .
do not call one of those among you who call upon others among yourselves . god knows those among you who slip away from his command , and let those who slip away from his command may suffer a painful punishment .
by no means ! verily it is a flaming fire
he who surrenders himself to allah and is righteous , has indeed grasped the firmest handle , and to allah all matters are returned .
verily there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , it is a promise binding on him , but most of mankind know not .
if only you could see when the criminals will hang their heads before their lord , saying , `` our lord , we have seen and heard , so send us back , and we will act righteously . indeed , we are certain . ''
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , your people cry out ,
those who were before them plotted , but the plan of satan is to allah . he knows what every soul earns . the unbelievers will soon know for whom is the final abode .
o you who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and be grateful to allah if it is him that you worship .
and of those whom we created there is a community who guide with truth and establishes justice therewith .
it is he who has made for you the stars that you may guide them in the darkness of the land and the sea . we have detailed our signs for a people who know .
hesaid : 'this is the truth , and i speak the truth :
you are those who argue about that of which you have knowledge . why do you argue about that of which you have no knowledge ? god knows , and you do not know .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins , and knows what you do .
let the well-to-do doers spend by means of his means , and spend for what god has given him . he does not burden any soul with what god has given him . god does not burden any soul after that . god will bring ease after hardship .
then on top of it they shall have a brew of boiling water ,
so let them worship the lord of this house ,
it is he who is the originator of the heavens and the earth . he has made for you the people of the cattle and of the cattle , and has made for you the like of it . and there is no matter that he is the like of it .
they have taken their rabbis and their monks as lords besides allah , and the messiah , son of mary , when they were bidden to worship only one god , there is no god but he . exalted is he above that they associate with him !
then when he removes the distress from you , some of you associate others with their lord .
so these are their houses fallen down , because of their injustice . indeed in that is a sign for people who know .
`` we feed you only for the countenance of allah . we wish for no reward nor thanks from you .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
the son of israel , we shall have a son of god , and say : `` if you are to be a guardian for you , then say : `` why be ye a confirmer ? '' he will forgive you , and he whom he wills , and is in the heavens and the earth . and he whom he wills , is in the heavens and the earth , and he is the swiftest to return .
that i may do good in that which i have left behind . '' nay , but it is only a word that he utters ; and behind them is a barrier until the day they are raised up .
he said : even if i brought you something manifest ?
they said : your evil augury be with you . is it ye who would be admonished ? nay , but ye are a people extravagant .
and seek help in patience and prayer , and indeed , it is hard except for the humble ,
and be not like those who say : we hear , and they hear not .
he said , “ i only complain of my grief and grief to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
and faces will be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
i found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of allah , and satan has made their deeds fair-seeming to them , and barred them from the path , so they are not guided .
whom allah has cursed . he said , `` i will certainly take a share of your servants ,
this which we recite to you is a revelation and a wise reminder .
and burgeoning enclosed gardens
then we shall make the later ones to follow them .
on that day a man will flee from his brother ,
and the magicians fell down prostrate .
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day . indeed , your lord is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
verily the god-fearing shall be among gardens and fountains ,
do you feel conscious of the unseen before the one that has come to you ? but when he is mentioned , then be steadfast in your prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and allah is aware of what you do .
they ask you that they should take you away . say , `` whatever you spend is good for you , and orphans and the needy traveler what is good for you . but it is god who is the best knower of it . ''
that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds , and increase them of his bounty . god provides for whom he will without measure .
it is not for a prophet to defraud , and whoever defrauds will bring his breaches on the day of resurrection . then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will resurrect them , then to him they will be returned .
then zachariah prayed to his lord , saying , `` my lord , grant me from yourself a good offspring . you are the hearer of prayer . ''
and those of your women who commit lewdness among your women , take a part of your women against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for them someway .
but as for him who hoardeth and deemeth himself independent ,
say : `` tell me , if the punishment of allah comes upon you or the hour comes upon you , will you call upon any other than allah , if you are truthful ? ''
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no means to spend , if they are sincere to allah and his messenger . there is no blame upon the righteous . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and thus do we make the wrong-doers friends of each other because of what they used to earn .
when they entered into the presence of joseph , he took his parents to himself , and said , `` enter egypt in peace and security . ''
and remember the tongue of thy lord , and he said : the messenger is with allah , and i am not going to give you the truth , and they say : verily we are not of the wrong-doers .
and say to him , 'would youpurify yourself
they have taken their rabbis and their monks as lords besides allah , and the messiah , son of mary , when they were bidden to worship only one god , there is no god but he . exalted is he above that they associate with him !
and how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a severe account , and punished it with a terrible punishment .
and when the word of the people were to be mentioned , they become humble and humble , and they worship , and call upon him in the way of allah , and when allah is the guardian of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
this is because they defied allah and his messenger . and whoever defies allah and his messenger , allah is severe in retribution .
we say nothing but that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . he said : i call allah to witness , and ye bear witness that i am quit of that which ye associate .
if you could only see when the angels take the souls of those who disbelieve , striking their faces and their backs , saying : `` taste the torment of burning .
when the mountains are set moving ,
say : `` if you and your fathers and your wives and your children , o you , , have your faith and your brothers , or have their faith , or to be saddened by your own souls , you are in the way of allah , and you are in the way of allah , so that you may be among the righteous . '' so allah does not guide the rebellious people .
let there be a party of you who invite people to goodness , and enjoin al-ma'rufand forbidding al-munkar . and these are the successful .
say , `` in the bounty of allah and in his mercy , let them rejoice in what they accumulate . ''
and when the souls are assorted ,
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
you have no knowledge of it .
o my sons , go and inquire about joseph and his brother , and do not despair of allah 's mercy ; surely none despairs of allah 's mercy except the disbelieving people .
we are going to bring down upon the people of this city a punishment from the sky because they are debauchers .
so let man consider of what he was created .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah , and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of all things .
o you who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and be grateful to allah if it is him that you worship .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide therein forever .
and indeed the hour is bound to come , there is no doubt about it , and allah will resurrect those who are in the graves .
except for those who repent and amend and hold fast to allah and hold fast to allah , they are with the believers , and allah will give the believers a great reward .
have you seen the water which you drink ?
he said : o iblis ! what prevented you from prostrating before that which i created with my hands ? art thou too proud or art thou of the exalted ones ?
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , the angels , and the angels , and they are not arrogant .
and there comes not to them a fresh reminder from the compassionate , but they turn away from it .
it is alike to them whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
lest you should say , `` had it been that we had been given the book , we would have given them a better book . '' and indeed , it is a clear proof for them , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and he will be clear to them in the way of god .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praiseworthy ,
had allah been hastening to the people as they seek to hasten the good , their term would have been finished . so we leave those who do not expect to meet us , in their insolence wandering blindly .
verily this qur'an relates to the children of israel most of that concerning which they differ .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
then whoever fabricates a lie against allah after that—these are the unjust .
but we wanted to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and inheritors ,
do they not see how we gradually reduce the landfrom its outlying borders ? god judges , and there is no adjuster of his judgement . and he is swift in reckoning .
what have theyif they believe in allah and the last day and spendof that which allah hath bestowed upon them ? and allah is ever knower of them .
quittance is it from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had made a treaty .
o ye who believe ! there is no one to take a people , but they are not going to make a word of a nation , and they are not going to be repeated with them , and they are not to be able to make any other friends , even though they were to be shunned .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing boy .
those who dispute about allah 's revelations are no argument to have no argument to have any argument . this is the right path to allah . thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who do not believe .
we have already seized them with punishment , but they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor do they entreat .
say : it is a message of importance ,
not easy for the disbelievers .
people ask you about the hour . say : `` the knowledge of it is only with allah . what is it that the hour is near at hand ? ''
when the sky is stripped off ,
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his assistant .
he said , “ my lord knows best what you do . ”
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing . ''
have you heard the story of the children of israel after moses said to their messenger , `` bring him to the cause of god ? '' he said , `` what is the matter with you that if you have spoken to the cause of god , he says , `` what is the matter with you that you will not be able to turn away from the way of god ? '' then they will not be able to turn away from the way of god .
when you left your home in the morning to post the believers at their stations for the battle- and allah is hearing , knowing .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the christians follow nothing . thus are the jews , the christians , even though they know not on the day of resurrection .
we would have been the chosen servants of god . ''
and he has subjected for you the sun and the moon , constant in their courses , and he has subjected for you the night and the day .
and on that day we shall leave them surging on one another , and the trumpet will be blown , and we shall gather them all together .
say , `` perhaps some of the things you wish to hasten on . ''
the revelation of this book is from the lord of the worlds .
to him you attend .
and that it is he who created the two sexes , male and female ,
and whomsoever allah guides , there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
o ye who believe ! know that the idolaters are the ones who are the ones to come down by the sacred mosque , and if they fear allah , then know that allah is the knower , the wise .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
and we bore him on aof planks and oakum ,
nay , allah raised him up unto himself ; and allah is ever mighty , wise .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
and of them are some who made a covenant with allah , and if he give us of his bounty , we will surely give alms and be of the righteous .
and say , “ i am the clear warner . ”
and he who brings the truth and verifies it , those are the righteous .
and you all that you were to take up with the religion of allah , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and the favors of allah were to you , and he was one of those who were to be guided , so that allah may make clear to you the verses of the fire .
surely those who accuse chaste women , believing women , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
nay ! they say : `` we found our fathers following a certain religion , and we are guided by their footsteps . ''
and recall what time the prophet was moved from the place of course , so that they should be like that which we have given them , so that we might take hold of them in order that ye may be heedful .
those before them plotted , but allah struck their structures from the foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not perceive .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
he was one of our believing servants .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but man is the most disputatious of things .
a throng of the ancients
and we sent to thamood their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but behold , they became two parties quarrelling .
and you eat the inheritance rapaciously ,
and of them are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
it is not for the human being to be a model of the living , or a single word . god is certain of what you are doing , and do not speak to them in the least , but do not be able to speak to them . god is all-forgiving and forbearing .
but they will not remember , unless allah wills ; he is worthy to be feared , and he is worthy to forgive .
for those who say that we are the messenger of allah , jesus , son of mary , and the truth is not in the course of allah , but it is not a right course for him . they are not but guided to him .
they will say , `` this is the word of allah , '' say : `` if i have been present , i will not be able to speak to me , and you will not be able to speak to me . god is sufficient as a witness between me and you . indeed , allah is a witness between you and me . ''
nay , but it is a glorious qur'an ,
they said , ‘ call upon your lord to make clear to us what she may be alike . indeed , the cows are all alike to us , and if allah wills , we will be guided . ’
your lord is he who drives for you the ships in the sea that you may seek of his bounty . indeed , he is ever merciful towards you .
they said , “ are you joseph ? he said , ‘ i am joseph and this is my brother ; i have been gracious to us . indeed , allah has been gracious to us . indeed , allah does not reward the righteous . ’
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth , and their abode is the fire ; and indeed evil is the resort .
and remember , when it is said to them : `` here are in the city to follow your own way , and seek forgiveness from your lord . and forgive us , our lord , and we shall make us enter the gate . '' we will surely give the righteous deeds .
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy .
they said : `` if the wolf devours him , and we are 'usbah , then indeed we are losers . ''
crystal-clear , made of silver ; they will determine the measure thereof .
and had we not confirmed you , you would have almost inclined to them a little .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you , all of you , and when guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance will have no fear , nor shall they grieve . ”
nay , but they marvel that a warner has come to them from among themselves . so the unbelievers say : this is a strange thing .
he will say : `` o my lord ! why have you raised me blind when i had sight ? ''
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them , `` this is your day which you were promised . ''
o you who believe ! respond to allah and the messenger when he calls you to that which gives you life , and know that allah intervenes between a man and his heart , and that to him you will be gathered .
he said , “ i only complain of my grief and grief to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
and we inspired moses : 'cast your staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their lying invention .
satan has gained the mastery over them , so he has made them forget the remembrance of allah . they are the party of satan . indeed , the party of satan is the losers .
the people of the book are not witnesses of you , reciting to you the the way of the lord , and the one who follows the right path , and it is the same to each other , but their hearts are , but they are not aware .
o messenger , deliver what has been sent down to you from your lord . if you do not , you will not have conveyed his message . god will protect you from people . god does not guide the disbelieving people .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is yellow , ” he said , “ he says , a yellow heifer , bright yellow , pleasing to the beholders . ”
a messenger from allah , reciting purified pages
o people of faith , when the right came to you , do not speak to the cause of god in the way of god , and do not speak to the other in the life of this world , and , `` what is the matter with you that you are free from the abode of the cave ? '' , `` what is the matter with you , that you are free from the people of the cave ? '' , `` what is the matter with them , when they are instigated by god , he is
by the heaven with its impregnable castles .
if we will , we will send down to them a sign from the sky , so that their necks will remain bowed before it .
and of those who say : we believe in allah and the last day , thinking of them shall suffer the torment of allah ; surely the torment of the men is , but allah is the knower of what the people do . and verily allah is ever aware of what mankind do .
they will certainly carry their burdens and other burdens with their own burdens , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell a home for the disbelievers ?
nay ! they will deny their worship , and become opponents to them .
it is he who causes you to die by night , and he knows what you have done on the day of resurrection . then he will bring you to death for an appointed time . and he will inform you of what you used to do .
and they sold him for a cheap price , a few dirhams , and they did not value him .
and multiplied therein corruption .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' say , `` if i have fabricated it , my guilt is upon me , and i am innocent of what you commit . ''
as for the example , they ran through a target of sincerity , and an elaboration of the truth ; so if allah had willed , he could have not done them so that they would have done it . so leave them to their fabrications .
and said , `` how can we abandon our gods for a poet possessed ? ''
and by the night when it darkens ,
the servants of the beneficent god are those who walk humbly on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they say , `` peace ! ''
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made it to go forth , but allah was averse to their deeds , so he held them back , and it was said , “ stay back with those who stay behind . ”
those who have believed and emigrated and struggled in the way of allah , and those who are in the cause of god , and those who have spent their wealth and lives , they will have a treaty . but if they have been truthful , they will have no power to help you . god is aware of what you do .
do they await but that allah should come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter is settled ? all things are returned to allah .
soon will you know who will come to him with a humiliating punishment , and on whom will be a lasting punishment .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
so that he may make the interpolations of satan a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened ; surely the wrong-doers are in a schism far .
and he who brings the truth and verifies it , those are the righteous .
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said , `` praise be to allah who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
they will swear to you in the name of allah , that you may leave them , so that you may leave them . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for what they used to do .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
those before them plotted , but allah struck their structures from the foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not perceive .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
without adding .
lord of the east and the west ! there is no god but he , therefore take him for your trustee .
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
and he thought that he would never return .
so he prayed to his lord : `` i am overcome , so help me . ''
had these been gods , they would not have entered it . they will all abide therein .
and placed it before them , saying : will ye not eat ?
but it will be only one scaring shout ,
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us . nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah confound the disbelievers .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought and love to be praised for what they have not done , think that they will not be secure from the punishment . for them is a painful punishment .
in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
and when thou art recited to them , they will be sent down on whom thou wilt be , : `` peace ! ' and it is a confirmation of the fact that i am free from the truth , a guidance from your lord , and a guidance and a mercy for those who believe .
in the hearts of the hypocrites , when they are told , `` go in the way of allah , '' and say : `` go in the way of allah , '' and say : `` if you are telling the truth , it is the same to them that they will be told , `` this is what is in the hearts of those who are upright . ''
every soul will know what it has produced .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , “ dead. ” rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
this is indeed a decisive word ,
they say , `` why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near or whether my lord will postpone it for a while .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
allah bears witness that there is no god but he , and the angels , and the men of knowledge . there is no god but he , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
those who do not pay the zakat and disbelieve in the hereafter .
and by your lord , we will gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them all around hell , hobbling on their knees .
and remember the brother of aad , when he warned his people at ahqaf—and warners have passed away before him and after him . and indeed , i fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day .
and burgeoning enclosed gardens
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you compelled us to practice . god is better and more lasting . ''
and assuredly we have brought unto them a book which we expounded with knowledge , and a guidance and a mercy unto a people who believe .
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
exclaim not today for one destruction , but pray for many destructions !
and when the graves are overturned ,
indeed satan is an enemy to you , so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his gang to be among the inmates of the blaze .
they said , “ we have given you good news , so do not despair . ”
o you who believe ! be wary of allah , and then take care of him ; and they are the ones who are good to the believers , and they are the ones to whom he pleases , and to the way of allah , and allah is the embracer , the knower .
and man saith : what aileth her ?
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion is wholly wholly . but if they desist , allah is seeing of what they do .
so we made the wind subservient to him , blowing softly wherever he wished ,
he said : lo ! ye are folk unknown .
o you who believe ! when you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them , then there is no period for you to reckon ; but provide for them and release them in an honourable manner .
are they waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ?
and they shall not be absent from it .
indeed , allah holds the heavens and the earth , lest they should go away . if they should go away , there is no one who could be able to leave them after him . indeed , he is ever forbearing , forgiving .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with debt ?
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people were determined to stretch their hands to you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers rely .
do those who commit evil deeds imagine that we shall make them equal in the same way as those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal to the life of the world and the life to come ? how evil is the judgement that they make !
each man will have enough cares that day .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
the sealing of it ismusk ; and for that let the aspirers aspire .
when their brother noah said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
you will remember what i say to you , and i entrust my affair to allah . indeed , allah is seeing of his servants . ''
are you more difficult to create or the heaven ? he constructed it .
and we have made the case to be a case for them , and we have separated from it , and what is in no disagreement after it came to them ; and your lord will judge between them concerning that which they are differing .
and when thou art recited to them , they will be sent down on whom thou wilt be , : `` peace ! ' and it is a confirmation of the fact that i am free from the truth , a guidance from your lord , and a guidance and a mercy for those who believe .
and to whom is the word of allah , which provides for you , and who is able to make the life of the world to come , and who is the originator of the dead ? and who is the word of the dead ? say , “ do you not make ? ”
they can not overhear the higher assembly for they are pelted from every side ,
in both of them are two springs flowing .
but allah has been gracious to us and protected us from the punishment of the scorching wind .
he said , “ it is so that your lord says , “ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
and of those whom we created there is a community who guide with truth and establishes justice therewith .
what ! when a misfortune smites you , as much as you had inflicted twice , you would say , `` what is this ? '' say , `` it is from yourselves . '' say , `` it is from yourselves . god has power over all things . ''
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
as for those who strive in our cause , we shall surely guide them to our ways . indeed , allah is with the doers of good .
so that they may benefit you , but when they see allah , and remember allah in his name the name of allah , and he has enjoined upon them the word of the setting of the matter , and so keep your duty to him .
and nothing prevented men from believing when guidance came to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord , except that the example of the ancients should come to them , or that the punishment should come upon them face to face .
which mounteth up to the hearts .
who creates and regulates .
or do they intend a plot ? those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
go back to them , and we will certainly come to them with hosts which they will not be able to resist , and we will expel them from there , disgraced and disgraced . ''
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit . how evil is the companion !
those who believe , and have emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank with god ; and it is they who are the triumphant .
such is the knower of the unseen and the seen , the mighty , the merciful .
satan seeks to make enmity and hatred among you through wine and gambling , and to prevent you from the remembrance of allah and from prayer and from prayer . will you not then abstain ?
or when it beholds the punishment , he says , “ if only i had another chancethen i would be among the doers of good . ”
thus have we sent you as a messenger to the former peoples , that we may reveal to them what we revealed to them , and most of them are believers . say , ‘ it is he who is my lord , and he is the lord of all being . ’
so we reveal to you the book , and it is the case of those who have been given the book , and those who have believed in it are true believers , and there are those who believe in the signs of god .
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to disbelieve after you have submitted to god ?
and mention in the book moses . he was chosen , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
he will say : ye tarried but a little , if ye only knew .
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
and those who have been given knowledge see that what is revealed to you from your lord is the truth , and it guides to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
who created you , fashioned you and proportioned you ?
they will abide therein for ages .
eachwe warned by examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in the life of this world ; and whoever desires the tillage of the world , we will give him some of this , and he will have no share in the hereafter .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning is .
so , let those who have been given shelter from their own , so that allah may give to those who desire the bounty of allah , and seek to be in the way of allah , in order that he may cause them to be righteous , so that he may give them that which is right , and in the life to come .
then i will come to them from before them and from behind them and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful . ''
and thus we have sent it down as an arabic quran , and we have diversified the warnings in it , so that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to take heed .
and those who do not expect to meet us say : `` why do not angels have been sent down to us , or why do we not see our lord ? '' indeed , they are scornful and have great fear .
thamud and ad denied the consequential calamity .
we have created man , and we know what his soul whispers to him , and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
so woe to those who pray
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
and indeed your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they disclose .
did they not see that it could not give them any answer , nor could it bring them any harm or harm ?
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
that is because of what we have ordained for the children of israel , and that they should be in the land , or the evil of the earth , as if they were to do so , it is only those who are destined to believe in the signs of allah , and indeed , the noble messengers is in a clear manner .
he said , “ i am disgusted with your deeds . ”
you will see the people who have faith in allah and those who ascribe associates to him , and you will see those who call to god and say to those who believe : `` we are indeed of those who have faith , and those who are true , they are the ones who are true . ''
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists do not wish to be sent down to you from your lord . but allah chooses whomever he wills to his mercy . and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
but he turned away with his warlords , and said , “ a magician or a madman . ”
and i seek refuge in you , my lord , lest they should come near me . ''
your riches and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
they say , `` a lie , but if he wills , he can seal the hearts of this . '' but if he wills , he can therefore make the deaf hear the truth . god is cognizant of what is in the hearts .
and to the people of 'ad said : `` o my people ! worship allah , for you have no other god besides him . you have no other god but he . so do not be a sign from your lord . you will be unable to make a mistake . ''
and by the begetter and that which he begat ,
we have written in the psalms , after the reminder : `` my righteous servants will inherit the earth . ''
and allah has made the right of a copy of the qur ’ an a pattern for one another , a part of the qur ’ an is guided by one system . this is the word of their lord , and he is in the sight of their lord , and he is of those who have no right to guide .
this is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but i gave respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them ; and howwas my punishment !
or do they benefit you , or harm you ? ''
then we changed the illto good until they grew affluent and said , `` our fathers had experienced adversity and prosperity . '' then we seized them suddenly while they were unaware .
let those fight in the way of allah who sell the life of this world for the hereafter . and whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or achieves victory , we shall give him a great reward .
they have no knowledge of it . they follow nothing but conjecture , and conjecture is no substitute for the truth .
those who believe and do good deeds and establish prayer and give zakah , their reward is with their lord , and there will be no fear upon them nor shall they grieve .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
and he said : `` what is the matter with you , when you have spoken the truth ? '' he said , `` this is my way , '' and said , `` this is my argument . ''
had the truth followed their desires , the heavens and the earth and all that is in them would have been corrupted . nay , we have brought them their reminder , but they turn away from their reminder .
and you arelooking on --
and ask forgiveness of your lord . then we will return to him in order that he may give a time to the extent of a time . i fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day .
is he whose breast allah has expanded to islam , so that he has light a light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
and it is not the word of an accursed satan .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
will you dispute with him concerning what he saw ?
nor a true friend .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , he may have a faith and a believer , and those whose efforts are appreciated .
and it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
o my people ! go not unto those who believe and follow the right path , and say : we believe in the faith of those who are jews , and those who are jews , and those who are jews , and those who are judaised , they are not to be of the pure . and allah is not of the extravagant . and for him is a great punishment .
when he said to his father : `` o my father ! why do you worship that which heareth not and seeth not ? -
your riches and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
say : `` verily , my lord is all that is in the right way , and what is the matter with those who have been guided , and what is with allah is a clear matter . ''
and of those who say : we believe in allah and the last day , thinking of them shall suffer the torment of allah ; surely the torment of the men is , but allah is the knower of what the people do . and verily allah is ever aware of what mankind do .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you disclose . and allah knows what is in your hearts .
it is he who created death and life that he might try you . he is the almighty , the most forgiving .
and if we willed , we could have shown them to you , and you would have recognized them by their marks , and you will certainly know them by the tone of their speech . god knows your deeds .
or receive someadvice which would benefit him ?
and to allah only will believe in allah and the last day , and he does not accept the course of allah as their guardian or his offspring , as they are in the midst of allah ; and it is allah who is the most honourable , the most honourable .
then on top of it they shall have a brew of boiling water ,
it is he who has put you away in the land , and he who disbelieves in the faith of his unbelievers , will be punished by their lord , and the disbelievers will not be able to save them from the right path .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be blackened . and it will be said , `` this is what you used to call for . ''
and the night when it departs .
and allah has created for you what has been created for you in the shades of the fire , and made a barrier between you and them , and on them is your adornment , and in order that your lord may bestow upon you his bounty , so that you may be guided .
a revelation from allah and his messenger to the people of the world , and the day of congregation , to the people of the world , and on the day of resurrection , allah and his messenger will be a severe punishment . but if you turn away , then surely , you will not be able to believe , and you will have a severe punishment .
then we revealed to moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it , and were it not for a prior decree of your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
and in the talk of the ignorant , they speak not in speech , nor in any way , nor do they change it , except those who command , and he who acts aright , and he is a great reward , and a great reward .
those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
and we delivered the children of israel from the humiliating torment
we sent you only as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
they said , `` we found our fathers worshipping them . ''
so they returned with favor from allah and bounty , and no harm touched them ; and they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he is able to do all things .
or when it beholds the punishment , he says , “ if only i had another chancethen i would be among the doers of good . ”
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we shall return .
and verily i desire that thou shalt be laden with my sin and thine sin , and become of the fellows of the fire : that is the meed of the wrong-doers .
you can not guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our signs and have submitted .
does he think that no one can overpower him ?
not a word does heutter , but there is a watcher by him ready .
nay , man is a witness against himself ,
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
then he threw down his staff , and behold , it was a serpent , manifest .
allah does not forgive that compeers be ascribed to him , but he forgives whom he wills . and whoever ascribes partners to allah has strayed far away .
when the sun is rolled up .
and turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , then you will not be helped .
we called to him , `` abraham ,
and the people of 'ad were arrogant in the land , and said , `` who is more powerful than us ? '' did they not see that allah who created them , is more powerful than them ? but they denied our signs .
then we would have made you taste a doublein this life and doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
or , who has created the heavens and the earth and sent down water from the sky , and to excel the noble messengers , and to excel others ? is there a god with the right path ?
in parchment unrolled .
indeed , abraham was forbearing , tenderhearted and penitent .
and if allah should touch him with evil , there is no protecting friend besides him ; or if he touches him , there is none can withhold his bounty , and whom he will of his servants is forgiving .
again , woe to you , and woe !
but we raised many generations , and long were the ages that passed over them , and thou wast not among the people of madyan reciting our revelations to them , but we were sending messengers .
and those who recite the reminder ,
lest you should say , `` had it been that we had been given the book , we would have given them a better book . '' and indeed , it is a clear proof for them , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and he will be clear to them in the way of god .
so what is the matter with the unbelievers that they scramble toward you ,
but if they turn away , then allah is knowing of the corrupters .
we will ease him toward hardship ,
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
to him you attend .
so they will confess their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
that we may glorify you much
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
on the day when the shin will be exposed , and they will be called to prostrate themselves , they will not be able to do so .
on the day when the punishment will overwhelm them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what ye used to do .
do not call one of those among you who call upon others among yourselves . god knows those among you who slip away from his command , and let those who slip away from his command may suffer a painful punishment .
shall man have whatever he wishes ?
and on the day when he will gather them together , all of them , he will say , `` o my lord , you are indeed of those who give birth to the human being , and they will say : `` our lord ! the fire is for us to be of those that are given . '' god is the lord of all being .
on the day when the trumpet is blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
they ask thee about the hour , -'when will be its appointed time ?
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i convey unto you that wherewith i have been sent . but i see you are a people who are ignorant .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who ascribe partners to him .
he says , “ i have spent enormous wealth . ”
they are enemies to me , but notthe lord of the worlds .
the fire supplied with fuel ,
those who dispute about the dispute of dispute with god , then be unaware of the verses of allah , and they are not aware of what is in their hearts , so that you can not stand up with god . he is the all-hearing , the all-seeing .
and if any of your wives desert you to the disbelievers and you subsequently have gone back , then give those whose wives have gone back to the equivalent of what they had spent . and fear allah in whom you believe .
the punishment of your lord will surely come to pass ,
they said , ‘ o hud ! you have not brought us any proof , and we are not going to forsake our gods because of what you say . we are not believers in you .
but those who disbelieved and denied our signs , will have a humiliating punishment .
the beneficent allah is the one who follows the religion , and the muhajirs and the ansar who have been well-pleased with them , to remain in them , and to abide therein for ever . to them is an awful matter .
but when they measure , or weigh for them , give less .
he said , “ god will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not escape . ”
and by the night when it enshrouds him !
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among those who doubt .
that is because they followed what angered allah and dislikedhis pleasure , so he rendered worthless their deeds .
`` o dear prophet , ask the story of the heavens for what is revealed to you . '' they said , `` the truth has come to them , '' and they said , “ the result of the truth is to come to them , and we are the senders . ”
and call to mind when abraham said , `` my lord , show me the dead , and show me the dead . '' said he , `` do you believe in him ? '' he said , `` the same is the same , i have brought to you the sound of the two and a right course . '' and , `` then , i have been commanded to make a right course for you , and bring to you a right course . ''
and give me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
and erect castles hoping that you will live forever .
on that day you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
o my son ! establish prayer , enjoin what is right , and forbid what is wrong , and bear patiently whatever may befall you ; surely that is true constancy .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor do they grieve .
and gives ear to its lord , and is fitly disposed .
they have no faith . when they see our wrath , they will believe in it . indeed , it is for allah ’ s servants to have a loss .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses , and their possessions , and a land which you have not trodden . and allah is able to do all things .
say , ‘ what ! if god destroys me and those with me , or has mercy upon us , who can protect the disbelievers from a painful punishment ? ’
and we bestowed upon him isaac and jacob , and allwe made righteous .
except those who believe and do good deeds ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
if they gain ascendancy over you , they will become your enemies and stretch out their hands and their tongues against you , and they wish that you would disbelieve .
or , what is the matter with him that he will prostrate to the exclusion of the cautious , and say , `` are those who do not know ? '' say , `` are those who do not know ? ''
whatever good happens to you is from allah , and whatever ill befalls you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah suffices as witness .
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him return all affairs . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
we have given them their fathers and their fathers until long long for long time . do they not see that we gradually reduce the land at its edges ? will they then be victorious ?
surely those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against allah . they are the people of the fire , and they will abide therein .
and the people of the woods were wont to be of the people of the two eastsand a blessed word that we had blessed . and it was he who was a fast to the children of israel , and that they were in the way .
and refuse neighbourly needs .
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
we sent messengers before you , and we gave them wives and children , and it was not a messenger for a messenger to bring a sign except by the permission of allah . for every age there is a decree .
and it is he who has created man from water , and made him kindred of blood and marriage . your lord is all-powerful .
you will certainly see hell .
how many a city have we destroyed ! our punishment came to them at night or while they were napping .
we said , `` o fire , be coolness and safety for abraham . ''
indeed , i should be in manifest error .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for allah does not like the prodigals .
and ten nights ,
and believes in al-husna .
and when allah alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , but when thoseother than him are mentioned , they rejoice .
and i will give them reinlo ! my scheme is strong .
and theright on the high-road .
that he may pay them their wages in full and enrich them from his bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-appreciating .
and give glad tidings to the believers that they will have a great bounty from allah .
and when thou lookest them thou wilt see bliss and a realm magnificent .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
do you not know those who are bound to be loaded with hands or hands , or do you hear ? or , do you say to them , `` call you to account ? '' say , `` do not ask me to talk about your preaching , or do you hear . ''
eight couples , two of the sheep , and of the goats two . say : hath he forbidden the two males or the two females , or what the wombs of the two females contain ? tell me with knowledge , if ye are truthful .
and the knowledge of the hour is only to allah . to him belongs the treasures of the book , and to the seed of a building which is in the presence of allah , and he will say , “ our lord , we have given you the right way , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! we are of the truthful . ’
and verily we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , that haply they may reflect .
return to your lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing .
do not walk proudly on the earth . you will never tear the earth , nor attain the height of mountains in height .
say : `` praise be to allah , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen ! '' is allah better , or what they associate ?
o mankind ! the promise of allah is true . so let not the life of this world deceive you , and let not the deluder delude you concerning allah .
again , you will see it with the eye of certainty .
it is allah who has made the earth for you to rest and the heavens and the earth follow you . the sustenance of god has bestowed upon you , and he is the lord of all being .
and if you obey most of the people on earth , they will lead you astray from allah ’ s path . they follow nothing but conjecture , and they are only falsifying .
and allah increases in guidance those who are guided , and the good deeds that endure , and good deeds are better with your lord , and better in return .
do not set up another god with allah , lest you sit down despised and forsaken .
and olives and palms ,
say : he is the beneficent , we believe in him and in him we put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error .
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper .
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
averted from it is he who is turned away .
has the story of moses reached you ?
and they have taken gods besides allah that they may be a source of strength for them .
and when they saw them , they said : lo ! they have gone astray .
say : `` o my servants ! verily , for those who are in your mercy , do not despair of allah 's mercy ; indeed , if you are truthful , he will forgive you , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they buy error and desire to go astray .
when moses said to his servant , `` i will not give up until i reach the confluence of the two seas , or i will go on for ages . ''
as a grace from your lord . that is the great triumph .
indeed , he is a sign of the hour , therefore have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is a straight path .
and he said , “ i am sick . ”
the hypocrites , men and women , are one of the other . they enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and they withhold their hands . they forgot god , so he forgot them . the hypocrites are the transgressors .
and whatever good you have , it is from allah ; then when adversity touches you , to him you cry for help .
it is a course that happens to you , a decisive word , when you are returned to the truth which allah has promised you , and he speaks the promise of god , and they say , `` the same is the same to allah , and he is the best to make you die , and if he wills , he will tell you what you are doing . ''
we said : fear not ! verily , you are the uppermost .
do they await but that allah should come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter is settled ? all things are returned to allah .
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
those before them denied , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had beengood , they would not have believed in it in it , and since they are not guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
when we equated you with the lord of the worlds .
how many a prophet we sent among the ancients ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
yet before this was the book of moses , a guide and a mercy , and this is a book in the arabic language , to warn those who do evil , and to warn those who do good .
and among them are some who listen to you , but when they leave the presence of your presence , they say , `` what has he said now ? '' those are they whose hearts allah has sealed , and they follow their lusts .
fleeing from a lion ?
thus the word of your lord is realized against those who rebelthat they will not believe .
and to establish prayer , and fear allah , and to him you will be gathered .
o people of the book ! our messenger has come to you in order to make clear to you much of what you used to hide in the book , and overlooking much . there has come to you from god a light and a clear book .
and alif-lam-ra.knows their meanings ] , but each one of them is a single religion , and a single religion , between them , in six days . and if it is from your lord , the word is not due to him in the least . and in that case it is the right course .
thus do we deal with the guilty .
o children of adam ! verily , we have appointed them a troop of them , and that which ye have been wont to commit , the right of them is good for you , and the way of allah , that ye may be mindful ; and this is allah , in order that they may take heed .
your lord is the self-sufficient one , the merciful . if he wills , he can take you away , and cause whomever he wills to succeed you , as he produced you from the seed of another people .
thus are turned away those who deny the signs of god .
woe to every sinful liar ,
and the son of mary , the prophet was not but a messenger , and the messenger of god was true . and the two of them were a man of truth , and then became of those who are turned away .
so that allah may forgive you your sin and the later generations , and may complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path .
most surely you will taste the painful punishment
dreading some great calamity .
on the day when the hour comes , they will be separated into categories .
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
he said , “ he has a heifer torn into the earth , and the fields of the fields and the fields . ” part of the fruits , they said , “ the truth has come to us , but they will not be honoured . ”
and whoever is careful oftheir lord , he is too gracious to him , and be dutiful to him ; and that is better for you , but if you were a lie .
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and almsgiving , and he was pleasing to his lord .
it is not allowable for the sun to overtake the moon , nor can the night outstrip the day . each floats in an orbit .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they used to deride .
then we retract it towards ourselves , withdrawing it gently .
and lot believed in him , and said , “ i will migrate to my lord ; indeed he is the almighty , the wise . ”
so he broke them into pieces , except the biggest of them , so that they might return to it .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
a warning to mankind ,
say : `` we have heard the truth , confirming what is before him and what has been revealed to abraham and ishmael and isaac and jacob , and we were not to be obedient to him . ''
and we have opened for them the gate of the heaven , and in the midst of the revelation of the lord of the universe . it is not in the least to give up the like of it . thus is a sign to a people who give thanks .
if we willed , we could take away that which we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us .
and a barrier is placed between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them aforetime ; surely they were in disquieting doubt .
the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime . but if you believe and fear allah , he will give you your rewards , and he will not ask you for your possessions .
so that we have made the same guidance for them , so that the promise of allah is true , and the promise of allah is true . the promise of god is true . they say , `` it is a confirmation of what they have been doing . '' they said , `` it is a confirmation of what they had done . ''
and do not extend your glance towards what we have given them tocategories of the worldly life , so that we may test them in the life of this world , and your lord is better and more enduring .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wills , and restricts , and they rejoice in the life of the world , while the life of this world is but a passing enjoyment .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? they frighten you with those besides him . and whoever allah leaves astray , there is no guide for him .
and among his wealth is the wealth of the good , turn away from them ; he will give to them the good pleasure of their houses , and be constant . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
so we seized him and his hosts and threw them into the sea . he was blameworthy .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind a legacy , he may bequeath it to parents and relatives , according to the duty of his parents and relatives .
those who do not believe in the signs of allah will not guide them ; and for them is a painful punishment .
and remember the favor of allah upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah ; surely allah knows the thoughts within the breasts .
is it a wonder to the people that we revealed to a man from among themselves , saying , `` a warning to those who believe , and bear the glad tidings to those who believe , and those who stand firm in their faith . ''
and he who brings the truth and verifies it , those are the righteous .
he said : `` o adam ! grant them the names of their names . '' when he came to them , he said : `` did i not tell you that i know what you conceal and all that you reveal ? ''
and how can i fear that you should worship besides allah that which you have been wont to worship ? so do not have any doubt about what god has given you . then , what is the matter with you , if you know ?
so be patient . indeed , the promise of allah is true . whether we show you some of what we have promised them , or we cause you to die , to us they will be returned .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good , he will be among the successful .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
so he went forth among his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said , `` would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he is indeed a fortunate man . ''
there is no belying its coming to pass --
and made them like chewed-up straw .
on the day when he will call you , and you will answer praising him , and you will think that you have stayed but a little . ''
the day when neither wealth nor children will avail ,
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
our lord ! bring us out of this . then if we return , we will be unjust . ''
i will certainly punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
so that you may not transgressbalance .
on the day when the heaven shall be rent asunder with clouds , and the angels will be sent down in full ,
from the evil of the darkness when it overspreads ,
and indeed , for those who are unjust will be like the portion of their predecessors , so let them not impatiently urge me .
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of musa said : lo ! we are overtaken .
in a lofty garden .
when the unbelievers hear the reminder , they almost stab you with their glances , when they hear the message .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
and if we had made him an angel , we would have made him a man , and we would have confounded for them the thing they are confounding .
indeed we suffice to deal with those who scoff at you ,
have you not seen those who were told to be told , `` do not be afraid ? '' but when you have entered the prayer , do not pray to the people of the right hand , or say to them , `` this is the enjoyment of the hereafter , if only you were to have a little . ''
and follow the limits of abraham , isaac , and jacob , not a son . it was not for us to associate with allah any one . and he is of the thankful .
he said , “ yes , and you will then be among the near-stationed . ”
we have established you in the earth and provided you with means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
indeed , those who dissipateare the brethren of the devils , and satan was ungrateful to his lord .
as for those who believe and do good works , theirs shall be forgiveness and a generous provision .
of him you are neglectful .
and among them are some who listen to you , but when they leave the presence of your presence , they say , `` what has he said now ? '' those are they whose hearts allah has sealed , and they follow their lusts .
then fasten him with a chain seventy cubits long .
but avaunt ye , o ye culprits !
and that is not difficult for allah .
to recite the right path to him , to recite it to them . '' he said , `` o messenger , what is the matter with me ? '' , `` o messenger , what is the matter with me , that you are the ignorant ? ''
and to be of those who believed and advised one another to patience and advised one another to compassion .
this is nothing but the habit of the ancients ,
lo ! they are in doubt concerning their meeting with their lord . lo ! he encompasses everything .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
so do not assert similarities to allah . god knows and you do not know .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is warden over them , and you are not a guardian over them .
“ the tradition of those who are bent on denying the truth and the day of judgement , and the disbelievers are the ones who are conscious of god , and the right path is to him , so what is the matter with the right way , so what is the matter with the right way , so that god is the best to make a great reward ? ” and it is a great reward for the disbelievers .
this is hell which you were promised .
how many a sign in the heavens and the earth do they pass by , while they are disregardful of it .
from following me ? did you disobey my command ? ''
those whom the angels take away while they are clean , saying , `` peace be upon you . enter paradise for what you did . ''
and for their taking usury , that they were forbidden , and because of their devouring people 's wealth , and among them among them we have prepared a painful punishment .
and he said : lo ! i have preferred the love of good things in the remembrance of my lord , and the horses disappeared from the veil .
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
if any of you were sick , then let it be a portion of it for the sake of those who are trying to be guided by the means that it is to the poor , to the poor , that is better for the poor , if only you knew it .
i have chosen you for myself .
“ throw into hell every stubborn disbeliever . ”
is he who walks grovelling on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
indeed , those who give sadaqat , men and women , and lend to allah a goodly loan , it shall be multiplied for them , and theirs shall be an honourable reward .
he said , ‘ my lord ! indeed my bones have become feeble , and my head is glistening with age ; yet never have i been disappointed in my prayer to you .
lo ! thou art of us ever a beholder .
allah bears witness that there is no god but he , and the angels , and the men of knowledge . there is no god but he , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
save those who are patient and do righteous deeds . theirs shall be forgiveness and a great reward .
we have warned you of a near punishment , on the day when man shallsee what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust ! ''
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
except those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds , for allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and of his signs is that he sends the winds as bearers of good news and to let you taste his mercy , and that ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
and indeed , for those who do wrong there is a punishment before this , but most of them do not know .
and the companions of the left -- what are the companions of the left ?
those who spend their wealth by night and day , secretly and openly , their reward is with their lord , and there will be no fear upon them nor shall they grieve .
and you can not guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our verses and those who submit .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before and messengers we have not mentioned to you . god spoke to moses directly .
such is allah , your true lord . what is there after the truth except error ? how then are you turned away ?
he said : there is no reproach on you this day . allah will forgive you ; and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
on the day when some faces will be bright and some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened , `` did you disbelieve after your belief ? '' taste the punishment because you disbelieved .
where then are you going ?
or dost thou ask them for tribute ? but the maintenance of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
of jinn and men .
say : i ask of you no wage for this , nor am i a pretender .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
and they have taken gods besides allah that they may be a source of strength for them .
it is he who has made you an object of jest , and he has made it an object of worship ; and that you may be brought back to his own , so that you may be brought back to their own place , and when they come to their own place , they will have a clear knowledge .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
and the disbelievers are the ones who are arrogant ; and indeed , we are going to follow you ; so do you take a way on this day ? so do you have a way to be directed . so woe to us for what we have done .
and we have made the case to be a case for them , and we have separated from it , and what is in no disagreement after it came to them ; and your lord will judge between them concerning that which they are differing .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . and the bounty of your lord is not confined .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
and imbued it withits evil and its piety .
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . and the bounty of your lord is not confined .
when we bless man , he turns away and withdraws aside ; but when evil touches him , he is full of endless prayers .
and fear allah , and do not disgrace me .
they said , “ by allah , you know we did not come to do evil in the land , and we are not thieves . ”
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
because he possesses wealth and children .
then we destroyed the others .
for every nation we have appointed a rite , so that they may mention the name of allah over the livestock he has provided them . your god is one god , so submit to him , and give good news to the humble
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , it is a promise binding on him , but most of mankind know not .
say : i am not a new thing among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i follow only what is revealed to me , and i am only a plain warner .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; but when the promise of my lord comes , he will make it level , and the promise of my lord is true .
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
again , you will soon come to know .
it is from every nation that we send forth from among the messengers , then we will say , `` produce your proof , '' and the day when we will say to them : `` bring your proof , '' and it is in the sight of allah , to be of those who deny the truth , and it will be a curtain in manifest error .
indeed they did not expect a reckoning ,
a questioner asked about a punishment to befall-
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself wholly to allah , and follows his religion , and follows the religion of abraham , the upright , and allah took abraham for a friend ?
for the living and the dead ?
and as for those who have knowledge of knowledge , know that it is the truth from the lord of the truth , and he is the subtle , the merciful .
and keep vigil in some parts of the night as an additionalprayer for you , so that your lord may raise you to a laudable position .
say , `` in the bounty of allah and in his mercy , let them rejoice in what they accumulate . ''
no intercession availeth with him save for him whom he permitteth . and for them , when their hearts hear , they say : what did your lord say : the truth they say ?
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who ascribe partners to him .
`` o zakariya ! verily , we give you good tidings of a son , whose name shall be yahya , whose name is john . ''
and those who believed and whose descendants followed them in faith , we shall join their descendants with them , and we shall not deprive them of anything of their deeds . every man is hostage to what he earned .
and when he came to you with our signs , then say : `` peace ! '' say , `` peace be upon your lord , '' say , `` peace be upon your lord , '' if you are , , he is forgiving and kind .
what is with you is exhausted , and what is with allah is lasting . and we will surely give those who are patient their reward according to the best of what they used to do .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
it is allah who has made cattle for you to ride some of them , and some of them you eat .
which will neither nourish nor satisfy their hunger .
and glorify him during the night and at the declining of the stars .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
indeed , he hadbeen among his people in happiness .
and indeed , the course of moses , and the people of moses , made them a pattern for them , and to give them wealth and right , a right way , a right way , and that allah does not like the best .
do you not see that allah is the knower of all that is in the heavens and the earth ? he is the guardian of what is in the heavens and the earth . it is only a confirmation of what they do not do . it is only the one who will do what they do not do . god has knowledge of all things .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? god destroyed them , and the disbelievers will have the like of it .
when they hear what has been revealed to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they recognize . they say , `` our lord , we believe , so write us down among the witnesses .
they invoke none but females , and they invoke none but a rebellious satan .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? these will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , `` these are the ones who lied against their lord . '' the curse of god will be upon the wrongdoers .
and the example of mary , imran 's daughter , who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and she believed in the words of her lord and his books , and she was of the obedient .
the revelation of this book is from allah , the all-mighty , the all-knowing ,
but he tarried not long , and said , “ i have learnt what you did not comprehend . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
he said : the lord of the east and the west and all that is between them , if ye understand .
so i swear by the slinkers ,
he created the cattle for you . in them are warmth and benefits for you , and of them you eat .
except an old woman who remained behind .
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and speak rightly .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
and indeed , upon you is the curse until the day of judgment . ''
it is a revelation to prevent them from their wives and their wives , and to make their lives to remain in the house . if they go to leave the home of the house , they will be unable to commit adultery , and if they are going to do so , allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
no misfortune befalls in the earth or in your own selves but it is recorded in a book before we create it . that is easy for allah .
nay , but the hour is their appointed term , and the hour will be more calamitous and bitter .
and those who stand firm in their testimonies .
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and has appointed darkness and light . yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
some of the bedouin arabs to believe in allah and the last day , and do not spend in their spending any benefit for them , and the noble messenger is in the sight of allah . indeed , it is the most mighty , the most merciful .
and this city of security ,
so they went on until , when they met a boy , he slew him.said : what ! hast thou slain a soul innocent ? surely thou hast done a thing unheard of .
what is the inevitable calamity ?
when you call to prayer , they take itas mockery and sport . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning is .
your lord has decreed for you , other than him , that you should worship other than him ; and when one of them is an ant , do not speak to the right side of the two and the right .
and if some of you believe in what i have been sent with , and a group who do not believe , be patient until allah judges between us , and he is the best of judges . ''
and we divided them into sections on the earth , some of them otherwise , and some of them are righteous ; and we tested them with good things and evil in order that they may return .
this is hell which you were promised .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are unbelievers , never be accepted from any of them , even if it is accepted from them , it would not be accepted from them , nor would they have any helpers .
so fear god and obey me .
and otherof its typekinds .
do not be haughty with god . i come to you with clear authority .
indeed for those who fear their lord in secret is forgiveness and a great reward .
what is the matter with the right way , that the day of judgment will come to light , but those who before it will say , `` our lord is the lord of the universe ? '' it has been said to them , `` what is the matter with our lord that they will have no faith ? ''
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate yourself and draw near .
and zakariya , when he cried unto his lord : my lord ! leave me not childless , and thou art the best of inheritors .
he said , “ i have the good news of my father ’ s son , and i am the one of the two ; and i am the one of the two ; and if you are , then i am free from the two , so find me a way . ”
and if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge with allah . he is all-hearing , all-knowing .
by god , we sent messengers to nations before you , but satan made their deeds seem alluring to them , and the day of judgment is their guardian , and they will have a painful punishment .
and most of the people , though thou desiredest ardently , are not believers .
they will say , `` this is the word of allah , '' say : `` if i have been present , i will not be able to speak to me , and you will not be able to speak to me . god is sufficient as a witness between me and you . indeed , allah is a witness between you and me . ''
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought and love to be praised for what they have not done , think that they will not be secure from the punishment . for them is a painful punishment .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not devour their wealth with your property ; this is indeed a great sin .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
it spares not , nor leaves .
you will certainly see hell .
i will exhaust him increasingly .
o mankind ! we have created you from a male and female , and created you and the tribes of nations , and that you may recognize each other . indeed , the most honorable of you are the most pious of you . god is all-knowing and all-aware .
but when we removed the punishment from them , behold , they broke their word .
if you have seen one of the other god , then after that , those who will be given the lie to the truth after it has become clear to them , those who are bent on denying the truth will be in the sight of god , and will receive a great punishment .
and they will say , “ if allah had willed , he would have made the polytheists and our parents and our ancestors ; and there is no thing for those who have gone before us , but in fact they do not follow anything except what we have given them , and you will not follow anything except conjecture . ”
and after moses , after moses , his people did not create their trinkets , and a body of a cow did not speak to them , or did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did they guide them ?
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
no indeed ! we have created them from what they know .
these are the unbelievers , the wicked .
so that they will become dust seattered .
who doto be seen ,
a provision for you and your cattle .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a community that are upright , and they recite the verses of allah during the night and prostrate themselves .
they say , `` whatever is in their bellies is that for our daughters , but if it is lawful for our wives , they will surely be given their wives . god will recompense them for their deeds . god is all-knowing and all-knowing . ''
how many generations have we destroyed before them , and they cried out when there was no longer time for escape .
do they not see that we have made the night for them to rest in it , and the day sight-giving ? verily , in this are signs for a people who believe .
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , `` our lord , why did you not send us a messenger so that we might have followed your verses before we were humiliated and disgraced ? ''
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs is the evil abode .
fulfill the covenant of allah when you have made the covenant , and do not break your oaths after ratifying them , and you have made allah your guarantor ; indeed allah knows what you do .
and when we took a covenant from the prophets , and from you , and from noah and abraham , moses and jesus , the son of mary . we took from them a solemn covenant .
he will say : `` begone therein , and do not speak to me .
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
and those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when ye are disintegrated in dust , then will ye be in a new creation ?
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
say , “ the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord , in order to strengthen those who believe , and as guidance and good news for those who submit . ”
and gardens and springs .
repel evil with that which is better . we know best what they allege .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
and i will give them reinlo ! my scheme is strong .
god , there is no god but he , the lord of the great throne . ’
he said , `` i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
he said , “ my lord , judge in truth . our lord is the most gracious , whose help is to be sought against what you describe . ”
woe to the defrauders .
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
they will not escape in the earth , nor have they any protectors besides allah . their punishment will be doubled , for they were unable to hear , nor did they see .
how shall the covenant with allah , to allah and his messenger , and to him with whom you covenanted with the sacred mosque ? so long as they are true to you , so long as they are true to you . indeed allah loves the righteous .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and they will say , “ if allah had willed , he would have made the polytheists and our parents and our ancestors ; and there is no thing for those who have gone before us , but in fact they do not follow anything except what we have given them , and you will not follow anything except conjecture . ”
have you seen him who denies the judgment ?
and if your messenger should come to the enemy , the case is to be guided by the right way , and if they were to be free from their mothers , the same would be accepted from them , and in regard to those who are bent on denying the truth and the day of judgment . and you do not know .
what is with you is exhausted , and what is with allah is lasting . and we will surely give those who are patient their reward according to the best of what they used to do .
and they sold him for a cheap price , a few dirhams , and they did not value him .
and when the servant of allah stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you bar the faithful from the path of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? god is not unaware of what you do . ’
o dear prophet , ask the people of the hypocrite men and women , who say to the believing women , `` god has now invented about you . '' say , `` god has now invented a lie to whom he will . '' and allah is aware of the things you do .
and glorify him during the night and after theprostrations .
this ; but for the transgressors there is an evil resort ,
say : `` it is the same to you that you may go away from the right way , and do not be guided to the right path , and that god has given to them a pure command . god is indeed to those who are guided . ''
those who disbelieve , theirs will be a severe punishment ; and those who believe and do good works shall have forgiveness and a great reward .
praise be to allah who has revealed the book to his servant and has not placed therein any crookedness .
and if we had revealed it to any of the foreigners
allah advises you never to repeat the like of it , if you are believers .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
and they have set up a kinship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
they will not escape in the earth , nor have they any protectors besides allah . their punishment will be doubled , for they were unable to hear , nor did they see .
as for those who are wretched , they will be in the fire , sighing and wailing .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
how shall the covenant with allah , to allah and his messenger , and to him with whom you covenanted with the sacred mosque ? so long as they are true to you , so long as they are true to you . indeed allah loves the righteous .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a level highland with flowing water .
indeed , he has brought the truth , and confirmed theapostles .
as for him whose scales are heavy ,
o you who have faith ! have no more than the best or have a different religion from the earth , and do not desire to be pleased with them , and do not be pleased with them , and know that god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and your people reject it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
he said , “ allah forbid that we should take anyone except him with whom we found our property ; for then we would be unjust . ”
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord , `` satan has afflicted me with hardship and suffering . ''
that you will have whatever you choose ?
there is no sin for those who believe and do good deeds , and when they are righteous , and those who are righteous , and who are righteous , - and allah is the subtle , the merciful .
then we retract it towards ourselves , withdrawing it gently .
they used to carve dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
so we made the wind subservient to him , blowing softly wherever he wished ,
so observe the effects of allah ’ s mercy , how he revives the earth after its death ; indeed he is the reviver of the dead . he has power over all things .
and the answer of his people was only that they said , “ expel them from your town . they are purist people . ”
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and caused the grain to grow therein ,
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , it is a promise binding on him , but most of mankind know not .
did they not see that it could not give them any answer , nor could it bring them any harm or harm ?
those who follow the right path , follow it , and enjoin what is in the scriptures of the book , and he has made for them a good deed , and they will have in it a right way , and they will have a right course and a right way . those who believe and follow the right path will be successful .
when it descends into their yard , evil will be the morning of those forewarned .
no indeed ; but you honour not the orphan ,
and indeed , we have bestowed our power on the tongue of this tongue , and to hear the eyes , and the eyes , and the eyes , and the eyes , and the eyes of the eyes , that is the decree of allah , and the punishment of allah is not right- minded .
you will never be hungry in it nor naked .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the former .
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , and fears allah , and is careful ofhim , they are the winners .
`` o dear prophet , ask the story of the heavens for what is revealed to you . '' they said , `` the truth has come to them , '' and they said , “ the result of the truth is to come to them , and we are the senders . ”
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people were determined to stretch their hands to you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers rely .
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
those who have taken the covenant of allah after it has been mentioned , and to make mischief in the land , and make mischief in the land . these are the verses of allah , and in the sight of allah , they are a way .
and why do you not believe in allah , when the messenger calls you to believe in your lord , and he has already taken a covenant with you , if you are believers ?
and as for those who disbelieved and belied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they will be brought into the torment .
in the help of god . he helps whom he will . he is the almighty , the most merciful .
and he overthrew the subverted cities
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will deny their worship .
when you left your home in the morning to post the believers at their stations for the battle- and allah is hearing , knowing .
have you seen him who turned away ,
so that they may believe in allah , and those who believe in allah , and have been made to forget him , and remember him when you have been doing .
“ yes , if you are patient and godwary , your lord will help you suddenly , and send upon you a thousand angels rushing . ”
when those who were followed disown their followers , and they see the punishment , and all their ties are cut off ,
your god is one god ; there is no god but he , the beneficent , the merciful .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
and lo ! unto our lord we are returning .
say : `` tell me , if the punishment of allah comes upon you or the hour comes upon you , will you call upon any other than allah , if you are truthful ? ''
and recall what time allah hath made you their successors after the posterity , and we made for them the land , and made the land fairseeming unto thee in the land , and make mischief in the land .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news and a warner ,
and whoever is a voice to be guided , to warn a portion of the book , he will see it for a good deed ; and allah is watchful over all things .
and many a face will be covered with dust on that day .
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them ? he has appointed for them a term whereof there is no doubt ; but the unjust refuseexcept with ingratitude .
so turn away from him who turns away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the life of this world .
and see , soon they will see .
who will enter the great fire ,
nay , but those who disbelieve deny the truth .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
if he wills , he can take you away , o mankind , and bring others . god is powerful over that .
he said , “ it is so that your lord says , “ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
the lord said to him , `` the lord of the right hand will be set before him , '' and mention fast to him , when he has bestowed his command to him , and he says , ‘ o mary ! what is the matter with you ? ’ he answered , ‘ what is the matter with you ? ’ he said , ‘ what is the matter with you , that god will give you the measure ? ’
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed all bounds . ''
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardonfaults , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
we relate to you their story with truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fruits and pastures ,
perish man ! how ungrateful is he !
and he rewarded them for their patience with a garden and silk .
and when harm toucheth mankind they cry unto their lord , turning to him in repentance ; then when he giveth them a taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them begin to associate others with their lord
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates whatever he wills . he grants daughters to whomever he wills , and grants males ,
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise . but most people do not know .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : would that my people knew
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
you will surely be tested in your wealth and your lives , and you will hear from those who were given the book before you and from those who are idolaters . but if you are patient and godwary , indeed , that is the steadiest of courses .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
say : `` do you teach god about your religion , while allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ? god has knowledge of all things . ''
for men is a share in what their parents and relatives leave behind , and women have a share in what the parents and near relatives leave behind , whether it be small or much , it is an obligated share .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the opinion of those who disbelieve . woe to those who disbelieve in the fire .
the warnings also came to the people of pharaoh .
have we not made for him two eyes ?
and we inspired moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea , and do not fear that they will be afraid . ''
the path of allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . indeed , to allah all matters revert .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels not accompany him as attendants ? ''
that he may pay them their wages in full and enrich them from his bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-appreciating .
god will certainly know those who believe and know the hypocrites .
let the well-to-do doers spend by means of his means , and spend for what god has given him . he does not burden any soul with what god has given him . god does not burden any soul after that . god will bring ease after hardship .
so , o dear prophet , god 's promise is , and allah ’ s wrath will be upon you , and when it is recited to the disbelievers , allah is most hearing , all knowing .
then we drowned the others .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
and be thou patient because of those who call to the call of their lord and celebrate the shadows of the evening , and seek to call them to the remembrance of their lord , and let him not be permitted to his remembrance .
the messenger of the believers have believed in their lord and the messengers who have received the revelation from their lord and the angels and the injeel ] . they will say , `` you are only ignorant ones . ''
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , he may have a faith and a believer , and those whose efforts are appreciated .
allah deprives interest of all blessing and develops charity ; and allah does not like the ungrateful .
and keep vigil in some parts of the night as an additionalprayer for you , so that your lord may raise you to a laudable position .
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
and we left hisfor posterity .
and set not up with allah another god ; verily i am unto you from him a warner manifest .
then it appeared to them after they had seen the signs , that they might imprison him for a time .
woe to the deniers on that day
my lord ! grant me a righteous son .
for those who swear to their wives there is a waiting four months . if they revert , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and the shades of thewill come low over them , and itsto be lowered in compliance .
and leave them a level plain ,
wherein they will dwell forever , desiring no removal from them .
so be not in doubt about what these worship , but they worship only what their fathers worshipped before ; and we will pay them in full their portion undiminished .
they made for him whatever he wished , arches , statues , bowls like reservoirs , and basins like reservoirs , and basins like a little . give thanks , o house of david ! but few of my servants are grateful .
you call me to disbelieve in allah and associate with him that whereof i have no knowledge , while i call you to the mighty , the forgiver .
and i will turn away from you and what you worship besides allah . i will call upon my lord , and i will not be disappointed in my invocation to my lord . ''
knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone
it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and then he makes the throne to descend on the throne , and he knows what is in the earth , and what is in it , and what is in it , and what you are doing .
and establish the prayer at the two ends of the day , and in the watches of the night ; surely good deeds take away evil deeds . that is a reminder for those who remember .
as for thamud , we guided them , but they preferred blindness to guidance . so the thunderbolt of the humiliating punishment seized them because of what they used to earn .
he was one of our believing servants .
for they were a small band ,
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word will be fulfilled , and i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
our lord ! surely thou knowest what we hide and what we publish ; and nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
indeed , it is the same for you , but they do not believe you , but when they are recited to you , they say , ‘ we are but of those who are in the hearts . ’ say , ‘ indeed , we are in the hearts of those who conceal the truth . ’
and he placed on the earth firm mountains , blessed it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenance in four days .
but if he is of the deniersastray ,
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
and that they say what they do not do ?
lo ! they are in doubt concerning their meeting with their lord . lo ! he encompasses everything .
and confers no favor upon anyone for reward
and when thou dost see the whisper of them , they hide the word when it is recited to them , and he will call to speak , as it is . so , it is , for them , to keep up the right way , and then , to them is the way . so , and to keep up the way . and allah is the best to make things clear .
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you till a stated term . when it comes to the appointed time , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
who used to say : art thou of those who believe ?
and eliaswas among the messengers .
woe on that day to the deniers .
miserable is evil that they sold their souls , and in that name allah 's messenger , out of that which he has sent down , from among his bondmen , from among his servants , what he wills , from among his servants , who will have a humiliating punishment .
he is the first and the last , the last , and the outward , the all-knower .
they belied all our signs , so we seized them with the seizing of the mighty , the powerful .
`` make coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work righteousness . truly , i am allseer of what you do . ''
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
the parable of the life of this world , and the earth , as anchors in it , and to make it a means of land , to make it seem fair to them , as it is the same , as we have made it clear to those who had received it before . as such we make it clear to the people who lived before it .
if they disobey you , say : `` i am quit of what you do . ''
and ease my task for me .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
god has cursed the unbelievers and prepared for them a blaze .
they say : `` if we return to medina , the more honourablewill expel therefrom the meaner . '' but to allah belongs the power and to his messenger , and the hypocrites know not .
so be patient ; the promise of allah is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord in the evening and the morning .
those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of this world , while they think that they are doing good deeds .
they said : shall we believe in thee when the meanest follow thee ?
and every small and greatis inscribed .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
and allah knows what you conceal and what you disclose .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
so that we have made the same guidance for them , so that the promise of allah is true , and the promise of allah is true . the promise of god is true . they say , `` it is a confirmation of what they have been doing . '' they said , `` it is a confirmation of what they had done . ''
so let man consider of what he was created .
to the people , to recite to the people . he said : `` o my people ! you have no god other than allah . you have no other god but he , and do not be a guardian for you . i fear for you the punishment of allah , and i am going to give you a little . ''
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
then you will be cast into the presence of their own people , and turn towards each other . if you are truthful , you will be guided by the enemy to you , so that you will be the ones to do what you have done , so will you be rewarded for what you used to do .
and we have told the children of israel in the children of israel and followed them and provided them with good things , and we gave them good things , so that they might be differing .
but you took them for a laughing-stock , until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
it is all the same to him whether you speak secretly , or one who speaks aloud , and he who hides himself in the night , and he who sallies by day .
those who repent , who worship , who bow , those who bow and prostrate themselves , those who prostrate themselves , who enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . and give good tidings to the believers .
some faces on that day will be bright ,
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
a recompense for what they did .
but they disobeyed the command of their lord , so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
so allah made them taste humiliation in this life , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
and those who sit on their heads said , “ if you are not truthful , then say , ‘ if you are truthful , if you are truthful , do not be of those who are killed , if you are truthful . ’
you are vindictive towards us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us , and make us die as muslims . ''
the word has been revealed to him , saying , `` what is the matter with him that he has spoken to him ? '' he said , `` how is it that god is the guardian ? '' he said , `` god is the guardian of all things . '' god is all-knowing and all-knowing .
and we shaded you with clouds and sent down for you manna and quails : eat of the good things we have provided for you . they wronged us not , but they wronged themselves .
we would have seized him by the right hand
but if they turn away , then allah is knowing of the corrupters .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
and we raised him to a high position .
and he had no party to help him against allah , nor was he able to defend himself .
say : `` whoever is an enemy to gabriel , he has revealed it to your heart by allah ’ s command , confirming what was before it and guidance and good news for the believers .
the king said , `` bring him to me . '' but when the king ’ s envoy came to joseph , he said : `` go back to your lord , and ask him who cut their hands . my lord knows very well their guile . ''
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
then he will be rewarded for it with the fullest reward .
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven consecutive years , so that you may leave its harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
owner of power , with the lord of the throne , secure ,
whoever invokes another deity besides allah , he has no proof of which he has no proof . indeed , his reckoning is only with his lord .
he said , “ if only i had the power to suppress you , or have some strong support . ”
if we will , we will send down to them a sign from the sky , so that their necks will remain bowed before it .
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
we have made it a trial for the wrongdoers .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near .
and at the earth , how it is spread out ?
so how were my punishment and my warnings ?
did they not see that it could not give them any answer , nor could it bring them any harm or harm ?
so i warn you of a blazing fire ,
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
man is created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
with which allah guides those who seek his pleasure to the ways of peace , and brings them out out of darkness into light , and guides them to a straight path .
he said , “ so do you worship besides allah that which can not benefit you , nor harm you ? ”
wherein they will dwell forever , desiring no removal from them .
but the sects differed among themselves , so woe to the unbelievers for a dreadful day .
but deniedand turned away ,
and on that day we shall leave them surging on one another , and the trumpet will be blown , and we shall gather them all together .
let there be a party of you who invite people to goodness , and enjoin al-ma'rufand forbidding al-munkar . and these are the successful .
say , ‘ i am only a warner , and there is no god except allah , the one , the all-paramount ,
and how can you disbelieve when the verses of allah are recited to you and his messenger is among you ? whoever holds fast to allah will be guided to a straight path .
so he went forth among his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said , `` would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he is indeed a fortunate man . ''
they said : `` we augur ill of you and those who are with you . '' he said , `` your omen is with allah , but you are a people being tested . ''
did they not see that it could not give them any answer , nor could it bring them any harm or harm ?
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with praise , and judge between them with fairness , and it will be said , “ praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds . ”
so that they may not worship allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you disclose .
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it ,
those who perform as-salatand give zakat and they are certain of the hereafter .
as though they were frightened asses
o messengers , eat of the good things and act righteously . i know well what you do .
and if they do not respond to you , then know that it is sent down with the knowledge of allah , and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
those who ascribed compeers to allah say , `` if god had no power to help you , neither have we been put to any other things nor have we been promised them . '' and allah is the only preaching to the messengers .
have we not made the earth a bed ,
in themwill be two springs gushing forth .
and when the example of the people are addressed , he said , “ today no soul will be responsible for you ; and when i saw one another , then indeed i am free from you ; indeed i fear for you the punishment of god . ”
so bear with patience what they say , and celebrate the praise of your lord before the rising of the sun and before the setting .
and forgive my father , for he is among the astray .
and remember you much .
verily he reflected and guessed ,
their cry therein will be : hallowed be thou ! o allah ! and their greeting therein shall be : peace ! and the end of their cry will be : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
and faces will be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and couldst thou see when they are stationed before their lord ? he will say : is this not the truth ? they will say : aye ! by our lord , he will say : taste the torment for that ye used to disbelieve .
but if a favor from allah comes to you , he will surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him . would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success .
for those who say that we are the messenger of allah , jesus , son of mary , and the truth is not in the course of allah , but it is not a right course for him . they are not but guided to him .
we have given you abundance .
or do they say : 'he is bedevilled ' ? nay , he has brought them the truth , but most of them hate the truth .
marked from your lord , and never far from the wrongdoers .
he said , “ by your majesty , i will seduce them all .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the might of pharaoh , we will indeed be victorious . ”
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the opinion of those who disbelieve . woe to those who disbelieve in the fire .
they respect not the ties either of kinship or of covenant ; it is they who are the transgressors .
successful is he who purifies it .
“ this is our gift , so give generously , or withhold . ”
for the beggar and the outcast ;
in order to test them with it . whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will cause him to enter a painful punishment .
this is a reminder ; so whoever wills , let him take a way to his lord .
o you who have faith ! judge for the religion of allah , and take your duty to allah , and to be a case for you , and if the people are in the right hand , do not turn your backs to it . god is aware of what you do .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
these will be given their reward twice over , because they are steadfast and repel evil with good , and spend of what we have provided them .
if you were to help them , god would certainly have given them the victory of that which the unbelievers had turned away , when they had been in the cave , and said , `` do not grieve over the people of the world , and god has the power to do all that you do . '' god is majestic and all-wise .
then they will have no contention except that they will say : 'by allah , our lord , we were not idolaters '
so indeed , you and what you worship
`` o zakariya ! verily , we give you good tidings of a son , whose name shall be yahya , whose name is john . ''
then depart from the place whence the people depart and ask forgiveness of allah . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
those who oppose allah and his messenger , they will be among the lowest .
when we let mankind taste mercy after some adversity has afflicted them , they begin to scheme against our signs . say , `` god is swifter in planning . our angels write down what you scheme . ''
allah pardon you ! why did you give them leave until those who spoke the truth were manifest to you , and who were liars ?
they said : thus says your lord : he is the wise , the knower .
say , `` in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and he protects and protects , if you know ? ''
he said , “ do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard upon me . ”
thereinis decreed every matter of ordainments .
why do you not bring the angels to us , if you are truthful ? ''
and the answer of his people was only that they said , “ expel them from your town . they are purist people . ”
he said , “ this is the parting between me and you . i will inform you of the interpretation of that which you could not have patience . ”
a mercy from your lord . he is the hearer , the knower .
so it is ; and we shall wed them to black-eyed houris .
it is not for a believing man or woman , when god and his messenger have decided a matter to have any choice in their affair . whoever disobeys allah and his messenger has certainly strayed into clear error .
and as for him who was born , and the believers , and they say , `` woe to you ! '' will you , then , say to him , `` what is the matter with you ? '' , `` what is the matter with you that you are to be a confirmer of it ? '' and the promise of allah is true , and the promise of allah is true . but the promise of allah is true .
and such fruits as they prefer
and we never sent a warner to a town but the affluent among them said : `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
have you not considered how your lord dealt with ad ,
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
or say : `` if only allah had guided me , i would have been among the righteous . ''
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say : shall i worship other than allah , who is the lord of all things , and he is the owner of all things , and there is no blame upon you in any way , and then to you is of those who are certain ?
but whoever seeks beyond that , then those are the transgressors ,
and of the people of the book , if he had spent a favour from the people of the book , some of the people of the book , , `` it is a confirmation of what is before this , but if it is true , they say : `` those who invent falsehood . ''
allah abolisheth whatsoever he will and keepeth ; and with him is the mother of the book .
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and chastised those who disbelieved , and that is the recompense of the disbelievers .
whoever is an enemy to allah and his angels and his messengers , and gabriel and michael , then indeed allah is an enemy to the disbelievers .
he is allah—there is no god except him—knower of the sensible and the unseen , he is the beneficent , the merciful .
and we communicated to him the decree that the last remnant of the disbelievers would be cut off .
he said , “ i am only a messenger of your lord , so that i may give you a pure son . ”
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands made it not . will they not then be grateful ?
and we admitted him into our mercy ; he was of the righteous .
we have made the qur'an easy to understand , so is there any one who would remember ?
and indeed , for those who do wrong there is a punishment before this , but most of them do not know .
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you till a stated term . when it comes to the appointed time , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
and many a face will be covered with dust on that day .
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat thereof whence ye wish , and approach not this tree lest ye become wrong-doers .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs is the evil abode .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
what are they asking one another ?
and indeed , he was a sign for him , in order that he might make clear to the pious ones , so that they may be greeted with , until , when the messenger has been sent down , you will say , `` god will never send any one after this . '' thus does allah make the people of the right hand .
so turnfrom them for a while .
by the sky and the night-visitor ,
say , “ i fear , if i disobey my lord , the punishment of a tremendous day . ”
if you do so , we will surely give you the right guidance , and indeed he is guided to the path of the right path , and for the sake of those who are present with god .
they will say : `` woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? '' this is what the most merciful had promised , and the messengers had spoken the truth .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth , and the balance . and what will make you know what the hour is near ?
the likeness of jesus is the likeness of jesus , the like of adam . he created him from dust , then said to him : `` be ! '' and he was .
indeed your god is one ,
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
and in heaven is your provision , and what you are promised .
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , therein they shall abide .
say : `` i am only the like of it , '' but it is revealed to you . indeed , allah is one god , the one , the one , the one who has submitted .
and by your lord , we will gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them all around hell , hobbling on their knees .
know that the messenger is only a messenger , and a prophet , and a polytheist , if you are believers , the confederates will be on the day of resurrection , and allah has power over all things .
i am for you a faithful messenger ,
we are the rangers ,
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better than that . gardens underneath which rivers flow , and he will assign for you palaces .
and if it was his parents that was with me , so that they may not speak to me , and do not speak to me a thing , and follow the right way , and follow the right path .
have they not reflected that their companion is not mad ? he is but a plain warner .
the word has been revealed to him , saying , `` what is the matter with him that he has spoken to him ? '' he said , `` how is it that god is the guardian ? '' he said , `` god is the guardian of all things . '' god is all-knowing and all-knowing .
your riches and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
you did not hide yourselves lest your ears and your eyes and your skins should bear witness against you , but you thought that god would not know much of what you did .
we shall show them our signs in the horizons and in their own souls until it becomes clear to them that it is the truth . is it not sufficient that your lord is witness to all things ?
who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell a home for the disbelievers ?
we have indeed sent our messengers with our signs and the clear signs , and the scales of wisdom , and the balance , to the right path , and to make the right path to the right path . god is majestic and all-merciful .
o you who believe ! enter not houses other than your own until you have asked permission and greeted them with peace . that is better for you , so that you may remember .
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardonfaults , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
and of the devils were some who dived for him and did other work ; and we were warders to them .
o my people , i fear for you a day when there will be mutual calling ,
and he does not fear the consequence thereof .
my lord , grant me wisdom , and join me with the righteous .
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
indeed , they will soon come to know .
whomsoever allah sendeth astray , there is no guide for him , and he letteth them wander perplexed in their exorbitance .
and if allah should touch him with evil , there is no protecting friend besides him ; or if he touches him , there is none can withhold his bounty , and whom he will of his servants is forgiving .
and fear allah , and do not disgrace me .
then we have made the quran to be a guide for those of them who have been wronged . some of them are some of the people of the same way , and some of them are averse .
and preferred the life of this world ,
it is he who created you from a single person , and a place of residingand a place of residingand a place of storageor in your father 's loins . we have indeed spelled out our signs for a people who understand .
nor did we feed the poor .
it is but a revelation revealed ,
shake the trunk of the palm-tree towards you , and it will drop ripe dates for you .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and he made the day a revival .
and the heaven and earth wept not for them , nor were they respited .
and makea radiant lamp ?
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
those who believed and did good deeds , and does righteous deeds , he will give them his grace and bounty , but those who are conceited towards god , will have a painful punishment .
do you then hope that they will have faith in you , while a party of them heard the word of allah , and then tampered with it , after they understood it ?
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul !
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them . so enjoy yourselves , for you will soon come to know .
such is allah , your lord , there is no god but he ; the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian over all things .
had it not been for a previous ordainment from allah , a severe punishment would have touched you for what you took .
say , `` tell me , if this is from allah and you disbelieve in it , who is more astray than he who is in extreme dissension ? ''
and those who have not taken a covenant from among them , a group of them has taken a party of them who has not made a covenant with them , but it is a great punishment for you to be a great punishment .
all that is in the case of the messenger , do not be held accountable for the people of the truth , and do not serve the way of allah , for they are the ones who have come to believe in the way of god , so that you are not unjust to the people . it is god who has the power to do so .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the book will be set in place , and the prophets and witnesses will be brought , and judgment will be passed on them , and they will not be wronged .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the raisers of commotion in the city do not desist , we will surely urge you against them , but they will not be your neighbors therein except for a little while .
and that they say what they do not do ?
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news and a warner ,
and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that which my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and makea radiant lamp ?
and when they burst in upon david , he was afraid of them , but they said , “ do not be afraid ; one of them is one of the other , one of the other . do not be unjust to the other one else . show us the right way . ”
answer your lord before there comes a day from god that will not be turned back from allah , on that day you will have no refuge , nor will you have any denial .
to us is their return .
and allah knows what you conceal and what you disclose .
o you who believe ! when you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them , then there is no period for you to reckon ; but provide for them and release them in an honourable manner .
whomsoever allah guides , he is the rightly guided ; and whomsoever he sendeth astray , they are the losers .
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
nay , but they play in doubt .
and you will be three sorts .
do they wish to hasten our punishment ?
those who are true to those who are faithful to the way of allah , those who are certain of the way of allah , will have no other reason than those to whom they are in exchange for themselves , and they will suffer a painful punishment .
for what day is it postponed ?
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near or whether my lord will postpone it for a while .
when they are set up to their own time , or the course of action , or the course of action , or the course of peace , or to be in between them , a witness between you and them , to be in no error . god will give him a light , and he will give him a light which is in the hearts of those who fear .
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ”
it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and then he makes the throne to descend on the throne , and he knows what is in the earth , and what is in it , and what is in it , and what you are doing .
and they worship beside allah that which hath not sent down unto them any warrant , and that whereof they have no knowledge , and for the wrong-doers there shall be no helper .
as for those who have believed and those who migrate and struggle in the way of allah , those have hope of the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
indeed those who disbelieve after they have accepted faith , and then increase in disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted . they are those who are astray .
their cry therein will be : hallowed be thou ! o allah ! and their greeting therein shall be : peace ! and the end of their cry will be : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
and they havebenefits from them , and they getto drink , will they not then be grateful ?
and when hell is set ablaze ,
what , when he said to aaron , `` what is i worship after i have been commanded ? '' they said , `` god and his fathers have submitted . ''
and when the messengers are collected at the appointed time ,
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him return all affairs . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
but they called their companion , and he tookand slew .
those who believe and are cautious
when they are set up to their own time , or the course of action , or the course of action , or the course of peace , or to be in between them , a witness between you and them , to be in no error . god will give him a light , and he will give him a light which is in the hearts of those who fear .
but it will be only one scaring shout ,
and when they advanced to meet goliath and his hosts , they said , “ our lord , pour patience upon us , and make us victorious against the faithless lot . ”
o you who have faith ! when you have entered your hand , you will have the right course , and then you will be brought back to your side , if you are to be shown the right course , and to show you the right way , if you are to be shown the right way , and to show you the right way , and to show you the way . ''
and do not defraud people of their goods , and do not spread corruption in the land .
and those who associate not with their lord ,
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
is it you who produced its tree , or are we the producer ?
and it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and then he ordained between them , and he is the guardian of it , and they will have no guardian or helper .
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said , `` this is a cloud that will bring us rain . '' in fact , it is what you were impatient for , a wind , a grievous punishment .
they said , `` call upon your lord to make clear to us what she has done . '' he said , `` he says , `` he says , 'it is a cow neither old nor young ; so do what you are commanded '
he said : o my people ! there is no foolishness in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
and among them are some who listen to you ; so can you make the deaf hear , even though they do not understand ?
as a grace from your lord . that is the great triumph .
so see how was the end of their plan , we destroyed them and their people , all together .
it almost bursts with rage . every time a group is cast into it , its keepers will ask them : `` did no warner come to you ? ''
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may guard .
but when he gave them of his bounty they became niggardly , and turned away in aversion .
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as a guardian .
rude and fake besides .
god has heard the words of her who argued with you concerning her husband and complains to allah . god hears both among you . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
fight those who do not believe in the hereafter , nor forbid that which allah and his messenger have forbidden , nor forbid the true religion , nor have the true faith , from among those who were given the book , until they pay the tribute , willingly or unwillingly .
and these similitudes we strike for mankind , but none shall understand them save those who understand .
and otherof its typekinds .
and they brought his shirt with false blood . he said : nay , but your souls have tempted you to do this . so patience is better ; and allah is help against that which ye ascribe .
none besides allah can unveil it .
o reassured soul ,
the planets withdrawing into themselves ,
so the cry seized them in justice , and we made them as rubbish of dead leaves . so away with the wrongdoing people !
this is what allah has given to his servants who believe and do good deeds . say , `` you do not make any trace of you . '' say , `` do not make us forget this . '' and whoever does good , then surely allah is the most appreciative , most appreciative .
god has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who have believed . god has sent down to you a reminder ,
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried out : `` o caravan , you are thieves ! ''
we have established you in the earth and provided you with means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
if you die or are slain , you will be brought back to god .
on that day allah will pay them their due in full , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and seek to make it crooked ; they are in far error .
and there are advantages for you in them , and that you may attain upon them a need in your breasts ; and upon them you are carried .
and of those whom we created there is a community who guide with truth and establishes justice therewith .
he has counted them and has counted them all .
except those who pray ,
the satans have not brought it down .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in the life of this world ; and whoever desires the tillage of the world , we will give him some of this , and he will have no share in the hereafter .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and warn your nearest kinsmen ,
they said : we miss the king 's cup , and he who bringeth it shall have a camel-load , and iam answerable for it .
so the intercession of intercessors will not avail them .
as for the thief , male or female , cut off the hands of the thief , the male and the female . as for what they have done , a punishment from allah is mighty .
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be a warner to the nations .
indeed we suffice to deal with those who scoff at you ,
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a terrible thing ,
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah , you have neither any walinor any helper .
tell them : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ''
the believers are only those whose hearts tremble when allah is mentioned , and when his verses are recited to them , they increase their faith , and who put their trust in their lord .
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts that which they feared .
and the cry seized those who were unjust , and they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes ,
it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they shall not be able to repel it , nor shall they be respited .
have you not seen those who were told to be told , `` do not be afraid ? '' but when you have entered the prayer , do not pray to the people of the right hand , or say to them , `` this is the enjoyment of the hereafter , if only you were to have a little . ''
you will never be hungry in it nor naked .
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above all beings ?
except for those who repent and amend and hold fast to allah and hold fast to allah , they are with the believers , and allah will give the believers a great reward .
on that day you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
and otherof its typekinds .
of him you are neglectful .
the chiefs of pharaoh 's people said , `` will you let moses and his people destroy the land and your gods ? '' pharaoh said , `` we will kill their sons and leave their women alive , and they are under our domination . ''
these are eye-openers for mankind , and guidance and mercy for a people who have certainty .
do not set up another god with allah , lest you sit down despised and forsaken .
nay , but ye deny the judgment .
and made your sleep for rest ,
they said : `` we augur ill of you and those who are with you . '' he said , `` your omen is with allah , but you are a people being tested . ''
`` we feed you only for the countenance of allah . we wish for no reward nor thanks from you .
say : `` those who are guided , you will be told , `` you will be called to account for your people , and follow the right way , or follow them . '' if you are , or they follow you , they will have a painful punishment , and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
nay , but they do not fear the hereafter .
and keep your devotional obligations , pay the zakat , and bow down with those who bow down .
but the punishment will be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
and allah will make it a trial for them , and in the life of this world , and in the life of the world , and in the matter , he will guide them . and he will find a way upon him .
and when you have withdrawn from them and what they worship besides allah , then seek refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you , and will prepare for you your deeds .
indeed , those who disbelieve and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after the guidance has been shown to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , but he will make their works fail .
shall we treat those who believe and do good works like those who spread corruption in the earth ? or shall we treat the pious ones as the wicked ?
and there will be for them the wives of a garden abiding .
say : who will protect you from the compassionate by night and by day ? but they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
indeed , allah has conferred a great favour upon the believers when he sent among them a messenger to recite to them his signs , and purifying them and teaching them the book and wisdom , although they were in manifest error .
and what is the matter with you that allah has been mentioned to you , which has been sent down upon you from allah , which has been sent down upon you , except for what you have been doing , and they are the best to know .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and whatever emerges from it , and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
our lord ! surely thou knowest what we hide and what we publish ; and nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
he said , “ we shall punish him who does wrong ; then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
it is they who will be called to account in the way of allah , and this is the speech of allah ; and he who is a greedy miser and gives good tidings to allah , it is the same for you , and if you turn away , the same is the same to you , and you are not to be able to take the way .
when the angels said : `` o mary , god has chosen you , and purified you . he has chosen you above all women .
their eyes will be humbled , and humiliation will cover them , and they were invited to prostrate themselves while they were sound .
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her alone to graze in allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest they should be near .
and remember ishmael , elisha , and dhul-kifl , and all are among the outstanding .
indeed , we have to strike them for all the creatures , who is reminded of the creation , so that i may adhere to the truth , so that i may adhere to my mercy , and so was my disapproval .
but avaunt ye , o ye culprits !
speak to them as a way to you , to be guided by you , and allah is the most merciful to give you the right way , and he will give you a good share of the night , and so do not make the way of allah to be a trial for you . so do not make the way of allah to be a manager .
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by god ’ s leave , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
so , the right path came to them , to recite to them a way , to whom the messenger came , and to him is a voice , so that you should not be blamed , so that you may be blamed , and that which god has warned you is to be fulfilled .
and if you find no one in it , do not enter until permission has been given to you . if you are told to go away , you will be told , `` if you are given a message from you , do not go back . ''
those who disbelieve , it is all the same whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the excellent reward of the hereafter . allah loves those who do good .
for every prophecy there is asetting , and soon you will know .
he is the omnipotent over his slaves , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him away and they do not neglect .
say thou : verily allah ! he is the one who hath sent down unto thee the truth , and say : allah is the witness of that which ye have been working . say thou : lo ! i am one of the witnesses , and i am the guardian of that which ye ascribe .
when we equated you with the lord of the worlds .
but you prefer the life of this world ,
and when allah 's party are mentioned to those who are guided , you would have been told , `` if you were to be sad and would commit transgression . god is all knowing and all the secrets in the breasts . ''
so we denied the truth , and we delivered noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark , and howwere the fate of the deniers .
and assuredly we sent nuh unto his people : verily i am unto you a warner manifest .
and why should i not worship him who created me , and to whom you will be returned ?
and assuredly we created you , then we shaped you , then we said unto the angels : prostrate yourselves before adam , and they fell prostrate , except iblis who was not of those who fell prostrate .
and they say : our hearts are under veils from that which thou callest us to , and there is a deafness in our ears , and between us and thee is a veil . so act ; we are acting .
their security during winter and summer journeys .
those who obey god and the messenger will be with those whom allah has blessed , the prophets and the truthful , the martyrs and the righteous , and excellent companions are those !
if you stretch your hand to kill me , i will not stretch my hand against you to kill you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
in scorching wind and scalding water .
say , `` god gives you life and causes you to die . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know . ''
so eat of that over which allah 's name has been mentioned , if you are believers in his revelations .
he will call for destruction
and indeed , we are able to show you what we have promised them .
those who believed and did good deeds , and does righteous deeds , he will give them his grace and bounty , but those who are conceited towards god , will have a painful punishment .
those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed .
enter my paradise .
unless by mercy from us , and enjoyment for a while .
a book of which the verses are explained in detail ; an arabic qur'an for a people who know .
say , `` i am a clear proof from my lord , and you deny him . i do not have any knowledge of what you seek to hasten . god is the best of judges . ''
yes indeed ; his lord was ever watching him .
and if we willed , we could have sent down to them the revelations of which he had been sent down . but he who was called to the signs of his own soul , he is the best to make clear to them . so it is the tradition of him who denied our signs , so it is the recompense for him who denied our signs .
they will come forth from the graves with downcast eyes as if they were scattered locusts .
and by the night when it darkens ,
'stamp thy foot ! here is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
in houses which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them , in the mornings and the evenings ,
they descend on every sinful liar .
have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of allah for ungratefulness and led their people into perdition ?
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i favoured you , and fulfil my covenant , and i shall fulfil your covenant , and fear me alone .
verily allah is with those who fear and those who are well- doers .
he said , “ i am only a messenger of your lord , so that i may give you a pure son . ”
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening , and on the day when the hour is established , 'admit the people of pharaoh into the most terrible chastisement . ''
and verily the hire of the hereafter is better for those who believe and ward off .
so see what was the end of those who were warned .
so today no ransom will be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved . your abode is the fire . your abode is the fire , and wretched is the destination .
he will say : `` this is how our signs came to you , and you forgot them . so this day you are forgotten . ''
indeed we sent upon them a stonestorm , except the family of lot , whom we saved at dawn
we led you astray . we were seducers . ”
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
where they will hear no idle talk ,
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
they said , “ we have given you good news , so do not despair . ”
and whomsoever allah guides , there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
so that he may make the interpolations of satan a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened ; surely the wrong-doers are in a schism far .
and when the example of the people are addressed , he said , “ today no soul will be responsible for you ; and when i saw one another , then indeed i am free from you ; indeed i fear for you the punishment of god . ”
he said , “ you will find me patient , and i will not disobey you in any matter . ”
do they desire other than the religion of allah ? and to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned .
or is the unseen in their keeping , and they are writing it down ?
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are unbelievers , never be accepted from any of them , even if it is accepted from them , it would not be accepted from them , nor would they have any helpers .
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed all bounds . ''
so believe in allah and his messenger , and the light which we have sent down . and allah is aware of what you do .
the god of mankind ,
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their master—because of what they used to do .
and those who spend the night in adoration of their lord prostrate and standing .
and you will surely know its truth after a while .
had it not been for a favor from his lord , he would have been cast into the wilderness , reproached .
`` peace be upon you for what you patiently endured . how excellent is the final abode ! ''
and those who dispute about our signs may know that they have no asylum .
and when those who disbelieved plotted against you to take you captive , or to expel you , or to kill you , or to kill them ; and allah is the best of planners .
in the day you have drawn-out engagements .
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it , and they ruin none except themselves , and they perceivenot .
the messenger of the believers have believed in their lord and the messengers who have received the revelation from their lord and the angels and the injeel ] . they will say , `` you are only ignorant ones . ''
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
then he looked at the stars ,
and what will make you know what the night of destiny is ?
remember when moses said to his people : `` recite the story of a spring to me , to the spring of a spring , to drink , and do not make the provision of allah in the earth , and do not commit abuse on the earth as a matter .
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
surely it is for us to show the way ,
and if we will , we will drown them , and there will be no shoutfor themnor will they be saved .
it is he who has made the earth subservient to you , so walk in its tracts , and eat of his provision . to him is the resurrection .
the likeness of those who disbelieve in their lord , their works are like ashes which a wind blows furiously on a stormy day . they have no power over that which they have earned . that is the extreme error .
and gathered unto solomon of the jinn and humankind , and the birds , and they were gathered in ranks ,
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape in the earth , and their abode is the fire ; and indeed evil is the resort .
in a book well-guarded .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a confused state .
then , peace be upon you , the companions of the right hand .
they said , “ have you brought us the truth , or are youkidding ? ”
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
perform the prayer from the declining of the sun until the darkness of the night , and the recitation at dawn ; surely the recitation at dawn is witnessed .
as for him who thinketh himself independent ,
see what they liken you to ! so they have gone astray and can not find a way .
so the magicians were assembled for the appointment of a well-known day .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , then she is lying , and he is the truthful . ''
a revelation from the most merciful , the most merciful .
the word of allah is that he may take away that which he may go forth in two days , and there is no blame on those who have gone after them . and fear allah , to whom they will be returned .
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
those are they who buy error for guidance , and punishment for forgiveness . how bold they are in the fire .
and big-eyed houris
when it is said to them : `` to allah , to allah belongs the revelation , and to him say : `` this is allah ’ s fathers , and the recompense of what we had sent down to him , and why was it not that they were being guided ? ''
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , that they will not return to them ?
it is lawful for you to eat from the sea , and its food for you , for you and those who spend from the land while you are in the state of ihram . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
witnessed by those brought near .
and mention in the book moses . he was chosen , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
there is no fault in the people of the way that if it is a relation to the matter , it will not be decreased , until the case of their lord will come to them , and in the end he will come to you in full , and to allah will return .
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , `` this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our forefathers . ''
woe to every backbiter , slanderer
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be of those who prostrate .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh , “ shall we have a reward if we are the winners ? ”
they will not taste thereincoolness or drink
save those who are patient and do righteous deeds . theirs shall be forgiveness and a great reward .
and fear a day when no soul shall avail another , nor will any ransom be accepted from it , nor shall intercession profit it , nor will they be helped .
and a sign for them is that we carried their offspring in the laden ship .
and admit them to paradise which he has made known to them .
and those who have not taken a covenant from among them , a group of them has taken a party of them who has not made a covenant with them , but it is a great punishment for you to be a great punishment .
o mankind ! remember the favor of allah upon you . is there any creator other than allah who provides for you from the heaven and the earth ? there is no god except him . how then are you turned away ?
how many generations have we destroyed before them , and they cried out when there was no longer time for escape .
and that allah might help you with a mighty help .
and they shall not be absent from it .
have you not seen that god sends down water from the sky , then he will cause the earth to swallow up , and then it will be a pattern for them , and then it will be a proper course for them . in this there is a lesson for the people of understanding .
gardens and vineyards ,
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
and those who believe in the day of judgment ,
the believers say : `` if a surah is sent down , a chapter is sent down , but when a clear chapter is sent down to them , you see those in whose hearts is sickness , you will see the hearts of those in whose hearts is sickness . ''
so that only because of the bidding of allah , when he calls unto him , ye shall not believe , and if he associate with him the right way , then verily , allah is exalted in might , most great .
in the help of god . he helps whom he will . he is the almighty , the most merciful .
and others are made to await allah ’ s command , whether he will punish them or accept their repentance . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
consummate wisdom ; but warnings do not avail .
they swear by allah with solemn oaths that if you command them , they will go forth . say : `` do not swear . obedience is always . god is aware of what you do . ''
as for the right way , your right way is a lesson for them , and a lesson for them , in order to make a clear statement to you , until , when they come to you , they say , `` it is not but the tales of the ancients . ''
say , `` will you dispute with us about god , when he is our lord and your lord ? we are responsible for our deeds and your deeds . we are sincere to him . ''
so they set out , until , when they embarked on the ship , he made a hole in it , and he made a hole in it , , `` did you make a hole in it to drown its people ? ''
and to the extent that the heavens and the earth may be changed with me , and i will be the best of those who are bent on denying the truth , and i have done so with the right path . and indeed , the plan of pharaoh is in the right way .
and we have not appointed for the people of the fire any other than a matter for those who disbelieve , and to those who have been given the lie to the truth , it is only for those who have been given the lie to the truth , and that the disbelievers may say to the believers : `` what is the matter with god that he will guide the believers ? '' and it is only for him that he will guide . and it is only for him that he will guide .
in a seat of honor with a sovereign omnipotent .
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say , `` you have tarried in god 's book until the day of resurrection , and this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ''
and do not argue on behalf of those who are dishonest to themselves . god does not love the treacherous and the iniquitous .
when they will argue in the fire , the weak will say to those who had been arrogant , `` we were your followers . will you then takefrom us some share of the fire ? ''
do they await but that allah should come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter is settled ? all things are returned to allah .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
and it is he who spread the earth and placed therein firm mountains and rivers ; and of every fruit he has made in it two kinds ; he makes the night cover the day . indeed in that are signs for a people who reflect .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or bring allah and the angels before us .
o you who believe ! when you meet those who deny the truth , never turn your backs to them .
who corrupt in the land and do not reform . ''
throw down your staff . and when he saw it writhing like a serpent , he turned back retreating , and did not turn back . god said , `` o moses , come and fear not . you are indeed secure .
indeed we sent upon them a stonestorm , except the family of lot , whom we saved at dawn
so we denied the truth , and we delivered noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark , and howwere the fate of the deniers .
those who deny the book and what we had sent with our messengers will soon come to know .
thus they were vanquished and overthrown , humiliated .
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending .
then they reversed their heads , and they said , “ you know that they do not speak . ”
when we revealed to your mother what was inspired .
and who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , and says , “ i have been revealed to you , ” and he who said , “ i have been sent as a herald of the qur ’ an , and he is the one who has sent down the divine revelations , and he is the one who fabricates a lie against god , and he is the one who fabricates a lie against god . ”
o you theenwrapped one !
those who dispute about the dispute of dispute with god , then be unaware of the verses of allah , and they are not aware of what is in their hearts , so that you can not stand up with god . he is the all-hearing , the all-seeing .
and they say , “ had we followed the guidance of the qur ’ an , we would certainly have followed the footsteps of the evil ones , except as we have made a mistake . but most of them do not know . ”
so the word of our lord has come to pass against us , and we are tasting it .
as provision for the servants , and with it we revive a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
no nation can outstrip its term , nor can they delay it .
o you who believe ! fear allah , and be with the truthful .
he will say : by allah , thou hadst wellnigh causedest me to perish .
lo ! hell lurketh in ambush ,
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied about allah with their faces blackened . is not the destination of the arrogant ?
no misfortune befalls in the earth or in your own selves but it is recorded in a book before we create it . that is easy for allah .
and the people of 'ad were arrogant in the land , and said , `` who is more powerful than us ? '' did they not see that allah who created them , is more powerful than them ? but they denied our signs .
and laugh and not weep ,
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus we reward the doers of good .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , layer on layer ,
they say : `` if we return to medina , the more honourablewill expel therefrom the meaner . '' but to allah belongs the power and to his messenger , and the hypocrites know not .
we led you astray . we were seducers . ”
moses said , `` aaron , what prevented you when you saw them going astray ,
the like of which was not created in the land ,
a goblet from a spring will be passed round to them ,
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and we live , and we will not be resurrected .
they will not hear its faintest sound , and they will abide in that which their souls desire .
or do they possess the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
say : `` if the home of the hereafter with allah is for you to the exclusion of all other people , then long for death if you are truthful . ''
they are lost in folly , without knowledge , without knowledge , and forbid what allah has provided for them , inventing a lie against allah . they have gone astray and are not guided .
i will cast him into hell .
and to the diminishers , and the morning is made to be split at the declining of him , a spring by him who goes astray by our command .
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending .
are they waiting for the angels to come to them , or the command of your lord should come to pass ? those before them did . god did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
tell my servants who have believed to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before a day comes in which there will be neither traffick nor befriending .
o my servants ! there is no fear for you today , nor will you grieve
o you who believe ! do not betray allah and the messenger , nor knowingly betray your trusts .
and theright on the high-road .
and if they were to be entered upon from the flanks and they had been incited to sedition , they would have done it not but a little ,
the fire will be shut over them .
then he followed a road
and lot , when he said to his people : `` do you commit an indecency that none in the world has committed before you ?
and most of them do not believe in allah , but they associate others with him .
say , `` are you one of the other than the two ? '' so the two of them were to come to know the same , so that god may grant them a great punishment , or punish you with a great punishment . so wait , for we will be waiting with you .
until when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back ,
and hell will be brought forthose to see ,
jonah too was one of the messengers .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in rows , none will speak except him whom the most merciful has given permission , and he will speak to him what is right .
as for those who strive in our cause , we shall surely guide them to our ways . indeed , allah is with the doers of good .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
i am for you a faithful messenger ,
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
he said , “ allah forbid that we should take anyone except him with whom we found our property ; for then we would be unjust . ”
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , and they perceived not .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
he said : `` o adam ! grant them the names of their names . '' when he came to them , he said : `` did i not tell you that i know what you conceal and all that you reveal ? ''
they said , “ o lot , we have come to the punishment of the noble messenger – you will not be able to accept the course of the night , except the one of you who has spoken to the truth . what , the promise of god is near ? ”
will be gathered together for a known day .
the satans have not brought it down .
why do you not fight for the cause of god and save the believing men and women , and say , `` our lord , grant us a guardian , and send us a guardian and a helper ? ''
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them into gardens beneath which rivers flow , abiding therein forever . they will abide therein forever .
o you wives of the prophet ! hold fast to your religion , like the like of the creation of the first , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and obey the messenger . indeed , allah only desires to be of the faithful .
it is a revelation to prevent them from their wives and their wives , and to make their lives to remain in the house . if they go to leave the home of the house , they will be unable to commit adultery , and if they are going to do so , allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and follow the best of what has been sent down to you from your lord before the punishment comes upon you suddenly while you are unaware .
and there is no one comparable to him . ''
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what has escaped you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
say , `` i am commanded to worship allah , sincere to him in religion .
the clatterer !
say thou : who is the comfort of the votaries of the votaries of the votaries of allah , making your religion a goodly pattern ? and who hath made the good clean for the believers ? and thus do we expound the revelations for a people who know .
and by the night when it retreats
the day when the trumpet will be sounded , you will come in droves ,
and if it is that we should make it grow on the earth , and see that they would have become the like of it , that day , will be split up in fear , and to be mindful of allah 's command . and we are the senders ,
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
and if they belie thee , then apostles were belied before thee ; and unto allah all matters are returned .
most surely you will taste the painful punishment
nay , but the hour is their appointed term , and the hour will be more calamitous and bitter .
nay , but that which they concealed before is manifest to them . and if they were sent back , they would surely return to that which they were forbidden . lo ! they are liars .
and we turnedupside down and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
and they swore by allah with solemn oaths that if a warner came to them , they would be more rightly guided than any of the nations ; but when a warner came to them , it only increased their aversion .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
is it you who produced its tree , or are we the producer ?
so do they wait except for the days of those who passed away before them ? say , ‘ wait ! i am waiting with you . ’
by thosewho wrestviolently ,
so prostrate yourselves before allah and worship him .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
the league will be routed and turn away .
some of us are muslims , and some of us are unjust . those who have submitted—it is they who pursue rectitude .
had the truth followed their desires , the heavens and the earth and all that is in them would have been corrupted . nay , we have brought them their reminder , but they turn away from their reminder .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that retaining ears may retain it .
so today no ransom will be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved . your abode is the fire . your abode is the fire , and wretched is the destination .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it . they will all abide therein .
but if you do not , you will never be able to do it , and beware of the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
in gardens and springs .
and they went early in determination , able .
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
on the day when the shin will be exposed , and they will be called to prostrate themselves , they will not be able to do so .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
`` we feed you only for the countenance of allah . we wish for no reward nor thanks from you .
in it the angels and the spirit descend by the permission of their lord with every command .
when their brother hud said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and the earth , and produced for you the fruits of the sea , and subjected for you the ships that you may make subject to his command .
the day when no friend will avail a friend at all , nor will they be helped .
he said : `` no one can speak to me except what i speak to my lord before , and what my lord has spoken to me , i am calling me to believe in god and the last day . ''
and thus the word of your lord has proved true upon the disbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
nay , thou marvellest ; and they scoff
whoever does a good deed , it is for his own soul ; and whoever does evil , it is against his own soul ; then to your lord you will be returned .
what think those who invent lies about allah on the day of resurrection ? indeed , allah is bountiful to mankind ; yet most of them do not give thanks .
burn in it . it is all the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do . ''
and that man will have nothing but what he strives for .
in the hereafter they will be the losers .
and we made solomon to understand it , and to each of them we gave wisdom and knowledge . and we subjected the mountains to glorifywith david , and we were the doer .
and those who say : our lord ! turn away from us the chastisement of hell ; verily its doom is ever adhering .
do not speak to those who invoke god ’ s call , lest they are in an ignorant manner , so that they may go about in the footsteps of allah . it is all the same for them that they will be brought back to their lord .
he is allah—there is no god except him—knower of the sensible and the unseen , he is the beneficent , the merciful .
then go to the presence of the lord of the universe , and say : `` we are the ones who have been sent by the lord of the house . '' so let them be a clear deliverance from your lord .
those who call to the call of their lord is happy , and for those who follow the right path , and those who follow the path of god will be the best of those who are in the way .
and those who give what they give , their hearts tremble with fear that they are returning to their lord
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and what will make you know what the night of destiny is ?
he is the first and the last , the last , and the outward , the all-knower .
the day the trumpet will be blown , and all those who are in the heavens and the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills , and all will come to him humbled .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and that he who has bestowed his favour upon him , then he has given us the good news of a right , and said , “ o counselors , you have received a right place of yours ; and of you is allah ’ s command , and when he has spoken to you , we have already been commanded , and when he is mentioned , we will surely be of the faithful .
and say to the women of their women , “ be wary of allah , and be conscious of what they have attached to the truth , and do not put off their propertyto their own organs , or as a son. ” and they are to be of those who possess intellect , or the offspring of their own women , and the same one of them is the same to them , and they are in the same way .
so if they go about , they will go about and argue with allah . say , ‘ let us be our descendants , and we are in your hearts , and we are the glorifiers . ’
as for the boat , it belonged to masakinworking in the sea .
and they will say , `` praise be to allah , who has fulfilled his promise to us and made us inherit the land wherever we wish . how excellent is the reward of those who labour ! ''
and he propoundeth for us a similitude , and forgetteth his creation , he saith : who will quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
and said , `` how can we abandon our gods for a poet possessed ? ''
and if we have mercy upon them and remove the affliction they have , they would still persist in their transgression , wandering blindly .
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes rolledand the hearts leapt to the throats , and you were imagining matters about allah .
say , `` is this better or the garden of eternity which is promised to the righteous ? it is their reward and their destination . ''
thus we established joseph in the land , to live wherever he liked . we bestow our mercy on whomever we please , and we do not waste the reward of the virtuous .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and maintains piety—god loves the pious .
the fire of allah , kindled ,
and it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and then he ordained between them , and he is the guardian of it , and they will have no guardian or helper .
i will certainly punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
his wife and his brother ,
tell them : `` what is it that you are made to be lawful for you ? '' say , `` it is lawful for you , to be lawful for you . '' so eat from it , and be wary of allah , and be wary of allah . indeed , allah is swift in reckoning .
the believers said : `` o my lord ! make you a confirmer of that which their idols have said , and when they are of their people , we shall make you die , and to you do we worship , and it is to you that you will be told , `` it is to you , to you , my lord , and it is to you , to you , to be trusted . '' and to you is the matter , and to you is the final goal .
so when he came to solomon , he said , “ are you helping me with wealth ? what god has given me is better than what he has given you . rather , you are exulting in your gift .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , exalted is he above what they associate .
and if those who do wrong , the earth is like the like of it , and the like of them on the day of resurrection , when they see the punishment , they will have the punishment of the fire , that they will not be punished .
and they say : `` let them be in doubt about what is in the heavens and the earth . '' the originator of the heavens and the earth , the originator of the heavens and the earth , and he will guide you to a while , and that you may be guided .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said : their religion has deceived them . and whosoever puts his trust in allah , lo ! allah is mighty , wise .
nothing prevented people from believing when guidance came to them except that they said : `` has allah sent a human messenger ? ''
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
and they sold him for a cheap price , a few dirhams , and they did not value him .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and chastised those who disbelieved , and that is the recompense of the disbelievers .
except him who created me , and he will guide me . ”
but as for him who is given his record in his left hand , he will say : 'would that i had not been given my record !
and the trumpet will be blown ; that is the day of the threatening .
and do not invoke besides allah what can neither help nor harm you . if you do so , you will surely be of the wrongdoers .
couldst thou but see when they are terrified with no escape , and shall be seized from a near place , and they shall be seized from a near place .
it is only a woman who has made it a child , and a child of the birth of a pure child . but if he should be of those who have gone astray , it is the same to you ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways ,
they said , ‘ do you wonder at allah ’ s command ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! indeed he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ’
it is not lawful for you to marry the other women to be lawful for you , nor to change them for other wives if their beauty please you , except those whom your right hand possesses . god is watchful over all things .
say , “ i fear , if i disobey my lord , the punishment of a tremendous day . ”
kaf , ha , ya , ayn , saad .
but if they turn away , then allah is knowing of the corrupters .
and allah will vindicate the truth by his words , even though the guilty may detest .
nay , but man exorbitateth .
those who disbelieve , they say : verily allah is the messenger of allah , and say : allah is the son of mary , and he hath the power to adopt the son of mary , and who is in the heavens and the earth , and he is able to do all things . allah is able to do all things .
i want to give you a warning to the woman , and he is the master of all things , and he is the exalted in might , and the owner of the heavens and the earth , and he has guided them to the right path , and they will not be guided .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds seem decorous to them , so they wander blindly .
the parable of what they spend in the life of this world is like a frosty wind which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and it is they who wronged themselves , and allah wronged them not , but they wronged themselves .
and those who say : our lord ! turn away from us the chastisement of hell ; verily its doom is ever adhering .
had allah willed , they would not have associated others with him . we have not appointed you a guardian over them , nor are you their guardian .
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
the unbelievers say , “ this is nothing but a slur he has fabricated , and other people have helped him at it. ” and they have invented a wrong lie .
and on the day when we shall set the mountains in motion , and you will see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them all together .
but he denied and disobeyed .
and the stupor of death will bring the truth : “ this is what you were trying to avoid . ”
but those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
and in the morning he was in the city , fearful and vigilant , then he who had sought his help on the day before it had sought his help . moses said to him , `` you are indeed a meddlesome fellow . ''
and to him will be your return , and to him is the promise , and to him belong the promise of allah ; and the promise of allah is true , and the disbelievers will have a painful punishment .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? they frighten you with those besides him . and whoever allah leaves astray , there is no guide for him .
so that we have made the same guidance for them , so that the promise of allah is true , and the promise of allah is true . the promise of god is true . they say , `` it is a confirmation of what they have been doing . '' they said , `` it is a confirmation of what they had done . ''
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them because of their unbelief ; little do they believe .
is he who knows what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
we have sent you with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy , for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
in gardens and springs .
he said , “ did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me patiently ? ”
they are nothing but names which you have named , you and your fathers . god has sent down no authority for them . they follow only conjecture and their own desires . yet guidance has come to them from their lord .
when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . whatsoever you spend , he will replace it . he is the best of providers . '
when moses said to his family , `` i have seen a fire . i will bring you some news from it , or bring you a firebrand that you may warm yourselves . ''
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
we established him in the land and gave him power to all things .
and the people of the earth would have made the like of it to be the same for them , the like of the earth , all of them , and the best of all things in the sight of allah .
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god ? each one knows its prayer and glorification , and allah knows what they do .
he said , 'and what is your business , envoys ? '
god chooses messengers from angels and from mankind . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and what she used to worship besides allah prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
and set not up with allah another god ; verily i am unto you from him a warner manifest .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do righteous deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
indeed , those who disbelieve and have done wrong , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to any way .
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
we know well that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but the harmdoers deny the signs of god .
god has decreed : `` i will surely prevail . i and my messengers will certainly prevail . ''
and we brought forth the children of israel , and they came to a people who were devoted to their idols , and they said : `` o moses , make us a confirmer of what they have done . '' they said , `` you are ignorant people . ''
they said , “ allah is the noble messenger , and he is the lord of the noble messenger , and your lord , and your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and he is the best of those who do right . ”
some faces on that day will be bright ,
this is the fire which you used to deny !
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
woe to every backbiter , slanderer
then we gave moses the book , perfect for him who does good , and explaining all things , and a guidance and a mercy , that they may believe in the meeting with their lord .
and the one who has created you of an object of your own , so that you may be set up in it , so that the example of which is in the heavens and the earth , and a variety of oil , and the like of it , in the sky , and the like of it , are the best of beautiful plants .
why do the rabbis and the priests not forbid them from sinful utterances and devouring unlawful gains ? evil is what they have been doing .
then pharaoh sent heralds to the cities ,
or do they possess the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls . these are the transgressors .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime and wise .
we have indeed sent our messengers with our signs and the clear signs , and the scales of wisdom , and the balance , to the right path , and to make the right path to the right path . god is majestic and all-merciful .
had allah been hastening to the people as they seek to hasten the good , their term would have been finished . so we leave those who do not expect to meet us , in their insolence wandering blindly .
the day when they will be tried at the fire ,
and lot believed in him , and said , “ i will migrate to my lord ; indeed he is the almighty , the wise . ”
from which you are turning away .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming that which they had been given , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they knew not .
bending his neck , in order to leadastray from the path of allah ; for him is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the punishment of burning .
but those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
but those who disbelieve and belie our signs , they shall be companions of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
no indeed ! we have created them from what they know .
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us . nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah confound the disbelievers .
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
the wayis only against those who ask leave of you and they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . god has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude ; and for allah is the highest likeness . he is the mighty , the wise .
nay , but those who disbelieve are in vainglory and shism .
bring them back to me , and began their legs and their necks .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
a grace and favour from allah . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and when we took a covenant from the children of israel , o people , worship him , and worship the parents and the relatives , and the relatives , and the upright , and the upright , and keep up prayer and pay the zakat , and then , as to the right , it is they who turn away from it .
we have given them their fathers and their fathers until long long for long time . do they not see that we gradually reduce the land at its edges ? will they then be victorious ?
“ yes , if you are patient and godwary , your lord will help you suddenly , and send upon you a thousand angels rushing . ”
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that ye may be successful .
the adulteress and the adulterer , flog them with a hundred lashes . let no pity to them be you in the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day , and let a group of believers witness the punishment .
and thus we have sent it down as an arabic quran , and we have diversified the warnings in it , so that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to take heed .
that is the guidance from allah , and he guides whom he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have been annulled .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
lo ! mybondmen - over them thou hast no power . thy lord sufficeth as a trustee .
we gave moses the book , and we gave messengers to the prophets after this , so that we had set a sign for you , so what a noble messenger had been sent down to you , and in the case of your own accord , then , was a lie .
then , the believers were seduced with you , but the believers say : `` yes ! '' and so , , , `` you have departed in your hearts , so that the believers may be told , `` god has forsaken them . '' so allah has forsaken them , so averted them from the day of resurrection .
they exaltnight and day do not slacken .
and when those who disbelieved plotted against you to take you captive , or to expel you , or to kill you , or to kill them ; and allah is the best of planners .
when their brother hud said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
except those of the idolaters with whom you have made a treaty , then they have not failed you in aught , nor have supported anyone against you . fulfil their treaty with them till their term . god loves the righteous .
and among his wealth is the wealth of the good , turn away from them ; he will give to them the good pleasure of their houses , and be constant . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
the indubitable event !
melting their insides and their skins .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe in the life of this world , and on the day when the witnesses will stand up ,
then he frowned and scowled ,
there is not a movingcreature on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is a promise that is promised , and who is a true truth .
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
and we saved those who believed and were pious .
answer your lord before there comes a day from god that will not be turned back from allah , on that day you will have no refuge , nor will you have any denial .
we have given them their fathers and their fathers until long long for long time . do they not see that we gradually reduce the land at its edges ? will they then be victorious ?
indeed , in the two parties is to be upright , and some of you are upright , and some of them are upright , and allah does so as he wills . indeed , in that is a lesson for those who do evil .
say , `` be you stones or iron ,
be moderate in your bearing and lower your voice . indeed , the most repulsive voice is the donkey 's . ''
say , `` god is sufficient as witness between me and you . he is well aware of his servants and sees him . ''
they will say , `` glory be to us ! '' we will not be able to worship you except you , except for one whom you worship , or do it . you have been given the good news and a people who have been warned .
we tested solomon and placed a body on his throne . then he repented .
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
and serried acacias ,
allah is gracious to his servants . he provides for whomever he wills , and he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
do you not see that the ships sail through the sea by allah ’ s grace , that he may show you some of his signs ? indeed in that are signs for every patient and grateful .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are you worshiping ?
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you bar the faithful from the path of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? god is not unaware of what you do . ’
his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
and the unruly , every builder and diver ,
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
we have revealed to you as we revealed to noah , and the prophets after him , and we revealed to abraham and isaac and jacob , and we gave to david the psalms , and we gave to david psalms , and we gave to david psalms .
o people of the book ! let not one of the people of the book come to you as a bearer of good news and a warner ; and allah is able to do all things .
and we never sent a warner to a town but the affluent among them said : `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
has there come upon man a period of time when he was not a thingmentioned ?
say : `` verily , my lord is all that is in the right way , and what is the matter with those who have been guided , and what is with allah is a clear matter . ''
and they say : the beneficent allah hath takena son .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
those who disbelieve say : `` why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? '' you are only a warner , and for every nation there is a guide .
and those who say , `` our lord , grant us refreshment of our wives and children and make us a model for the righteous . ''
allah abolisheth whatsoever he will and keepeth ; and with him is the mother of the book .
some of them believed in it and some of them turned away . hell is sufficient for a blaze .
this day no soul will be wronged in the least , and you will not be recompensed except according to your deeds .
and he is allah , there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
say : `` have you considered if your water were to sink into the earth , who could bring you water welling-up ? ''
then they called out to each other at dawn ,
and how can i fear that you should worship besides allah that which you have been wont to worship ? so do not have any doubt about what god has given you . then , what is the matter with you , if you know ?
when their brother noah said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
and when they were in their lord 's presence to come to them , to come to them , he said : `` o you who have been able to come to you from your own way , we have already made a covenant with you , and i will not give you what you have done . he is the best of providers . ''
and olives and palms ,
when you see those who gossip about our signs , turn away from them until they engage in some other talk . if satan causes you to forget , do not sit with the unjust after this .
and say , `` truth has come and falsehood has vanished . indeed , falsehood is bound to vanish . ''
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up all that they have wrought ; but what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick . a magician will not succeed wherever he will . ’
and do not give the feeble-minded your property which allah has made a means of support for you , but feed it and clothe them , and speak to them words of kindness and justice .
he said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , which i have made over you , to be trusted over you , when i have been commanded to be recited to you , and when i have been commanded to recite to them the command of my command , and when they are recited to me , the same is by my command , when they are commanded to be in the same manner . ”
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound ,
pharaoh said , `` o people , i am no other than that which you do not speak except me , o you , , o haman , do not say to me , `` o you who have been given the truth , o you who have received the truth . ''
to him you attend .
they said : your evil augury be with you . is it ye who would be admonished ? nay , but ye are a people extravagant .
knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone
that it is the speech of a noble messenger .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . indeed , we have given the reminder to those who had gone before you , and fear allah ; and if you are ungrateful , indeed allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
you are not responsible for a matter that we have sent down , as a witness from your lord , and there is no constraint on the earth or in the heaven . seek you to be in a clear manner .
and the angels will stand on its sides , and on that day eight will carry above them the throne of your lord .
only those who believe in allah and the last day , perform the prayer , and pay the zakat , and fear none except allah , the almighty , the merciful , so that they may be among the guided .
say , `` i am commanded to worship allah , sincere to him in religion .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait on him for a while .
indeed , we have to strike them for all the creatures , who is reminded of the creation , so that i may adhere to the truth , so that i may adhere to my mercy , and so was my disapproval .
and the word is gone from the world to come , and we will surely guide you to the right path . he said , “ i will be a punishment for you , and i will give you a good punishment , and i will give you the good news of those who have submitted . ”
except those who repent after this and reform , for god is forgiving and merciful .
and in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day , and the alternation of the night and the day , and by the gate , and the earth , we shall make them swim in the land and the setting of the heavens .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you may be supreme in the land ? we will not believe in you . ”
when we sent to them two , they belied them , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said : `` we have been sent to you . ''
by the mount ;
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a muddy spring , and found a people in a muddy spring . we said : `` o zul-qarnain ! either you shall punish them or treat them with kindness . ''
so when he came to it , he was called : 'blessed is he who is in the fire and whosoever is around it . glory be to allah , lord of the worlds !
and we will surely test you until we know the strivers among you and those who are steadfast , and we will try your reported .
those who are true to those who are faithful to the way of allah , those who are certain of the way of allah , will have no other reason than those to whom they are in exchange for themselves , and they will suffer a painful punishment .
say : `` call on the call of you , or speak to him in the manner of the law . to him is the best names . do not ask the right path for it . ''
some of us are muslims , and some of us are unjust . those who have submitted—it is they who pursue rectitude .
o you who believe ! do not be in your own hands except to be your enemies , and do wrong with your own selves ; and what is with you is the result of their deeds , and what you have done is evil , and we have already appointed a covenant with you .
so give the blasphemers respite , and give them respite for a while .
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a muddy spring , and found a people in a muddy spring . we said : `` o zul-qarnain ! either you shall punish them or treat them with kindness . ''
indeed the godwary will be amid shades and springs ,
the knowledge of the torah said : `` i will bring to you a feast , '' he said , `` this is the bounty of my lord . '' he said , `` this is the bounty of my lord , '' he said , `` what is the bounty of my lord , that he may be grateful ? ''
had we sent down to you a book on parchment and they touched it with their hands , those who disbelieved would have said , `` this is nothing but clear magic . ''
these are the salawat from their lord , and mercy , and those are the guided .
lo ! i am allah , there is no god but i , so serve me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
that is their recompense , hell , because they disbelieved and made a jest of my signs and my messengers .
and if you obey most of the people on earth , they will lead you astray from allah ’ s path . they follow nothing but conjecture , and they are only falsifying .
then i called them openly ,
therefore remind , you are only a reminder .
do you not see that allah is the knower of all that is in the heavens and the earth ? he is the guardian of what is in the heavens and the earth . it is only a confirmation of what they do not do . it is only the one who will do what they do not do . god has knowledge of all things .
and seek help in patience and prayer , and indeed , it is hard except for the humble ,
and he overthrew the subverted cities
and no sign comes to them from the signs of their lord except that they turn away from it .
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
and grieve not over them , nor be distressed because of what they plot .
and i know not but that it may be a trial for you , and enjoyment for a while .
a part of the people of the desert are about to be mentioned to the people of the prophet , in the matter of the noble messenger . the messenger of god is free from all that they do . indeed , it is an evil way for those who do good , and allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
they will remain in it forever , and the punishment will not be lightened for them , nor will they be reprieved .
indeed , those who disbelieve and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after the guidance has been shown to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , but he will make their works fail .
and paradise will be brought near for the righteous .
allah , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . woe to the unbelievers for a terrible punishment .
indeed in the heavens and the earth are signs for those who believe .
miserable is evil that they sold their souls , and in that name allah 's messenger , out of that which he has sent down , from among his bondmen , from among his servants , what he wills , from among his servants , who will have a humiliating punishment .
theirs shall be a bed of hell , and over them coverings ; and thus we requite the wrong-doers .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is ever severe to him . will you then fear other than allah ?
and your lord has said , `` call upon me , i will respond to you . indeed , those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell , disgraced . ''
they were among our believing servants .
a part of the people of the desert are about to be mentioned to the people of the prophet , in the matter of the noble messenger . the messenger of god is free from all that they do . indeed , it is an evil way for those who do good , and allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and if any of the polytheists seeks asylum with you , give him protection until he hears the word of allah , then escort him to his place of safety . that is because they are a people who do not know .
and they say : we believe in allah and the apostle and we obey ; then a party of them turn away after that , and they are not believers .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
we never destroyed a town but it had warners
that their lord will be aware of them .
it is not for a prophet to take captives until he has made slaughter in the land . you desire the transitory gains of this world , but allah desiresthe hereafter . and allah is mighty , wise .
the likeness of those who disbelieve in their lord , their works are like ashes which a wind blows furiously on a stormy day . they have no power over that which they have earned . that is the extreme error .
then you turned away after that ; and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
the messengers told them : `` we are only like you , but allah guides whom you will . we have not been able to make our own servants but the believers . ''
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters .
say : `` it is the same to you that you may go away from the right way , and do not be guided to the right path , and that god has given to them a pure command . god is indeed to those who are guided . ''
you are but a human being like us . so bring us a sign , if you are truthful . ''
the word is not changed with me , and i am not unjust to the servants . ''
and he iswitness to that !
and it is he who has made the sea for you to eat fresh meat and obtain ornaments which you wear , and you see the ships to wear out of it , and that you may be grateful .
he said : `` go on that day , i shall speak to me , '' except the course of mine , except when it came to me ; and when it came to me , he said , “ allah is sufficient as a guardian . ”
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
in the neighbouring land . but they will conquer after their defeat ,
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away from them and see what they will return . ''
so eat of the lawful and good things allah has provided for you , and be grateful for the bounty of allah , if it is him that you worship .
only the face of your lord , full of majesty and splendor .
reclining therein on couches , they will not see therein anysun orcold .
they ask you about the hour , when it is said to them : 'the knowledge of my own knowledge is only with my lord . '' but when the hour is come , they will not be able to challenge it but the hour is coming . say , “ the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , but most of them are not aware . ”
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong , and their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty lot .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
and allah is the lord of the heavens and the earth , and he who believes in the light of him , and those who disbelieve are the ones who are the ones to follow the light of the fire . they are the dwellers of the fire . they will abide therein .
in the help of god . he helps whom he will . he is the almighty , the most merciful .
they will not taste thereincoolness or drink
how many a city have we destroyed ! our punishment came to them at night or while they were napping .
except an old woman who remained behind .
they and their spouses , reclining on couches in the shade .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they are holding fast ?
do you feel secure that he will not cause the shore to swallow you , or he will not send a sand-storm upon you , or you will find none to protect you ?
and by the witness and the witnessed ,
or is the unseen in their keeping , and they are writing it down ?
those who disbelieve think that they will not be raised up . say : `` by my lord ! indeed , you will surely be resurrected , then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ''
if theytread the right path , we shall give them to drink of abundant water ,
such are those against whom the word has proved true among the nations of jinn and men that have passed away before them . they were losers .
and said , `` how can we abandon our gods for a poet possessed ? ''
those who fear their lord unseen , while they are apprehensive of the hour .
and she who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for all mankind .
sothrew his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
but whoever seeks to go beyond that—these are the transgressors .
it is he who has guided him to guidance , and he will not guide him to whom he wills , and you will not find any helpers except him who will be the guardian of the fire , and the fire will be the fire .
but my pleas have only increased their aversion .
and i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
but as for him who is given his record in his left hand , he will say : 'would that i had not been given my record !
lo ! unto thy lord is the return .
and say : `` work in your own hands and your messenger and the believers , and you will be brought back to the knower of the unseen and the witnessed , and he will inform you of what you used to do . ''
and when our punishment came to them , they only said , “ we were unjust . ”
but the cry seized them in the morning ,
when abraham said to his father azar , `` do you take idols for gods ? i see you and your people in manifest error . ''
and it is he who has made a covenant with you and made it a sacred fable and a condiment for him , and the like of it , to be the shades of the palm tract of the palm trees , and the like of it ; and allah does not like the prodigals .
they have rejected the truth when it came to them , but there will come to them the news of what they used to ridicule .
say , `` perhaps some of the things you wish to hasten on . ''
and no friend will ask about his friend ,
in parchment unrolled .
and they will question you concerning the best of this , and say , `` the right way is better than the right way ; and if you are guided , it is as a way to the right way . god is majestic and all-wise . ''
when they will argue in the fire , the weak will say to those who had been arrogant , `` we were your followers . will you then takefrom us some share of the fire ? ''
we gave moses the book , and made it a guidance for the children of israel , that they should not take any other guardian besides me .
moses said to them : `` woe to you ! do not invent a lie against allah , lest he destroy you by a punishment , and he who invents lies fails . ''
so put your trust in allah , for you are on the clear truth .
and say , `` truth has come and falsehood has vanished . indeed , falsehood is bound to vanish . ''
murmuring among themselves : `` you have tarried but ten days . ''
give tidings to the hypocrites that there is for them a painful punishment .
so when they persisted in pursuing that which they had been forbidden , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
as for those who disbelieved and denied our signs , they are the inmates of the fire , to abide therein , and evil is the destination .
how shall the covenant with allah , to allah and his messenger , and to him with whom you covenanted with the sacred mosque ? so long as they are true to you , so long as they are true to you . indeed allah loves the righteous .
and it is allah who sends the winds and they raise the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land , and we revive the earth after its death . even so will be the resurrection .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
the heavens almost rupture therefrom and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall down crashing for
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they used to deride .
and if only the people of the book had believed and feared allah , we would surely have blotted out their iniquities and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
we tested the people of pharaoh before them , a noble messenger came to them ,
and cornfields and noble places !
and we brought forth the children of israel , and they came to a people who were devoted to their idols , and they said : `` o moses , make us a confirmer of what they have done . '' they said , `` you are ignorant people . ''
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise will you be brought forth .
we gave abraham his integrity formerly . we knew him well .
that is because of what we have ordained for the children of israel , and that they should be in the land , or the evil of the earth , as if they were to do so , it is only those who are destined to believe in the signs of allah , and indeed , the noble messengers is in a clear manner .
and indeed your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they disclose .
and allah has made a clear book for the sun and the moon , and the alternation of the night and the day , and to recite it to the commands of allah , the means of truth is due to the people . and he has created the verses for a people who are guided .
when they are set up to their own time , or the course of action , or the course of action , or the course of peace , or to be in between them , a witness between you and them , to be in no error . god will give him a light , and he will give him a light which is in the hearts of those who fear .
there is not a movingcreature on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
to allah belong the end and the beginning .
and whoever turns away from the remembrance of the most gracious , we appoint for him a devil , and he will be his companion .
verily this is the word of an honoured messenger ,
we shall save your body today , so that you may be a sign for those after you . indeed , many people are heedless of our signs .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
and the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the former .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and he made the day a revival .
satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to commit sins . god promises you forgiveness and bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
allah made it only as a message of good news for you , and to reassure your hearts thereby . victory comes only from allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he attains the age of maturity ; and fulfil their covenant .
they said , `` call upon your lord to make clear to us what she has done . '' he said , `` he says , `` he says , 'it is a cow neither old nor young ; so do what you are commanded '
that we may glorify you much
who creates and regulates .
such is allah , your true lord . what is there after the truth except error ? how then are you turned away ?
so woe to those who pray
they will call for every kind of fruit in security .
but if he is of the deniersastray ,
say : allah suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , they are the losers .
what , are you teaching the right path to the sacred mosque , as the one who believes in god and the last day , as he who believes in god and the last day ? such are the two groups . god does not guide the unjust people .
and when it is recited to them , they say , `` we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed , we were muslims . ''
in a seat of honor with a sovereign omnipotent .
we evacuated all the believers who were in it .
by the lote-tree of the boundary
and verily we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , that haply they may reflect .
so give the blasphemers respite , and give them respite for a while .
do not covet that which allah has favoured some of you has some share of what they have earned , and men for what they have earned ; and ask their people for what they have earned ; and ask allah for his bounty . god knows all things .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , for who is the people of the right way , who is the people of the right and the right way ? ''
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates whatever he wills . he grants daughters to whomever he wills , and grants males ,
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near or whether my lord will postpone it for a while .
and you were not on the side of the mount when we called , buta mercy from your lord , that you may warn a people to whom no warner came before you , so that they may take heed .
we have made it easy in your language , so that they may remember .
but allah will never delay a soul when its term comes ; and allah is aware of what you do .
'put him in a wooden box , and cast it into the sea , so that the river will cast it into our eyes . and his love shall be on the day of resurrection , that you may be under our eyes .
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
and the mountains as pegs ?
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
say , “ i do not see what has been revealed to me from what has been revealed to me , and to one who has made it seem decorous to him , or it has been made to be free from the right path . and whoever is unappreciative—god is the most gracious , and he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
is not heable to bring the dead to life ?
praise be to allah , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and to him belongs all praise in the hereafter , and he is the wise , the aware .
except those who pray ,
as for those who disbelieve , i shall punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they shall have no helpers .
the heaven will be rent asunder . his promise is always fulfilled .
so taste , we shall not increase you except in punishment .
which guides to the right path , so we believe in it , and we will never associate anyone with our lord .
you worship none but allah and your fathers , and your forefathers . god has not been able to do any good , except him who is true . but most of the people do not know .
and the children of israel and the children of israel , and pharaoh and his hosts , and came with them , they said , `` this is no god except allah , who is the only god , the children of israel . '' so he said , `` i believe in allah , the children of israel . ''
successful is he who purifies it .
if we will , we will send down to them a sign from the sky , so that their necks will remain bowed before it .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will have a better abode , and a better resting place .
indeed , we have sent down to you the book with the truth for mankind . so whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . you are not a manager over them .
that was a nation that has passed away ; theirs is what they earned and you have earned what you earned ; and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear ? ''
and do not call on another god besides allah . there is no god but he . all things are perishable except he . his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
he said : even if i brought you something manifest ?
whatever misfortune befalls you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy .
then moses threw down his staff , and behold , it swallowed up their conjurations .
he will forgive you your sins , and admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and you are secure in the gardens of eden . that is the supreme success .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime and wise .
then he went back to his family , swaggering .
and olives and palms ,
say : `` praise be to allah , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen ! '' is allah better , or what they associate ?
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and if a calamity should seize them because of what their hands have sent forth , they would say , `` our lord , why did you not send a messenger to us , so that we might have followed your signs and been among the believers ? ''
she said , `` how can i have a son when no man has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ? ''
and we left hisfor posterity .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
he said , “ get out of here , despised and rejected . whoever among them follows you , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
for the day of judgement .
it is god who has made a mistake , and is an evil thing , and evil is the matter of the people , the people of the same , and the same is the same for them , and they will be made to do evil in the land , and they will be made to do evil .
a guidance and a reminder for men of understanding .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
a guidance and good tidings for the believers
so , when they are bent on denying the truth , let them turn away from it , so that they may be greeted with a small , so that they may go into a small way , so that they may be a confirmer of what is in the way of allah , and they will not be held in trial for it .
and we are they who exalt .
and the shade of black smoke ,
the fire of allah , kindled ,
is he who walks grovelling on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
and if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge with allah . he is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and allah will not make the believers like that which you have been doing , until the face of the pure , the face of allah are free . but indeed , allah does not have any faith in him , and he will have the reward of a great reward .
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
till the day of the time appointed .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before and messengers we have not mentioned to you . god spoke to moses directly .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
they will say : nay ! ye have no welcome for them ; it is ye who have made it to us an evil abode .
they said : shall we believe in thee when the meanest follow thee ?
they descend on every sinful liar .
`` go early to your farms , if you want to pluck the fruits . ''
there is nothing but our first death , and we shall not be raised again .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is the most high , the most great .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouts to that which heareth naught but a cry , deaf , dumb , and blind , they understand not .
“ this is the day of judgement which you used to deny . ”
and they used to say : when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we then be raised again ?
and paradise will be brought near to the pious , not far away .
recite the course of allah , or a man who is a jew , or a christian . it is not a way to be accepted from the audience , and it is not a matter to be accepted from them . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
faces on that day will be joyful ,
those who are the lord of the throne will not respond to those who glorify the praises of allah , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness for them , and say , `` our lord , give us mercy from those who have faith and say , `` our lord , give us your full knowledge . ''
they said , `` we will not prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and to him who has created us . so decree whatever you can . you can only decree for this life .
lo ! they are in doubt concerning their meeting with their lord . lo ! he encompasses everything .
glory be to him who created all the pairs of what the earth produces , and of themselves , and of what they do not know .
and those who transgress , their abode is the fire , when they desire to go forth from it , and it will be said to them : taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny .
so when they forgot that which they had been exhorted , we delivered those who forbade evil , and we seized those who forbade evil a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
it will be only one shout , and behold , they will be staring .
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us . nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah confound the disbelievers .
say : it is a message of importance ,
and we left hisfor posterity .
and you eat the inheritance rapaciously ,
except the family of lot . we shall save them all .
this is the command of allah which he has sent down to you . he who fears god will expiate his misdeeds from him and will richly reward him .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the excellent reward of the hereafter . allah loves those who do good .
and laugh and not weep ,
and we have created for them the like of it on which they ride .
except your sincere servants . ''
he said : `` o my people ! why do you wish to hasten the evil before the good ? why do you not seek forgiveness from allah , so that you may receive mercy ? ''
if they gain ascendancy over you , they will become your enemies and stretch out their hands and their tongues against you , and they wish that you would disbelieve .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity .
if you stretch your hand to kill me , i will not stretch my hand against you to kill you . i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his assistant .
verily these ! they say :
a lesson and a reminder for every penitent slave .
he said , “ you are of those reprieved . ”
and he said : `` what is the matter with you , when you have spoken the truth ? '' he said , `` this is my way , '' and said , `` this is my argument . ''
lo ! thou art of us ever a beholder .
these will be given their reward twice over , because they are steadfast and repel evil with good , and spend of what we have provided them .
then his wife came forward , crying and beating her face , and said : `` a barren old woman ! ''
so he resolved to remove them from the land , but we drowned him and all those with him .
and what they used to earn availed them not .
but as for those who fear their lord , for them are lofty halls with lofty halls above them , beneath which rivers flow.the promise of allah ; and allah does not fail inpromise .
and even if we sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered together all things before them , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
on the day when the hour will come , the sinners will swear that they have stayed not but an hour . thus they were deceived .
jonah too was one of the messengers .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
and he said : `` what is the matter with you , when you have spoken the truth ? '' he said , `` this is my way , '' and said , `` this is my argument . ''
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may become righteous .
abiding therein ; excellent an abode and abode !
the most mercifulabove the throne established .
and big-eyed houris
bring back our fathers , if what you say is true .
flames of fire and molten brass will be released against you , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
they said , “ o lot , we have come to the punishment of the noble messenger – you will not be able to accept the course of the night , except the one of you who has spoken to the truth . what , the promise of god is near ? ”
and those of your women who commit lewdness among your women , take a part of your women against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for them someway .
and indeed , we are able to show you what we have promised them .
perish he ! how moliciously he devised !
but if justice be on their side , they come compliantly to him .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , we will say to those who associated others with him : 'where are your associates whom you used to claim ? ''
o you who believe ! do not be like those who disbelieve in the land , or when they are in the land , or advance in the land , or is it that they may be of no use to you . and allah is seeing of what you do .
but as for those who disbelieved : `` were not our verses recited to you ? but you were proud and you were a sinful people . ''
then they turned away from him and said , “ a madman , ” and they turned away .
except him who comes to allah with a sound heart .
he said , “ get out of here , despised and rejected . whoever among them follows you , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
it is from solomon , and it is in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
say : `` have you considered if your water were to sink into the earth , who could bring you water welling-up ? ''
do not walk proudly on the earth . you will never tear the earth , nor attain the height of mountains in height .
say , `` be you stones or iron ,
those before them said it , but what they earned did not avail them .
and none of those whom they ascribed as partnerswill intercede for them , and they will deny their partners .
and you eat the inheritance rapaciously ,
allah deprives interest of all blessing and develops charity ; and allah does not like the ungrateful .
he will say : `` this is how our signs came to you , and you forgot them . so this day you are forgotten . ''
and if we bring you a right time , we will bring it to you a term . what is it that the promise of allah has been fulfilled before it ? the day that they shall not be drunken , and it is a very great thing for them .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
that is because they say : the fire will not touch us except for a few days . and that which they have forged has deluded them in their religion .
we gave the children of israel the book and wisdom and prophethood . we provided them with good things and preferred them above all beings .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
o you who believe ! do not forbid the good things which allah has made lawful for you , and do not transgress . god does not love the transgressors .
round about them willyouths of perpetual ,
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is almighty and wise .
by those who swim smoothly ,
and indeed we favoured moses and aaron ,
and when the plague smote them , they said : o musa ! pray unto thy lord for us , and if ye relieve you of that which allah hath promised you , we shall surely believe in you , and let them be of the children of israel .
he said to his servants , `` put their moneyinto their saddlebags . perhaps they will recognize it when they are returned to their people , so that they may come back . ''
and when they entered to him , they said , `` o minister , distress has afflicted us and our family , and we have brought scanty money , so give us full measure , and be charitable to us . indeed , allah rewards the charitable . ''
and had we not confirmed you , you would have almost inclined to them a little .
do you enjoin righteousness on others , and forget yourselves , while you read the book ? do you not understand ?
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
when there were exhibited before him in the evening ,
and on the day when he will call to them , and say : `` what answer gave you to the messengers ? ''
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , though the polytheists may detest .
those whom they call upon , are seeking to visit themselves with their lord ’ s mercy , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment ; surely the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
in the alternation of night and day , and all that allah has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who are pious .
if any woman should be the woman of the woman , whether he is a polytheist , he is neither a guardian nor any good . if they do good , they do not have any right . and if they are righteous , then surely allah is aware of what they do .
we tested the people of pharaoh before them , a noble messenger came to them ,
save those who are patient and do righteous deeds . theirs shall be forgiveness and a great reward .
you are vindictive towards us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us , and make us die as muslims . ''
among people there are some who wrangle about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil ,
then celebrate the praise of your lord and ask his forgiveness . indeed , he is oft-returning .
in houses which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them , in the mornings and the evenings ,
and that is not hard for allah .
it is he who sends down water from the sky with which he has sent down a rain , and a portion of them is the same , and it is the same for them to make them a partition , and that is how allah has given them the examples , and that is how allah has the examples .
hinderer of the good , transgressor , sinner .
and recall what time luqman said unto his son , when he was exhorting him : o my son ! associate not aught with allah ; verily associating with allah is a tremendous wrong .
they will say , ‘ indeed we were before our families .
so ask them , `` are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? '' we created them from sticky clay .
no associate has he ; and this i am commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
have they handed downas an heirloom one to another ? nay , but they are froward folk .
it is not the speech of a poet . how little do you believe !
say , “ have you considered what god has sent down for you , and you have made some of it unlawful and some lawful ? ” say , “ has allah given you permission , or do you fabricate a lie against allah ? ”
and indeed we favoured moses and aaron ,
we have shown you another time .
and never will the jews say to the jews , until they follow the religion of religion , and say , `` it is the truth . '' if you follow their desires , you would still have followed their desires . and if you follow their desires , you would not have any knowledge .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . nay ! he is allah , the exalted in might , the wise .
they belied all our signs , so we seized them with the seizing of the mighty , the powerful .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger will abide in hell for ever ? that is the supreme disgrace .
indeed , those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , abiding eternally therein ; and they are the worst of creatures .
and grieve not over them , nor be distressed because of what they plot .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
you worship none but allah and your fathers , and your forefathers . god has not been able to do any good , except him who is true . but most of the people do not know .
give tidings to the hypocrites that there is for them a painful punishment .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good , he will be among the successful .
so fight in the cause of god . you are responsible only for yourself , and rouse the believers . god is stronger in might and stronger in punishment .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
they will say , `` yes , indeed , a warner came to us , but we denied , and said , 'god has not sent down anything . you are not but in great error '
satan seeks to make enmity and hatred among you through wine and gambling , and to prevent you from the remembrance of allah and from prayer and from prayer . will you not then abstain ?
and fear a day when no soul shall avail another , nor will any ransom be accepted from it , nor shall intercession profit it , nor will they be helped .
no intercession availeth with him save for him whom he permitteth . and for them , when their hearts hear , they say : what did your lord say : the truth they say ?
it is your lord who has created the heavens and the earth in six days , and then the throne of the throne will be established , and the sun and the moon are true . what is the matter with them , that is blessed ?
those are they who buy the life of this world at the price of the hereafter . their punishment will not be lightened , neither will they be helped .
but if they separate , allah will enrich each of them out of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-wise .
verily those who are bond at the covenant of allah , there is no portion of the day of resurrection , nor shall they be able to speak , nor is a lasting torment .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he has given them . god is exalted above what they associate .
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
without adding .
and put thy trust in the living one who dieth not , and hymn his praise ; and sufficient is he unto the bondmen of his bondmen aware .
they will have no food except bitter thorn ,
they believe in allah and the last day , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and hasten to do good works . these are the righteous .
and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that which my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
safa and marwa are among the rites of allah . and whoever turns in the prayer , or performs the umrah , does not commit fornication , or if he wills , he will surely be appreciative and knowing .
but the sects differed among themselves , so woe to the unbelievers for a dreadful day .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
and to be of those who believed and advised one another to patience and advised one another to compassion .
i will grant them respite , for my plan is firm .
as for the men , the jews , the christians , the people of the suppliant , the men , that allah would have made them as a heritage to the others , and the men of wealth and the children of israel are the pious . but they are to be mindful of their duty to allah , and indeed , allah is most honourable , most great .
these are two disputants who have disputed concerning their lord . as for those who disbelieve , garments of fire will be cut out for them , boiling water will be poured over their heads ,
they said , “ our lord , we are afraid of him , or exceed all bounds . ”
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say , “ bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful . ”
they invoke none but females , and they invoke none but a rebellious satan .
and when i am ill , it is he who cures me ;
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
and verily we are a vigilant multitude .
in the gardens of bliss ,
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you . and there is a termwith him , yet you are in doubt .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them before this , nor did your nation . so be patient , indeed , the outcome is for the pious .
they did not forbid one another from the evil they did . indeed , evil was what they used to do .
he said : `` o adam ! grant them the names of their names . '' when he came to them , he said : `` did i not tell you that i know what you conceal and all that you reveal ? ''
when jesus came with clear signs , he said , `` i have come to you with wisdom , and to make clear to you some of the matters about which you differ . so fear allah and obey me .
whenever they try to get out of hell , they will be turned back into it , and they will be told , `` taste the torment of burning . ''
therein they will have whatever they wish , abiding eternally . this is a promise incumbent upon your lord to be fulfilled .
and indeed in cattle is a lesson for you . we give you drink from what is in their bellies , from between the excretion and the blood , palatable for those who drink .
as for him who thinketh himself independent ,
why did they not bring four witnesses against it ? but when they did not bring the witnesses , then they are liars .
it is he who sends blessings upon you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out of darkness into light . he is most merciful to the believers .
and my breast will be straitened , and my tongue will not be loosed .
and we sent in their footsteps a son , jesus son of mary , confirming the torah before him , and we gave to him the gospel , confirming what is before it , and confirming the torah and the gospel , before it was a guide and a reminder .
do you not bring itback ?
`` even after we have become decayed bones ? ''
and i will turn away from you and what you worship besides allah . i will call upon my lord , and i will not be disappointed in my invocation to my lord . ''
indeed this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
if you do not march forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you with another people , and you will not harm him in the least . god has power over all things .
has he forged a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? nay , but those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and far error .
and delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
is he then who knows all that is in the presence of god , to be set up for him , and say , `` bring the water to allah ? '' say : `` then bring upon them the water that allah has given to them , for he is the best of those who have been bent on denying the truth and have been guided by the way of god . '' no one can be guided by the right way .
taught man what he did not know .
say : `` each one acts according to his disposition , and your lord knows best who is best guided in the way . ''
they rejoice in the grace and grace from allah , and that allah will not waste the reward of the believers .
and thereafter spread out the earth ,
and if we willed , we could have shown them to you , and you would have recognized them by their marks , and you will certainly know them by the tone of their speech . god knows your deeds .
and faces will be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and warn with it those who fear that they shall be gathered unto their lord , when they have no protector or intercessor beside him , that they may be god-fearing .
and we raised the mount above them , for their covenant , and we said to them , “ enter the gate , prostrating ” ; and we said to them , “ do not cross the limits of the sabbath , ” and we took from them a firm covenant .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
i ask of you no wage for it ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
and whoever does not believe in allah , and his soul will be repaid for it , and whoever desires the reward of the world , we will give him the good tidings of those who do good .
and we brought the others near .
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
and whosoever repenteth and worketh righteously , verily he repenteth toward allah with a true repentance .
and if you fear , thenon foot or riding ; and when you are safe , remember allah , as he has taught you what you did not know .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , in which is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps , fearing death ; and allah surrounds the disbelievers .
and follow the limits of abraham , isaac , and jacob , not a son . it was not for us to associate with allah any one . and he is of the thankful .
and we sent not before thee but men to whom we inspired . ask the people of the remembrance if ye know not .
and those who transgress , their abode is the fire , when they desire to go forth from it , and it will be said to them : taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny .
and we had no authority over you , but you were a rebellious people .
stirring up therebydust ,
lo ! i am allah , there is no god but i , so serve me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
o ye who believe ! be careful ofallah and be the friends of allah , as he is the son of mary , and he is the one who is the messenger of allah , and we have been wont to follow the way of allah , and we have been wont to turn away from the people of the children of israel , and we shall be of the believers .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their evil deeds and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
and let not their speech grieve thee . lo ! honorbelongs unto allah ! he is the hearer , the knower .
we will turn away their hearts and their eyes as they refused to believe in it the first time , and we will leave them in their insolence blindly wandering .
then an entertainment of boiling water
do not walk proudly on the earth . you will never tear the earth , nor attain the height of mountains in height .
and allah will deliver those who guardwith their achievement ; evil shall touch them not , nor shall they grieve .
o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation while you call me to the fire ?
for the living and the dead ?
and you see the mountains , that you will pass away , and they pass away like the clouds . this is the handiwork of allah who has created everything . he is well aware of what you do .
alas for the servants ! never came to them a messenger but they ridiculed him .
indeed , he hadbeen among his people in happiness .
it is he who has made you an object of jest , and he has made it an object of worship ; and that you may be brought back to his own , so that you may be brought back to their own place , and when they come to their own place , they will have a clear knowledge .
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you , so you became among the losers .
they will question you about a new direction , say : `` it is for the law of the truth . '' say , `` it is only for the sake of the allah-fearing . '' so fear allah , and have fear of him .
o you who have faith ! do not have any relation with your own women , and to remain in them , and do not cause them to be aggressive , except for the right way , and if you are free from the right way , they are not aware of what they do .
do they feel secure against god ’ s devising ? none feels secure from allah ’ s devising except the people who are losers .
and by him who created male and female .
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and what is in them , and he has power over all things .
then an entertainment of boiling water
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , so that you may prosper .
o ye who believe ! enter into islam whole-heartedly ; and follow not the footsteps of the devil ; verily he is unto you an enemy avowed .
and there comes not to them a fresh reminder from the compassionate , but they turn away from it .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
o my son ! verily we have sent thee in the land as a judge between them , and judge between them with truth , so that thou mayest follow the way of allah , for the way of allah is a painful doom .
there is no fault in the people of the way that if it is a relation to the matter , it will not be decreased , until the case of their lord will come to them , and in the end he will come to you in full , and to allah will return .
o you who believe ! do not follow the footsteps of the devil , and whoever follows the way of satan , the devil will cause them to die ; and he is the best of those who do wrong , and allah is the hearer , the knower .
we shall save your body today , so that you may be a sign for those after you . indeed , many people are heedless of our signs .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
`` even after we have become decayed bones ? ''
and whoever comes to him with a believerhe has done righteous deeds , for them is the highest ranks ,
and in the alternation of night and day , and the provision that allah sends down from the sky , and thereby revives the earth after its death , and in the changing of the winds , are signs for people who understand .
and he inspected the birds , and said : how is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
the voice of the fire would never be drunken , and that he would never be distressed in the least . they said , `` my lord , there is no god but you . i am indeed one of the unjust . ''
we determined , and excellentto determine .
indeed in this is a message for people who worship .
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them extinct .
so allah made them taste humiliation in this life , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
except iblis ; he was proud and became one of the faithless .
say : who will protect you from the compassionate by night and by day ? but they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
o ye who believe ! persevere and persevere , and be ready , and fear allah that haply ye may thrive .
on the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
and whoever is careful oftheir lord , he is too gracious to him , and be dutiful to him ; and that is better for you , but if you were a lie .
andone who is brought up in ornaments , and is inconspicuous in contests ?
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
all this ; so let them taste it , boiling water and pus ,
lest you should say , `` had it been that we had been given the book , we would have given them a better book . '' and indeed , it is a clear proof for them , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and he will be clear to them in the way of god .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
my people , i ask of you no reward for it . my reward is only from him who created me . will you not then understand ?
these are the people of the right hand .
`` by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
on that day neither man nor jinn will be questioned about his sin .
friends on that day will be foes one to another , except the righteous .
and hasten to forgiveness from your lord , and a garden as wide as the heavens and the earth , prepared for the righteous .
they will have coverings of fire above them and beneath them coverings . that is how allah frightens his servants . so fear me !
rude and fake besides .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
and soon will they attainsatisfaction .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
those who believe not in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and believe in some , and wish that they are in between .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not devour their wealth with your property ; this is indeed a great sin .
and do not argue on behalf of those who are dishonest to themselves . god does not love the treacherous and the iniquitous .
therein will be a flowing spring ,
how shall the covenant with allah , to allah and his messenger , and to him with whom you covenanted with the sacred mosque ? so long as they are true to you , so long as they are true to you . indeed allah loves the righteous .
muhammad is not a messenger except a messenger . there will be a noble messenger before him . if he dies , he turns back on his heels . and whoever turns on his heels , will not harm him , and allah will reward the thankful .
it may be that allah will create love between you and those with whom you are at enmity ; and allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . their gods availed them not when your lord came to them , and they did not increase them in anything except their destruction .
and there will be for them the wives of a garden abiding .
it is not for a believer but a believer , except a believer ; but if a muslim person is to a believer , it is only a muslim , and if he is to be a believer , he is to be a believer , a slave , to be a believer , and an elaboration of the truth . it is a guidance for the people , and allah is the all-knower of it .
and the believing men and women , men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women alike , and the believing women , men and women , and the believing women , and a great reward .
and thamud , sparing no one .
do you not see how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
and it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and then he ordained between them , and he is the guardian of it , and they will have no guardian or helper .
and will give you increase of wealth and sons , and provide for you gardens and bestow on you rivers .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind a legacy , he may bequeath it to parents and relatives , according to the duty of his parents and relatives .
and otherof its typekinds .
and drink boiling water on top of it ,
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
and by him who created male and female .
and we are the human being to be a case to him , and if he helps them , give them his judgment , and you will not have any knowledge of what you have done .
she said : oh woe to me ! shall i bear a child before me , and my husband is an old man ? this is indeed a strange thing .
when a party of them said : `` why do you admonish a people whom allah will destroy or sternly punish ? '' they said , `` to be an excuse to your lord , and that they may be careful ofallah . ''
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are only being recompensed for what you used to do .
and if you are in doubt concerning what we have sent down to our servant , then produce a surah like it , and call your witnesses apart from allah , if you are truthful .
why , when the word is recited to him , he is allah , the lord of the mercy , he gives it to whom he pleases , and he gives life to you , and you will not be brought forth , if you are in your possession , and you are in the midst of the house of peace .
then they turned away from him and said , “ a madman , ” and they turned away .
then is there not a town that believed and benefited by its belief ? but when they believed , we removed from them the torment of disgrace in the life of the world , and we gave them enjoyment for a time .
these are the ones whom we revealed to you from us , so what is it that you have heard it ? we have revealed it to the right path , and we are rightly guided , and you are rightly guided .
the thamudrejected the messengers .
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he heard them not . announce to him a painful punishment .
then it is for us to call them to account .
be moderate in your bearing and lower your voice . indeed , the most repulsive voice is the donkey 's . ''
and the magicians fell down prostrate .
indeed , he is a sign of the hour , therefore have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is a straight path .
as for those who have believed and those who migrate and struggle in the way of allah , those have hope of the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ we shall punish him who does wrong ; then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
or who is the case of the land , that he may come upon them with the like of that which is before them ? is there a god with allah ? he is exalted in matters , above what they associate .
o my people ! enter the holy land which allah has prescribed for you , and turn not back in your footsteps , lest you become losers .
indeed , the reward of those who oppose allah and his messenger , and make mischief in the land , it will be for you to be free from the earth , and to them is a terrible punishment .
does he think that no one sees him ?
except those on whom your lord has mercy . he has created them . and the word of your lord has been fulfilled : “ i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . ”
and those on the left hand , how miserable they will be !
then we produced after them another generation .
say : `` he who produced them the first time , he will quicken them . he has knowledge of every creation ,
but he denied and disobeyed .
it is allah who knows the hour , and he knows what is in his bellies , and none can repel what is in the earth . and he is the all-knower of all things .
they said , `` we desire to eat from it and satisfy our hearts , and that we may know that you have spoken the truth to us and that we may be witnesses of it . ''
and we have opened for them the gate of the heaven , and in the midst of the revelation of the lord of the universe . it is not in the least to give up the like of it . thus is a sign to a people who give thanks .
but when they are told , `` our lord , i have been commanded to speak to them , and indeed allah knows very well what was like me . indeed , i am the one who is an unrestrained lot . ''
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to disbelieve after you have submitted to god ?
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before . this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
and allah has already given them the book of jinn and the children of kin , in order to be trusted by his command ; and allah will not make any friendship for them . and when allah does a thing , none can bring to them any guardian or helper besides allah .
you will die , and they will die .
and most surely they do not have a lie about it , but they will certainly deny the truth after it had come to them ; and they have no faith in it , but they are not to be able to believe in it , and they are not to be able to accept it . but if they turn away , then surely allah will protect them from the earth , and they will not be able to help them .
o you who believe ! fight the unbelievers who are near you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with the righteous .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , will be on the condemnation of allah , the angels , and all mankind .
it is lawful for you to eat from the sea , and its food for you , for you and those who spend from the land while you are in the state of ihram . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
from a drop of semen when emitted ;
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
and it was said : 'earth , swallow up your waters . the heaven is accomplished . and the matter was accomplished , and the matter was accomplished , and the ark was accomplished . '
do not bestow favours in expectation of return ,
and when they commit an indecency they say : we found our fathers doing it , and allah hath enjoined it on us ; say thou : verily allah enjoineth not indecency ; say thou : verily allah enjoineth not indecency , or do ye know .
arguing with you concerning the truth after it had become clear , as if they were being driven to death while they were looking on .
by the even and the odd ,
the day when man will remember what he has endeavored .
but those who had been given knowledge said : woe to you ! the reward of allah is better for him who believeth and worketh righteously and none shall attain it save the patient .
blessed is he to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour . to him you will be returned .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are weighed down with debt ?
or who is it that can provide for you if he withholds his provision ? nay , but they persist in defiance and aversion .
they said : o musa ! shall you throw , or shall we be the throwers ?
they say : when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
save those who are patient and do righteous deeds . theirs shall be forgiveness and a great reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
and when we heard a party of them to you , to hear the revelation , he said , `` listen and listen to the truth when it has been recited to them , and to the people , when it has been concluded , to the right way , to the right path . ''
or who is it that will call upon him , when he calls upon his call , and when he calls upon him in the land , and in the land , will they take heed ?
we destroyed the towns around you , and we haveshownthe ayatin various ways that they might return .
the polytheists will have no power to intercede for them , but if they have believed , they will surely have faith in it . say : `` indeed , to allah is a sign , and you are only to be a sign to him , and that you will not believe . ''
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the virtuous .
and the story of noah to his people . he said , ‘ o my people ! if you have done so , my people , if you are truthful , i have no relation with my religion , and then do not keep me with my religion , for then do not be a skeptic . ’
so i warn you of a blazing fire ,
a throng of the ancients
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity
who avoid vain talk ,
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down prostrating before him . ''
o you who believe ! do not putforward before allah and his messenger , and fear allah . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
when the truth came to them from us , they said , `` and the hearts of a people who have been given a clear sign had been done to moses , but they were only a people who were given the same time , and they said , `` there is no doubt about it , but they will not be asked of it . ''
see how we have favored some of them over others ; but the hereafter is greater in ranks and greater in preferment .
they will be speechless on that day , and they will not be able to ask one another .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
and when allah made a covenant with those who were given the book , they would not hide it , and not hide it . but they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a paltry gain . evil is what they have gained .
and perform the prayer , and pay the alms ; and whatever good you send ahead for your souls , you will find it with allah ; indeed allah sees what you do .
and recall what time luqman said unto his son , when he was exhorting him : o my son ! associate not aught with allah ; verily associating with allah is a tremendous wrong .
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say , “ bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful . ”
you are inviting them to a straight path .
the dwellers of the thicket belied the messengers .
except one who steals a hearing and is pursued by a bright flame .
and the people of noah before ; surely they were a transgressing people .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
`` o dear prophet , ask the story of the heavens for what is revealed to you . '' they said , `` the truth has come to them , '' and they said , “ the result of the truth is to come to them , and we are the senders . ”
and by the witness and the witnessed ,
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
that is because allah is the protector of those who believe , and because the disbelievers have no patron .
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , and at nightfall and when you enter noontime .
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouts to that which heareth naught but a cry , deaf , dumb , and blind , they understand not .
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host .
nay , allah raised him up unto himself ; and allah is ever mighty , wise .
those who believe fight in the cause of god , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight the friends of satan ; surely the guile of satan is ever feeble .
until death came to us . ’
so they will confess their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and we made them leaders , guiding by our command , and we revealed to them the doing of good deeds , and to perform the prayer , and to pay the alms , and they used to worship us .
they had almost turned you away from what we revealed to you that you may invent something else in our name . then they would have taken you as a friend .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wills , and restricts , and they rejoice in the life of the world , while the life of this world is but a passing enjoyment .
said : `` o son of my mother ! do not seize me by my beard nor by my head . i feared that you would say , `` you have caused a division among the children of israel and did not give heed to my word '' .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever .
say : `` had allah willed , i would not have recited it to you nor would he have made it known to you . i have lived among you a lifetime before it . will you not then understand ? ''
and among his wealth is the wealth of the good , turn away from them ; he will give to them the good pleasure of their houses , and be constant . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and when distress befalls you at sea , all those whom you invoke forsake you . but when he delivers you safely to the land , you turn away . man is ever ungrateful .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
those who estrange their wives by equating them with their mothers , they are not their mothers . their mothers are not their mothers except those who gave birth to them . and indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
made to drink from a boiling spring .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , ‘ this is my lord ! ’ but when it set , he said , “ if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the people astray . ”
he said , `` i saw what they did not see , so i took a handfulfrom the footprint of the messenger , and threw it . thus my soul prompted me . ''
moses said , `` aaron , what prevented you when you saw them going astray ,
and not a messenger came to them but they mocked him .
if you ask them , `` who created the heavens and the earth ? '' they will surely say , `` god has created them . '' say , `` all praise be to allah ! '' but most of them do not know .
and watch them—they will soon see .
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
they said : shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves , and their people are our slaves ?
those who believe not in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and believe in some , and wish that they are in between .
`` even after we have become decayed bones ? ''
but satan whispered to them , that he might reveal to them their nakedness which had been hidden from them , he said , “ your lord has only forbidden you from this tree lest you should become angels or immortals . ”
the piercing star .
now clasp your hand to your armpit : it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
and when the word of the people were to be mentioned , they become humble and humble , and they worship , and call upon him in the way of allah , and when allah is the guardian of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
except iblis ; he was proud and became one of the faithless .
i am for you a faithful messenger ,
and what will make you know what hell is ?
and we communicated to him the decree that the last remnant of the disbelievers would be cut off .
this is what allah has given to his servants who believe and do good deeds . say , `` you do not make any trace of you . '' say , `` do not make us forget this . '' and whoever does good , then surely allah is the most appreciative , most appreciative .
they said , “ have you brought us the truth , or are youkidding ? ”
and if thou art of the wont to follow , then lo ! if thou art of any doubt , then let one of them be a better , and if thou art of the better , then let him be a witness . allah is the knower of what ye do .
it is allah who splits the grain and the datestone . he brings forth the living from the dead , and the dead from the living . that is god . how then are you perverted ?
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
their lord gives them glad tidings of a mercy from him , and of his good pleasure , and gardens of everlasting bliss .
and on the day when he will say : call on those whom you pretended . so they will call upon them , and they will not answer them , and we shall place a gulf between them .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah is seer of what they do .
he who surrenders himself to allah and is righteous , has indeed grasped the firmest handle , and to allah all matters are returned .
and of everything we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
the way of allah is the religion of the world to come , and that it has been revealed to you , and we have sent down to you the right path , and it is the right path to him , and the right path is to him , and he will guide them to the right path .
said : `` your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble at mid-morning . ''
so hasten thou not against them . we are counting for them anumber .
i will cast him into hell .
the sun and the moon have been determined for them , for the sun 's invited to the sun and the moon . and whoever is freed from evil , it is with a great punishment , and that which you have been wont to do .
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a near place
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
then he turned his back , striving hard .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of allah , so allah seized them for their sins . god is all-powerful and stern in retribution .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , he may have a faith and a believer , and those whose efforts are appreciated .
and we rained on them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
so be not in doubt about what these worship , but they worship only what their fathers worshipped before ; and we will pay them in full their portion undiminished .
and we have set up for them a gate of that which is in the right of the right and of the right , and in the name of allah , in order to be mentioned , and when they are in a company , then eat of it , and be of the pure . thus do we give you thanks .
do you not see that allah is the knower of all that is in the heavens and the earth ? he is the guardian of what is in the heavens and the earth . it is only a confirmation of what they do not do . it is only the one who will do what they do not do . god has knowledge of all things .
and at night . do you not understand ?
faces on that day will be humbled ,
and we have distributed it among them that they may take heed , but most men begrudge aught save ingratitude .
and we gave them the explicit book ,
this is because they defied allah and his messenger . and whoever defies allah and his messenger , allah is severe in retribution .
but if you should have a statement of that which they say , say to the unbelievers : `` is it that when we are dust , are the ones who told them , `` are the people of the fire ? '' it is the same to them that they are the inmates of the fire , and they are the companions of the fire .
and when you are addressed by the command , it is in order to make it a right course , and if they have made it a way , the two paths has made to them , so that it may be that the two of the people will have the decree of god , and allah is the hearer , the knower .
and on the day when he will gather them together , as if they had tarried but an hour of the day , they will recognise each other . those who denied the meeting with allah will be lost and lost .
then indeed , your lord , for those who migrated after they had been persecuted , and then struggled and remained patient , and remained patient , indeed , your lord is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
o prophet , tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaks over their backs . that is more likely that they will be recognised and not be harassed . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and chastised those who disbelieved , and that is the recompense of the disbelievers .
“ we are penalized .
and whoever earns the sin and sin , he has deserved the right way , and whoever is righteous , he is the righteous , and he is the best of those who give good news and a rich provision .
therein are thrones raised high ,
and they denied them , though their souls were convinced thereof . so behold , how was the end of the corrupters !
verily this is the word of an honoured messenger ,
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host .
and not equal are the good deed and the evil deed , and repel the evil deed . then you will see that he between whom and you was a close friend .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? god destroyed them , and the disbelievers will have the like of it .
then lodged it in a secure place
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the living creatures that he has dispersed in them . he is able to gather them whenever he wills .
on that day you shall be exposed , no secret of yours will remain hidden .
except to a messenger whom he has chosen , and then he appoints guards before him and behind him .
thus do we try some of them by means of others , that they may say , `` are these those whom god has favored from among us ? '' does not god know the grateful ?
say : `` o people ! the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided , is guided to his own soul , and whoever goes astray , it is only forhis own soul . i am not a guardian over you . ''
and leftfor posterity .
hinderer of the good , transgressor , sinner .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
she said , “ i seek refuge in the all-beneficent from you , if you are godwary . ”
have they taken awliya besides him ? but allah is the protector , and he gives life to the dead , and he is able to do all things .
that is because their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they said : `` shall mortals guide us ? '' and they disbelieved and turned away , and allah was not all-sufficient , all-laudable .
certainly allah has helped you on many fields , and on the day of hunain , when your great numbers elated you , and they availed you nothing , but the earth was strait for you , and you turned back in retreat .
they were guided to purity of speech , and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be a fuel of the fire , and the fuel of which the fire is made to swallow them , and it is an appropriate matter of what they have been commanded .
so have patience . the promise of allah is true . and let not those who do not believe make you unsteady .
and allah has made a revelation of the inspiration to stand with his hands , and of the people , and the glories of a fixed measure ; and that which is in the heavens and the earth know that allah is cognizant of all things .
those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of this world , while they think that they are doing good deeds .
'stamp thy foot ! here is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
and among the desert-arabs are those who regard what they spend as a fine , and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . theirs will be an adverse turn of fortune , and allah is hearing , knowing .
are they waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ?
and your lord inspired the bee : `` make your homes in the mountains , and in the trees and in what they erect .
they make it a favour to you . say : `` do not make a favour to me . '' say : `` do not make me a favour for me . nay , but allah has conferred a favour upon you , if you are truthful .
for every nation we have appointed rites which they perform , so let them not dispute with you in this matter . call to your lord , for surely , you are on a straight path .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
it closes in on them ,
and a multitude of those of later time .
and he it is who multiplied you on the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
has he forged a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? nay , but those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and far error .
we have not sent you except as a mercy to all mankind .
surely your lord is bountiful to mankind , but most of them do not give thanks .
say , `` this is what has been sent down to you from your lord . '' whoever wills , let him believe , and let him believe in it , and let the disbelievers hear the fire , and then , for the evil of it , it is a great matter for the unjust , and what is the matter with them , and an evil homecoming !
whether we show you some of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to convey the message . to us is the reckoning .
hecast lots , and he was among the losers .
and when thou lookest them thou wilt see bliss and a realm magnificent .
as for those who believe and do good works , they shall have the gardens of paradise ,
they said , “ we will solicit him from his father , and we will surely do . ”
if he should ask you for it , and press you , you would be niggardly , and he would expose your unwillingness .
their security during winter and summer journeys .
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the resourceful . he was penitent .
we hope our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers . ''
has he taken daughters out of what he himself creates and has favored you with sons ?
say , `` the truth has come , and falsehood can neither originate nor recreate anything . ''
those who believe , and have emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank with god ; and it is they who are the triumphant .
say , “ i pray only to my lord , and i do not associate anyone with him . ”
they said : nay , we bring thee that concerning which they were doubting .
and we shaded you with clouds and sent down for you manna and quails : eat of the good things we have provided for you . they wronged us not , but they wronged themselves .
they said : nay , but we found our fathers doing so .
and when he saw the sun rising , he said : this is my lord ! this is greater . but when it set , he said : o my people ! verily i am quit of that which ye associate .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
and indeed , for you is a reward uninterrupted .
they say : `` why are not signs sent down upon him from his lord ? '' say : `` signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner . ''
and it will come upon them suddenly , while they perceive not .
by the scatterersscattering ,
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
and there will be for them the wives of a garden abiding .
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing . ''
and thus we have told them , `` this is our command , '' and a one of them said : `` do we have a day , other than a day ? '' he said , `` it is only a day of which your lord will bring you to life , and let him have a share of it , and let him have no one to do it . '' so let him be a confirmer !
these are onguidance from their lord , and these are the successful .
save him who hath done wrong and then substitutes good after evil . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
we have sent down to you a book in which there is a reminder for you . do you not understand ?
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the boons .
worship allah , and do not worship any partners in his divinity , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the relatives , and the wayfarer . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
and the mother of maryam , to the throne , to be called to the throne , they have said , `` my father , my father is the same , '' and he said , “ my father , my father is the same , and indeed my lord is the most honourable , the most honourable , the most wise . ” indeed , my lord is the knower of what he wants .
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we originated the first creation , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it . verily , we shall do it .
and speak to the people of the book , except with the truth , except for those who do wrong , they say , 'we believe in us , and we are only one of those who believe , and we are only one of the guided .
and he has a high position with us and an excellent abode .
and we made it an example to their own time and the succeeding after them , and an admonition unto the god-fearing .
for those who do good is goodness and more ; and neither darkness nor ignominy will cover their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , and they will remain in it .
or follow that which is spoken to the right course , nay , but it is that allah will give you permission , and if it is not for the commands of allah , it is for the evildoers .
and whatever alms ye expend or vow ye vow , allah knoweth it ; and the wrong-doers shall have no helpers .
and when it is said to them , 'believe as the people believe , '' they say , `` shall we believe as fools believe ? '' indeed , they are the fools , but they do not know .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in rows , none will speak except him whom the most merciful has given permission , and he will speak to him what is right .
and follow the best of what has been sent down to you from your lord before the punishment comes upon you suddenly while you are unaware .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . god has made account of them while they forgot it . god is witness over everything .
and the divorced women shall be sent down on the three sides , that be lawful for them , and speak not to them that which allah hath created , and for them is the word of the hereafter , if they are in the right way , and the maintenance of their persons are in the right way .
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us . nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah confound the disbelievers .
so if you gain the mastery over them in war , deal with them in the manner of those who follow them , so that they may remember .
god created you , then he will cause you to die , and some of you will have been brought back to the worst age , so that they know nothing after having knowledge . god is all-knowing and all-powerful .
nay , thou marvellest ; and they scoff
said : `` then get out of here ; you are accursed ,
a party of those who have received the book have been sent down to you , to recite what has been sent down to you , and some of them are others . say to them , `` i have been commanded to serve the lord of the universe . '' say , `` i have been commanded to serve the lord of all being . ''
o ye who believe ! take your precaution , then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
this is what allah has given to his servants who believe and do good deeds . say , `` you do not make any trace of you . '' say , `` do not make us forget this . '' and whoever does good , then surely allah is the most appreciative , most appreciative .
and all those who are on earth .
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none except myself and my brother , so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and a few from the later generations .
the descendants of those whom we carriedwith noah . he was a grateful servant .
loving , equals in age ,
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ”
that he may warn him who is alive and justify the word against the unbelievers .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it . they will all abide therein .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters .
do you think that you will enter paradise while allah has not yet known those of you who strive hard and have not ascertained the steadfast ?
our lord ! forgive me and my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
does man think that he will be left sudaon him ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is aware of what you do .
and warn your nearest kinsmen ,
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a good deed with anot her deeds . it is likely that allah will turn to them in mercy ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
surely those who guardare in a secure place ,
the day when mankind will be like scattered moths
and nuh cried unto his lord , and said : o my lord ! verily my son is of my household , and verily thy promise is the truth , and thou art the justest of judges .
`` woe to the messenger ! '' but if a son is true , they will overcome you ; if you are one of those who will be given a hundred , they will overcome you , and if you are one of the two , he is with them , and allah is with the trusted .
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
and he who believed said : o my people ! surely i fear for you the like of the day of the parties ,
and if you are truthful , justice are the people of the youth , who are two other women , or a confirmation of the two women . if you are the ones to do so , they will be the same or four . it is the same for them that they may be the same .
if you give charity openly , it is good ; but if you conceal them and give them to the poor , it will be better for you , and will acquit you of your sins . god is well aware of what you do .
then hell will berefuge .
but satan caused them to slip from it , and caused them to slip in the end of them . we said , `` go down , enemies to one another , and you shall have your abode for a while , and you will have your abode . ''
your endeavours are indeed diverse .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses . ”
and indeed , for those who do wrong there is a punishment before this , but most of them do not know .
and he drew out his hand , and lo , it was white to the beholders .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
know that allah is severe in retribution , and that allah is forgiving , merciful .
and who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a dwelling in hell for the unbelievers ?
and they said , “ whatever sign you bring to us , to bewitch us , we will not believe in you . ”
dead , not living , and they do not know when they will be raised .
so we will surely bring you magic like the like of it . so appoint a tryst between us and you , which neither we nor you shall fail to go back .
i ask of you no wage for it ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
and made the night a covering ,
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were in my power , the matter would be settled between you and me . god knows the evildoers . ''
thus they were vanquished and overthrown , humiliated .
who is fairer in speech than he who calls to god and acts righteously and says , `` i am of the muslims ? ''
we have created man , and we know what his soul whispers to him , and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
and the promise of god will be near , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , ‘ woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this , but we have been unjust . ’
your wives are a tillage for you , so go to your tilth as you will , and do good . and fear allah , and know that you are going to meet him ; and give good news to the believers .
and when their messengers came to them with clear proofs , they exulted in the knowledge of the knowledge , and that they were surrounded by what they had mocked .
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
so we delivered him and his family , all together .
so if you gain the mastery over them in war , deal with them in the manner of those who follow them , so that they may remember .
whoever desires the reward of this world , with allah is the reward of this world and the hereafter ; and allah is hearing , seeing .
lo ! they fold their breasts to hide from him . lo ! when they cover themselves with their garments , he knoweth what they conceal and what they reveal . lo ! he knoweth that which is in the breasts .
say , ‘ flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will be given a little enjoyment . ’
as to the unbelievers , to recite the quran , to the quran , the course of allah is exclusively for him , and if only he was to be a guide , a way to those who do not consider . indeed , we have been the punishment .
in gardens of delight .
say , `` perhaps some of the things you wish to hasten on . ''
said , `` what ! even if i bring you a better guidance than what you found your fathers following ? '' they said , `` indeed , we disbelieve in what you are sent with . ''
and we will not be punished . ''
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you as they swear to you , and they will think that they are the liars .
then we produced after them another generation .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe , for the forgiveness of idolaters , even though they are near to do it , after it has become clear to them that they are the people of hell .
when the help of allah and the victory comes ,
and why should we not believe in allah and the truth that has come to us , and hope that our lord will admit us among the righteous ?
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
and to us belong the last and the first .
who has fed them against hunger , and has secured them against fear .
a throng of the ancients
and they havebenefits from them , and they getto drink , will they not then be grateful ?
so do not obey the unbelievers , but strive against them with a great endeavour .
they ask you that they should take you away . say , `` whatever you spend is good for you , and orphans and the needy traveler what is good for you . but it is god who is the best knower of it . ''
he said : take hold of it and fear not . we shall restore it to its former state .
when evil visits him , impatient ,
they invoke none but females , and they invoke none but a rebellious satan .
whenever a surah is revealed , some of them say : `` which of you has it increased in faith ? '' as for those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
except an old woman who stayed behind ,
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
no associate has he ; and this i am commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
and as for the camels , and a piece of the winds , say : `` has he forbidden the two males , or the two females ? '' say , `` has he forbidden the two males or the two females ? '' , `` what has he forbidden to the two females or what the wombs of the two females contain ? '' and who is a wrongdoer ?
they and their spouses , reclining on couches in the shade .
does he not know that allah sees ?
has there come to you the story of the hosts
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of allah , so allah seized them for their sins . god is all-powerful and stern in retribution .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet . ”
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear ? ''
and allah has given the example of the people of noah to the people of noah , and the people of imran who were among the two women who were among the two women . but they did not know the two women , but they did not know the fire .
but the messenger and those who have believed with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the successful .
say : `` had allah willed , i would not have recited it to you nor would he have made it known to you . i have lived among you a lifetime before it . will you not then understand ? ''
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you compelled us to practice . god is better and more lasting . ''
“ this brother of mine has ninety nine ewes , and i have one ewe ; and he says , ‘ give it to me , ’ and he says , ‘ give her to me my share . ’
then they turned to one another , blaming each other .
gardens of eden which they will enter , and the righteous among their fathers , their wives , and their descendants , and angels will enter upon them from every gate .
so we took revenge on them . see how terrible was the end of those who rejectedwas !
nay ! they will deny their worship , and become opponents to them .
will you believe in it when it has come to pass ? you will have faith in it . now you will seek to hasten it .
and surely my curse will be on you till the day of judgment .
say , ‘ whoever is in error , the all-beneficent will prolong his life until they see what they were threatened with , or the punishment is finished , and who is weaker in hosts , who is weaker in forces . ’
as a hospitality from one oft-forgiving , most merciful . ''
o ye who believe ! expend of that wherewith we have provided you ere a day cometh when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship nor intercession ; and the infidels are the wrong-doers .
surely those who disbelieve say : allah is there : there is no god but he . but if ye do not desist , there is no god but he ; and for those who disbelieve there will be a painful punishment .
and they say : our lord ! expand for us the course of the way , and we made him leaders , and we made for them a sign . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who have been performing .
when shu'aib said to them , `` will you not fear god ?
then we sent after him messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had denied before . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
lo ! i am allah , there is no god but i , so serve me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
do not think god is unaware of what the wrongdoers do . he only delays them for a day when eyes will stare .
and has made the moon a light for them , and made the sun a lamp ?
as to the unbelievers , to recite the quran , to the quran , the course of allah is exclusively for him , and if only he was to be a guide , a way to those who do not consider . indeed , we have been the punishment .
say : i am not a new thing among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i follow only what is revealed to me , and i am only a plain warner .
but my pleas have only increased their aversion .
and if allah had willed , he could have made you one nation , but he leads astray whomever he wishes , and he guides whom he wills . and you will be questioned about what you used to do .
and they were witnesses of what they did to the believers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found , and slain mercilessly .
peace be upon abraham .
a numerical book .
they have made their oaths a shield , so they turn away from the way of allah . indeed , evil is what they do .
those who conceal what allah has sent down in the book of god will not sell it for a small price . they will fill their bellies with it , and for them is a painful punishment .
so fear allah and obey me .
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host .
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no guardians besides allah , and you will not be helped .
and this quran could not be composed by any other than allah . it is a confirmation of what was before it , and a confirmation of what was before it , and there is no doubt about it .
we hope our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers . ''
has the story of moses reached you ?
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not know ?
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
no indeed ; but you honour not the orphan ,
and be not like those who went forth from their homes and showing off to people , and to show off to people , and allah encompasses all that they do .
where then are you going ?
and to us belong the last and the first .
and those who distributeby command ,
and for the matter , it is only for him that he is the same , and it is only for his own soul ; and it is only for him that he is the same , and do not be one of the doubters .
and we raised him to a high position .
indeed your god is one ,
so we took retribution from them , and we drowned them in the sea because they denied our signs and were heedless of them .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
except those who repent and reform , and proclaim the truth , for i will accept their repentance . i am the receiver of repentance , the merciful .
guide us to the straight path ,
you are receiving the quran from the wise , the knowing .
these towns—we narrate to you some of their stories . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they were not believers in what they had denied before . thus god seals the hearts of those who deny the truth .
and allah created every creature from water , and some of them walk on the belly of it ; and some of them walk on four legs , and some walk on four . god creates whatever he wills . allah has power over all things .
and of his signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon ; and do not prostrate to the sun and the moon ; but prostrate yourselves to allah , who created them , if it is him that you worship .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
or receive someadvice which would benefit him ?
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you disclose . and allah knows what is in your hearts .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
`` and what is that in your right hand , o moses ? ''
on the day when every soul will see its good deeds , and as an example for the good of it , it will wish for the evil of it , and allah will lead you into a great distance . god is kind towards the servants .
he said : `` this is not the course of an enemy to you ; indeed , it is not for you to bring out to you a time , and to make it the end of the winds , to make it proper .
“ this is what you were promised—for every careful penitent .
he said , “ if only i had the power to suppress you , or have some strong support . ”
o you who have believed , when you are bidden to be told , `` worship allah , and be a messenger to you . if you do so , he will give you the like of it , and when you are told , `` you will be brought back to god , and then you will be brought back to the best of what you have done . god is well aware of what you do . ''
and we gave him isaac and jacob and made the prophethood and the book prophethood , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
and when the truth came to them from us , they said : lo ! this is plain magic .
the messengers were also rejected before you , and they were wont to deny the truth , so that they might have no power to help them , so that they may come to us with the signs of allah , and assuredly there is a sign in that for allah ,
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself wholly to allah , and follows his religion , and follows the religion of abraham , the upright , and allah took abraham for a friend ?
who deny the day of recompense .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear ? ''
and those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when ye are disintegrated in dust , then will ye be in a new creation ?
and do not rebuke the beggar .
and we never sent a warner to a town but the affluent among them said : `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
the likeness of the garden is the driving of the god-fearing , and it has been made to gush forth with them , and with them are rivers . and to those whose drink is made to drink , and it is the same to those who spend it to the extent of the fire . it is the same to you to be in the fire , to be an abider .
o people , fear your lord , a day when a son will not be accepted from his parents , but the promise of allah will be fulfilled , and do not be in the least to be blamed .
they said , “ have you come to us that we should worship allah alone and abandon what our ancestors used to worship ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed for them , and said , “ this is a woeful day . ”
in the help of god . he helps whom he will . he is the almighty , the most merciful .
if they belie you , say : `` for me are my deeds , and you have your deeds . you are quit of what i do , and i am quit of what you do . ''
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
`` o my son ! if it be the weight of a mustard-seed , and even though it be in a rock , or in the heavens , or in the earth , allah will bring it forth . verily , allah is subtle , aware .
say , ‘ i have no power to benefit or benefit myself , except what god wills . ’ for every nation there is a term ; when their time comes , they can not postpone it nor can they advance it .
and when the truth came to them from us , they said : lo ! this is plain magic .
and they will be given to drink of a cup whose mixture is ginger ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they might return .
and we bestowed upon david bounty from us , saying : o ye mountains ! sing the praises of allah with him , and softened iron for him .
then , the believers were seduced with you , but the believers say : `` yes ! '' and so , , , `` you have departed in your hearts , so that the believers may be told , `` god has forsaken them . '' so allah has forsaken them , so averted them from the day of resurrection .
and it may be that my lord will give me better than your garden , and send upon it a thunderbolt from heaven , and it will be a slippery wind .
he said : lo ! ye are folk unknown .
will you be left secure in that which is here
it is they who will be called to account in the way of allah , and this is the speech of allah ; and he who is a greedy miser and gives good tidings to allah , it is the same for you , and if you turn away , the same is the same to you , and you are not to be able to take the way .
secret counsels are onlyof the shaitan that he may cause grief to those who believe , but he can not harm them in the least except by allah 's leave . in allah let the believers put their trust .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , that they will not return to them ?
the lord said to him , `` the lord of the right hand will be set before him , '' and mention fast to him , when he has bestowed his command to him , and he says , ‘ o mary ! what is the matter with you ? ’ he answered , ‘ what is the matter with you ? ’ he said , ‘ what is the matter with you , that god will give you the measure ? ’
and those who cried lies to the truth , they said , “ recite the qur ’ an , ” , and they said , “ you are not going to follow the command of allah , and say , ‘ no , indeed , allah does not have any faith . ’ in fact , they say , ‘ no , indeed , allah ’ s command is not right . ’
gardens of eden beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the reward of those who purify themselves .
ha . mim .
the league will be routed and turn away .
with hardship comes ease .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . these are the fuel of the fire .
these are the salawat from their lord , and mercy , and those are the guided .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
o dear prophet , it has been revealed to you , to warn the people of the same , but when he decides on any one of them , he says to it , `` it has been revealed to me , '' and allah has the power to make it fail . god has full knowledge of the truth . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
when two parties among you were about to lose heart , but allah was their protector . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
they said : `` we augur ill of you and those who are with you . '' he said , `` your omen is with allah , but you are a people being tested . ''
do not think that god will fail his promise to his messengers . god is majestic and revengeful .
which will neither nourish nor satisfy their hunger .
or follow that which is spoken to the right course , nay , but it is that allah will give you permission , and if it is not for the commands of allah , it is for the evildoers .
he said : o chiefs ! which of you will bring me her throne before they come to me in submission ?
allah knows what every female bears , and what the wombs loseor exceed . and everything with him is inproportion .
there has come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
and who believe in what has been sent down to you and what was revealed before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
every soul will taste death , then to us you will be returned .
o mankind ! we have created you from a male and female , and created you and the tribes of nations , and that you may recognize each other . indeed , the most honorable of you are the most pious of you . god is all-knowing and all-aware .
a party of the people of the book would fain lead you astray , but they lead none astray , but they do not realize it .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
verily man is created fretful ,
and fruits numberless ,
allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be of silk .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
but the messenger and those who have believed with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the successful .
those who have purchased unbelief in exchange for faith will not harm allah at all , and they will have a painful punishment .
the first of them will say to the last of them : `` you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ''
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the lifeless , and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt .
and we divided them into sections on the earth , some of them otherwise , and some of them are righteous ; and we tested them with good things and evil in order that they may return .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude ; and for allah is the highest likeness . he is the mighty , the wise .
and we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in play .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
he said , “ yes , and you will then be among the near-stationed . ”
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
so proclaim what you are commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
it is we who have sent down to you the book with the truth , and he has made the quran a veil between you and the commands of allah , and between them , and in the same manner of what he has sent down to you . so , to allah , you will be of the witnesses of that which he has given you , and to allah you will be of the witnesses .
until , when we open upon them a door of severe chastisement , behold , they are in despair .
and there is not a creature on earth but its provision is on allah . he knows its resting place and its repository . all is in a clear book .
the arrogant leaders of his people said : `` o shu'aib ! we will banish you and those who believe with you , unless you return to our religion. '' they said , `` even though we hate it ? ''
say : allah suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , they are the losers .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
what remains with allah is better for you , if you are believers . i am not a guardian over you .
she screened herself from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and he appeared to her as a well-proportioned human .
indeed the righteous will be among gardens and rivers ,
and those who arrangematter ,
the parable of what they spend in the life of this world is like a frosty wind which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and it is they who wronged themselves , and allah wronged them not , but they wronged themselves .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
whose hearts are filled with awe when allah is mentioned , and those who endure patiently what befalls them , and those who establish prayer and spend of what we have provided them .
have you seen him who turned away ,
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i favoured you and that i preferred you tocreatures .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but man is the most disputatious of things .
it is not for a believing man or woman , when god and his messenger have decided a matter to have any choice in their affair . whoever disobeys allah and his messenger has certainly strayed into clear error .
our lord , you will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . god does not break his promise . ''
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
he showed him the great sign .
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no guardians besides allah , and you will not be helped .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , and allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
nay , but ye thought that the messenger and the believers would never return to their families , and that was made fairseeming in your hearts , and ye harbored evil thoughts , and ye were a people doomed to perish .
those who conceal what allah has sent down in the book of god will not sell it for a small price . they will fill their bellies with it , and for them is a painful punishment .
and we saved moses and those with him , all together .
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , and that allah is clement , merciful .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
all of them will be arraigned before us .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and made the prophethood and the book prophethood , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them . those who deny the truth will enjoy themselves and eat as cattle eat . the fire will be their lodging .
and lot , when he said to his people : `` you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you before you .
it was only the sinners who led us astray .
he said , “ my people , i am a clear warner to you . ”
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : `` did we bar you from the guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but you were guilty . ''
and lot , when he said to his people : `` do you commit an indecency that none in the world has committed before you ?
o you who believe ! be wary of allah , and then take care of him ; and they are the ones who are good to the believers , and they are the ones to whom he pleases , and to the way of allah , and allah is the embracer , the knower .
the gates of heaven will not be opened for those who deny our revelations and are arrogant . they will not enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we reward the criminals .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say : `` o lord , have mercy on them as they nurtured me when i was small . ''
it may be that our lord will give us better than it , for we turn to our lord . ''
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
purity is to him who carried his servant by night from the sacred mosque to the farthest mosque the precincts of which we have blessed , that we may show him some of our signs . he is the all-hearing , the all-seeing .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , and the people of pharaoh were encompassed by a dreadful punishment .
on that day you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
by those who swim smoothly ,
rather , we have been deprived . ''
say : `` o people ! i am only a plain warner to you . ''
so enter the gates of hell to live therein forever . evil is the residence of the arrogant .
and when the servant of allah stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things . the wolf devoured him ; but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
“ eat of the good things we have provided you , and do not exceed the limits , lest my wrath descend upon you , and he upon whom my wrath descends has fallen . ”
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and we live , and we will not be resurrected .
over my servants you have no authority , except the erring ones who follow you .
as for him whose scales are heavy ,
verily those who are bond at the covenant of allah , there is no portion of the day of resurrection , nor shall they be able to speak , nor is a lasting torment .
a recompense for what they did .
then they will have no contention except that they will say : 'by allah , our lord , we were not idolaters '
and we saved him and his family , except his wife , who was of those who stayed behind .
whether we show you some of what we promise them , or cause you to die , to us is their return , and allah is witness to what they do .
and keep vigil in some parts of the night as an additionalprayer for you , so that your lord may raise you to a laudable position .
and recite to them the story of abraham .
allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path . ''
verily man is in loss ,
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off trading . that is better for you , if you only knew .
and the angels will stand on its sides , and on that day eight will carry above them the throne of your lord .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my faults on the day of judgement .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
and whoever turns away from the remembrance of the most gracious , we appoint for him a devil , and he will be his companion .
they said , “ burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do . ”
so they turned their backs on him and went away .
and not a messenger came to them but they mocked him .
and it was said : `` o noah ! get down from the east and the west , from ourselves , to be spoken to us , and we are the best to return . ''
and we sent to thamood their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but behold , they became two parties quarrelling .
when he said to his people , 'will you not be godfearing ?
wherein they will dwell forever , desiring no removal from them .
we have revealed to you as we revealed to noah , and the prophets after him , and we revealed to abraham and isaac and jacob , and we gave to david the psalms , and we gave to david psalms , and we gave to david psalms .
he said , ‘ my lord ! indeed my bones have become feeble , and my head is glistening with age ; yet never have i been disappointed in my prayer to you .
with hardship comes ease .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came unto you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts ye saw not ; and allah was ever seer of what ye do .
but he who suspects wrong or partiality on the part of the testator , and brings on the parties a settlement , there is no sin for him . god is forgiving and merciful .
like those shortly before them . they tasted the evil consequence of their deeds . they will have a painful punishment .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and it was revealed to noah : `` none of your people will believe except those who have believed already . do not grieve over what they have done .
it is allah who knows the hour , and he knows what is in his bellies , and none can repel what is in the earth . and he is the all-knower of all things .
the hypocrites , men and women , are one of the other . they enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and they withhold their hands . they forgot god , so he forgot them . the hypocrites are the transgressors .
`` and what made you hasten from your people , o moses ? ''
alif , lam , ra.a book whose verses are perfected , then elaborated , from one who is all-wise , all-aware .
see what they liken you to ! so they have gone astray and can not find a way .
we will ease him toward hardship ,
your riches and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
say : he is the beneficent , we believe in him and in him we put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error .
they will say : `` glory be to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , but they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them . ''
have you not heard the news of those who disbelieved before , and tasted the evil consequence of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
it is he who created you , and among you is a believer , and one of you is a believer , and allah sees what you do .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not frustrate allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said : their religion has deceived them . and whosoever puts his trust in allah , lo ! allah is mighty , wise .
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is warden over them , and you are not a guardian over them .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
allah has not given birth to a son , nor is there any god besides him ; and each god would have taken away what he has created , and some of them would have taken to others other than others . glory be to allah , above all that they describe !
andone who is brought up in ornaments , and is inconspicuous in contests ?
we have assigned companions to them who made their deeds seem decorous to them and made them seem decorous to them , and the word has been realized against them in nations before them , and they were losers .
with clear proofs and scriptures ; and we have sent down to you the reminder that you may explain to mankind what has been sent down to them , and that they may reflect .
they have no knowledge of it . they follow nothing but conjecture , and conjecture is no substitute for the truth .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of shadowseized them . surely , it was the punishment of a great day .
gardens and vineyards ,
they said , ‘ o moses , we will never enter it , so long as they are there . go you and your lord , and fight , we will stay here . ’
and when he said to his people , “ o my people , why do you commit a painful punishment , whereas i have come to you with a noble messenger ? ” but when they are returned to the truth , allah does not guide the guilty people .
they will say , ‘ indeed we were before our families .
when the task of faith is recited to them , remember allah when the remembrance came to them , just as the people of the town said : `` our lord ! give me , my lord , give me in this life . ''
a warning to mankind ,
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands made it not . will they not then be grateful ?
will you be left secure in that which is here
and gave a little , then stopped ?
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
and has made the moon a light for them , and made the sun a lamp ?
abiding therein forever ; and evil is the burden for them on the day of resurrection .
then he became a clot ; then he createdthen madeperfect .
say to those who do not believe , `` work according to your ability , and we are acting .
we have sent you with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is yellow , ” he said , “ he says , a yellow heifer , bright yellow , pleasing to the beholders . ”
the day when they will be shoved forcibly toward the fire of hell ,
and do not defraud people of their goods , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say : `` bring the truth that god has given you , '' and if they bear witness , do not speak with them , and if they are truthful , do not follow their desires , and do not follow their desires .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will never fail in his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning .
`` this is no other than a thing . '' it will not be accepted from him , and he will speak to him , and say : `` do that which we are commanded , and obey the messenger , ''
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
a revelation from the most merciful , the most merciful .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail on it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
the indubitable event !
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
`` woe to the messenger ! '' but if a son is true , they will overcome you ; if you are one of those who will be given a hundred , they will overcome you , and if you are one of the two , he is with them , and allah is with the trusted .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
but if they turn away , say : 'god is sufficient for me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust , and he is the lord of the mighty throne . '
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
and there are advantages for you in them , and that you may attain upon them a need in your breasts ; and upon them you are carried .
indeed allah knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what lies within the hearts .
and indeed it is the truth of certainty .
and allah will make it a trial for them , and in the life of this world , and in the life of the world , and in the matter , he will guide them . and he will find a way upon him .
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and we give it to drink of the cattle , and many of the people .
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
it is we who bring the dead to life and write down what they have forwarded and what they have left behind . we have recorded everything in a clear book .
and if you do not , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger . but if you repent , you will have your principal , neither will you be wronged .
those who believe , and those who are jews , and the christians , the jews , the sabaeans , or the sabians , the sabaeans , or the christians , allah will judge between them . god is witness over all things .
and when allah is mentioned , they will be told , `` this is the case of those who have denied god . '' they will ask the unbelievers , `` it is the same for those who have knowledge of god . so let them taste the wrath of god . '' so let them taste the curse of allah .
and marry the unmarried among you and those who are righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
do they have other gods besides allah ? tell them , `` your proof is true . '' say , `` your evidence is to come to me , and to those who are true to the truth , but most of the people are averse to it . ''
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy , for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . if they are in their hearts , they will be in their hearts , or allah 's heart , or he will give you account of whomever he wills . and he has power over all things .
he said , “ i am only a messenger of your lord , so that i may give you a pure son . ”
father , there has come to me knowledge of what has not come to you . follow me , i will guide you to a straight path .
do not be haughty with god . i come to you with clear authority .
and made them like chewed-up straw .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending .
he said , “ so do you worship besides allah that which can not benefit you , nor harm you ? ”
or dost thou ask them for tribute ? but the maintenance of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
and there will be for them the wives of a garden abiding .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul !
and they say : hallowed be our lord ! verily the promise of our lord must be fulfilled .
these will be given their reward twice over , because they are steadfast and repel evil with good , and spend of what we have provided them .
there is not a township but we shall destroy it before the day of resurrection , or punish it with a severe punishment . that is written in the book .
anda'ad and thamud , and the people of ar-rass , and many generations in between .
and they say : our lord ! expand for us the course of the way , and we made him leaders , and we made for them a sign . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who have been performing .
and persisted in the great sin .
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none except myself and my brother , so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
and we did not make them bodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best those who are guided .
and on the day when he will gather them all together , he will say : `` why do you not see the truth ? '' they said , `` why do we not know what you do not know ? '' and they say , “ we do not know what you do . ”
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but keep a mediumbetween those .
and in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day , and the alternation of the night and the day , and by the gate , and the earth , we shall make them swim in the land and the setting of the heavens .
enjoin prayer on your people , and be constant in it . we do not ask you for any sustenance , but we provide for you . the outcome is for the cautious .
out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
for the day of judgement .
indeed , in the two parties is to be upright , and some of you are upright , and some of them are upright , and allah does so as he wills . indeed , in that is a lesson for those who do evil .
it is he who originates creation , then repeats it , and it is easier for him . his is the highest attribute in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent is the preparer .
so that the people of the book may know that they have no power whatsoever over allah 's grace , and that whatever bounty is in allah 's hand , he gives it to whomsoever he wills . and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
by the promised day ,
and he inspected the birds , and said : how is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and assembledand proclaimed ,
and most surely they do not have a lie about it , but they will certainly deny the truth after it had come to them ; and they have no faith in it , but they are not to be able to believe in it , and they are not to be able to accept it . but if they turn away , then surely allah will protect them from the earth , and they will not be able to help them .
and the soul and him who perfected it
then he came out to his people from the sanctuary , and signaled to them to exaltin the morning and evening .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away from them and see what they will return . ''
and when allah will save you from the earth , then they will go out in the land . you are only responsible for your deeds . then to us you will be returned .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound ,
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
he said : my lord knows what is spoken in the heavens and the earth . he is the hearer , the knower .
this is hell which you were promised .
said : `` then get out of here ; you are accursed ,
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and to allah all matters are returned .
they said , ‘ call upon your lord to make clear to us what she may be alike . indeed , the cows are all alike to us , and if allah wills , we will be guided . ’
and he it is who hath created seven heavens in the heavens and that which he hath ordained between them , and they command the earth , and that allah may make the earth die , so that allah may know all things .
and if we willed , we could have obliterated their eyes , then they would race to the path , but how could they see ?
ask the children of israel how many a clear sign we gave them . he is severe in punishment .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and whatever emerges from it , and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what has escaped you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
we evacuated all the believers who were in it .
he said : `` o my lord ! appoint a measure for us . '' and my lord said : `` this is a cow to man , and the bitterly in the evening , and at the evening and the morning . ''
worship allah , and do not worship any partners in his divinity , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the relatives , and the wayfarer . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter ; and the words of allah will not change . that is the supreme success .
and if it is that allah is the best of yours , it is the best of you to be better than him , and the true believers are the ones who are with him , and those who are upright , and the righteous .
who is fairer in speech than he who calls to god and acts righteously and says , `` i am of the muslims ? ''
say : `` tell me , if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will the people of the wrong be destroyed ? ''
and every soul is given the book ; but thou art filled with doubts , and their hearts are in doubt , but they say : `` woe to us ! but it is only a way , but your lord is not unjust to them . ''
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they used to ridicule .
those who are the lord of the throne will not respond to those who glorify the praises of allah , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness for them , and say , `` our lord , give us mercy from those who have faith and say , `` our lord , give us your full knowledge . ''
this is a declaration for mankind , a guidance and an admonition to those who guard .
we sent noah and abraham and placed prophethood and the book . some of them were guided , and some of them are guided .
how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were stronger in valour than they , and they searched about in the land ? is there any asylum ?
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
about the guilty .
we would have been the chosen servants of god . ''
those who disbelieve , it is all the same whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
some of them believed in it and some of them turned away . hell is sufficient for a blaze .
and when the messengers came to them from before them and behind them , they said , `` do not worship anyone except allah . '' they said , `` if our lord had pleased he would not have sent down angels . we believe in what you have been sent with . ''
and believes in al-husna .
upon your heart , that you may be of the warners ,
and leave them a level plain ,
indeed , those who swear allegiance to you are allegiance to allah , and allah 's plan is over them ; and whoever breaks their covenant with allah , he will give him a great reward .
and soon will your lord give you so that you will be well-pleased .
so fear allah and obey me .
then winnow them thoroughly ,
she screened herself from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and he appeared to her as a well-proportioned human .
and a sign for them is that we carried their offspring in the laden ship .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and the earth , and produced for you the fruits of the sea , and subjected for you the ships that you may make subject to his command .
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise ,
on that day no intercession will avail , except for one whom the most beneficenthas given permission and whose word is acceptable to him .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , his efforts will not be ignored ; and we are recording it .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for allah does not like the prodigals .
is this a better hospitality or the tree of zaqqum ?
and if you obey most of the people on earth , they will lead you astray from allah ’ s path . they follow nothing but conjecture , and they are only falsifying .
have you not seen those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he will and they will not be wronged a whit .
though they will be within sight of each other . the guilty will wish that he could ransom himself from the punishment of that day .
to you is the case , and of your hearts , and you in the midst of your own abode , and then turn away from the dwellings of the companions of the garden , and they will have what they want .
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except with the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
we have certainly told the people of this world to say , `` worship allah , '' and say , `` worship allah , and fear him . '' so you will be pursued .
then he turned to their gods and said : `` why do you not eat ?
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
he who does not respond to the summoner of god can not frustrateon the earth , and he will not have any protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
so it sailed along with them amid waves like mountains . noah called out to his son who was standing apart , `` my son , embark with us , and do not be with the unbelievers . ''
that you will progress from stage to stage .
and when you are addressed by the command , it is in order to make it a right course , and if they have made it a way , the two paths has made to them , so that it may be that the two of the people will have the decree of god , and allah is the hearer , the knower .
a soul will know what it has sent ahead and held back .
thamudbelied the warnings .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : `` the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you . obey god and his messenger , if you are believers . ''
and that which you give in usury , that it may increase in order that it may increase with allah will not be rewarded with the property of allah , but that which you give in zakah , those are the multipliers .
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him ; surely they were a transgressing people .
and do not grieve for those who rush to disbelief ; they will not harm allah in the least ; and allah desires to give them no share in the hereafter ; and for them is a great punishment .
allah will not call you to account for what is unintentional in your oaths , but he will take you to task for what your hearts have earned ; and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
so , if they accuse you of lying , then a party of them are guided to him , and then you do not turn away with me , and you are not with me . you are not with me .
are these not the ones whom you swore that allah would not have mercy upon them ? enter paradise , and fear no fear , nor shall you grieve .
so that he may not have any knowledge of the fish , which is before one another , and whoever is the most upright in front of him , then let him belong to the best of those who have been upright , and for those who are with allah and his messenger is a lasting punishment .
he is allah , there is no god but he , the angels , the purified ones , and the good news is for the believers , and the most honourable , the most exalted .
will you not then remember ?
exalted be the majesty of our lord ! he has taken neither a wife nor a son .
and besides these two there will be two other gardens .
then cast him into hell ,
we have adorned the lower heaven with lamps , and we have made them missiles against the devils , and we have prepared for them the punishment of the blaze .
and what is it that allah should not punish them , when they barfrom the holy mosque , and they are not its custodians ? it is not its fitting guardians except the god-fearing . but most of them do not know .
and we will surely test you until we know the strivers among you and those who are steadfast , and we will try your reported .
then he made his progeny from an extract of a mean fluid ,
he said : fear not , verily , i am with you , hearing and seeing .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
but as for him whose scales are light ,
and others of them who have not yet joined them . he is the mighty , the wise .
he said : we shall see whether thou hast spoken the truth or whether thou art of the liars .
so give to the kinsman his due , and to the needy , and the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek allah 's countenance , and they are the successful .
and those on the left hand , how miserable they will be !
and those speeding along with ease ,
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
as for those who believe and do good deeds , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them in whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs , will they not listen ?
say : allah knows the secret in the cave in the cave ; and the knowledge of the heavens and the earth is allah 's ; and he is not of the trustee .
do you enjoin righteousness on others , and forget yourselves , while you read the book ? do you not understand ?
and placed therein lofty mountains and given you sweet water to drink ?
and we created you in pairs ,
she said : oh woe to me ! shall i bear a child before me , and my husband is an old man ? this is indeed a strange thing .
and if they dispute with you , say , “ allah knows best what you do . ”
a reward from your lord , a fitting gift .
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs is the evil abode .
`` what led you into hell ? ''
say : `` tell me , if allah had made the night perpetual for you till the day of resurrection , what god other than god can bring you light ? will you not hear ? ''
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
those are the ones that are in their hearts . so turn away from them , and admonish them , and speak to them in terms of their own souls .
and they shall have no friends to help them beside allah . and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him there is no way .
he is allah , there is no god but he , the angels , the purified ones , and the good news is for the believers , and the most honourable , the most exalted .
then , after it , be upright , a company of it , a company of them , a company of them , they say : `` is it that we are in the world to come . '' say , `` what is the matter with us that they are in the matter ? '' say , `` what is the matter with us that they are in the matter ? '' say , `` what is the matter with us , that you are to be a confirmer ? '' say , `` it is the same to
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . god turns to whomsoever he will . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , and they perceived not .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah , and there is a humiliating punishment for them .
they said , “ have you come to us that we should worship allah alone and abandon what our ancestors used to worship ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate yourself and draw near .
say : he is the beneficent , we believe in him and in him we put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error .
when the caravan departed , their father said : `` i smell the scent of joseph , if you do not think '' .
and the earth , we have spread out the earth , and cast therein firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it all kinds of things .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
alif . lam . mim .
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , in which is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps , fearing death ; and allah surrounds the disbelievers .
allah , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
and those who cried lies to the truth , they said , “ recite the qur ’ an , ” , and they said , “ you are not going to follow the command of allah , and say , ‘ no , indeed , allah does not have any faith . ’ in fact , they say , ‘ no , indeed , allah ’ s command is not right . ’
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and be patient , for your patience is only with the help of allah , and do not grieve over them , and do not be stressed by their schemes .
on the day when you see it , every suckling female will forget her suckling , and every pregnant female will be suckled by her burden , and you will see men drunk , yet they will not be drunken , but god 's punishment is severe .
and obey allah and the messenger , that you may receive mercy .
and if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge with allah . he is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and those who do not know that they say , `` to allah , to us , do not speak to us the speech of those before them , and those who have before them are clear signs , and we have sent down clear signs to the people who are certain . ''
he said , `` it was she who sought to seduce me . '' and a witness from her own household testified : `` if his shirt is torn from the front , she is telling the truth and he is one of the liars .
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves .
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
they will say : `` glory be to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , but they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them . ''
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said , 'this is your god , and the god of musa , and he forgot . '
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
and man saith : what aileth her ?
but if they turn away , then know that allah is your protector , an excellent protector and an excellent helper .
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word will be fulfilled , and i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
and among them are some who listen to you , but when they leave the presence of your presence , they say , `` what has he said now ? '' those are they whose hearts allah has sealed , and they follow their lusts .
and indeed it is a sorrow to the disbelievers .
this is nothing but a reminder to all mankind .
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
and if two among you are guilty of it , punish them both . if they repent and reform , leave them alone . allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
they used to carve dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
who doto be seen ,
we have shown you another time .
god was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , and he sent down tranquillity upon them , and rewarded them with a near victory ,
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you may be supreme in the land ? we will not believe in you . ”
and what she used to worship besides allah prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
in the city there were nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
will you be left secure in that which is here
let the children of israel go with us . ''
and in ad , when we sent against them the withering wind
the likeness of those who are in order to follow the way of allah , he is the like of that which is right . the example of those who have rejected the truth is the likeness of the wrong-doers . lo ! allah guideth not the wrong-doers .
they said : we miss the king 's cup , and he who bringeth it shall have a camel-load , and iam answerable for it .
they say , `` a lie , but if he wills , he can seal the hearts of this . '' but if he wills , he can therefore make the deaf hear the truth . god is cognizant of what is in the hearts .
by thosewho wrestviolently ,
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion is wholly wholly . but if they desist , allah is seeing of what they do .
and among the people of moses is a nation who guideby the truth and do justice thereby .
say , `` is it that he will guide you to the right guidance ? '' say , `` god will guide the truth to the truth . '' what , do you not guide the true way ?
`` this is no other than a thing . '' it will not be accepted from him , and he will speak to him , and say : `` do that which we are commanded , and obey the messenger , ''
and we did not make them bodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
then they called out to each other at dawn ,
verily he reflected and guessed ,
those who have purchased unbelief in exchange for faith will not harm allah at all , and they will have a painful punishment .
those who believed and did good deeds , and does righteous deeds , he will give them his grace and bounty , but those who are conceited towards god , will have a painful punishment .
and our command is but one , like the twinkling of an eye .
a part of what allah has created for them of rain and what their hands have given them . and allah said , `` this is the god of whom you used to worship . '' what is the matter with them that you used to worship god ? what is the matter with them that they have been doing ?
nay , but they play in doubt .
and at night . do you not understand ?
and if our clear revelations are recited to them , they say , “ this is the way of the path of allah , and say , ‘ this is magic , and it is magic , and those who deny the truth are clearly magic . ’ ”
allah has not given birth to a son , nor is there any god besides him ; and each god would have taken away what he has created , and some of them would have taken to others other than others . glory be to allah , above all that they describe !
say : `` it is allah who delivers you from it and from every calamity , but you associate others with him . ''
and we made the sky a well-protected roof . yet they turn away from its signs .
and i have told you the treasures of the lord , and i do not know that i am the guardian of the believers , and allah is the best of those who are mindful of you , and allah is the wakilover him .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good , he will be among the successful .
`` o dear prophet , ask the story of the heavens for what is revealed to you . '' they said , `` the truth has come to them , '' and they said , “ the result of the truth is to come to them , and we are the senders . ”
that is the guidance from allah , and he guides whom he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have been annulled .
when the unbelievers hear the reminder , they almost stab you with their glances , when they hear the message .
then we shall deliver our apostles and those who believe . thus it is that we deliver the believers .
he said : by allah ! verily , he hath done wrong to thee , and most surely the believers are unto him one of the right , and most of them contend with each other , except those who believe and do good ; and ask for them the forgiveness of his lord .
surely your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants . ''
this is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
wherein he will neither die nor live .
and if you fear , thenon foot or riding ; and when you are safe , remember allah , as he has taught you what you did not know .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
but god bears witness to what he has sent down to you . he has sent it down with his knowledge , and the angels bear witness . god is sufficient as witness .
he enjoins you to commit evil and indecency , and that you should say about allah what you do not know .
so fear allah and obey me .
and landmarks . and by the stars they are guided .
so fight in the cause of god . you are responsible only for yourself , and rouse the believers . god is stronger in might and stronger in punishment .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
those before them denied , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and assuredly we sent nuh unto his people : verily i am unto you a warner manifest .
they ask , `` when will be the day of judgement ? ''
if they could find a refuge , or caverns , or a place of concealment , they would turn it away .
on the day when the earth will be changed into other than the earth , and the heavens , and they will emerge before allah , the one , the irresistible .
when they are set up to their own time , or the course of action , or the course of action , or the course of peace , or to be in between them , a witness between you and them , to be in no error . god will give him a light , and he will give him a light which is in the hearts of those who fear .
a fitting recompense .
and we left for him among the later folk :
by the snorting runners ,
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them before this , nor did your nation . so be patient , indeed , the outcome is for the pious .
and they shall not be absent from it .
it will be only one shout , and behold , they will be staring .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , though the polytheists may dislike it .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
why do you not bring the angels to us , if you are truthful ? ''
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among those who doubt .
you can not guide whom you love , but allah guides whom he wills . and he knows best those who are guided .
gardens of eden they shall enter , therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be of silk .
yet before this was the book of moses , a guide and a mercy , and this is a book in the arabic language , to warn those who do evil , and to warn those who do good .
and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , he hath no protecting friend apart from him ; and thou wilt see the wrong-doers , when they see the torment , saying : is there any way to return ?
but those who did wrong changed the word which had been said to them , so we sent down upon them wrath from heaven for their wrongdoing .
and by your lord , we will gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them all around hell , hobbling on their knees .
and be thou patient because of those who call to the call of their lord and celebrate the shadows of the evening , and seek to call them to the remembrance of their lord , and let him not be permitted to his remembrance .
say : `` i have the depositories of the god with the truth , and speak not to you what you say , but i say , `` are the blind ? '' say , `` are the blind and the seer ? '' say , `` are the blind ? ''
when the help of allah and the victory comes ,
and if an evil suggestion comes to them , or spend in the future , they will be made to die , and if they are averse to it , they will have no fear ; and if they are patient , they will have no fear . god is the guardian of all things .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
so it sailed along with them amid waves like mountains . noah called out to his son who was standing apart , `` my son , embark with us , and do not be with the unbelievers . ''
permission is given to those who are fought against , because they are wronged , and allah is able to give them victory .
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , therein they shall abide .
with which allah guides those who seek his pleasure to the ways of peace , and brings them out out of darkness into light , and guides them to a straight path .
put your hand into your bosom and it will come forth white without blemish—among nine miracles to pharaoh and his people . they are a wicked people . ''
and allah has already given them the book of jinn and the children of kin , in order to be trusted by his command ; and allah will not make any friendship for them . and when allah does a thing , none can bring to them any guardian or helper besides allah .
do you not ask one another to be in the gardens of palm trees and grapes , and all that has brought them into the midst of the two ? it is the same to the house of old , and the same is the same for you . thus does allah make clear to you the verses , so that he will make clear to you the verses .
and as for those whose scale will be light , they are the ones who will lose their souls because they are unjust .
let those fight in the way of allah who sell the life of this world for the hereafter . and whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or achieves victory , we shall give him a great reward .
and whoever commits a mistake or a sin and then blames it on an innocent person , he has burdened himself with slander and flagrant sin .
they said : `` we are endued with strength , and great might , but the decision is for you , so consider what you will command . ''
and whoever avenges himself after he has been wronged , there is no blame upon them .
our lord , you will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . god does not break his promise . ''
and i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
verily those who believe and do good works shall have a wage unfailing .
peace—a saying from the merciful lord .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
all those who are in the heavens and the earth entreat him . every day he is in a new state .
and of the cattle are some for carrying burdens , and some of them eat of what allah has provided for you , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; he is your open enemy .
on thrones woven ,
striking sparks of fire
andfiron , the lord of hosts ,
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will double it for you and forgive you . god is appreciative and forbearing .
and they say : `` let them be in doubt about what is in the heavens and the earth . '' the originator of the heavens and the earth , the originator of the heavens and the earth , and he will guide you to a while , and that you may be guided .
that you should worship none but god . i am to you from him a warner and a bringer of good tidings .
say : `` tell me , what is the matter with you , if it is from the truth that is revealed to you , and what is with the torah and the gospel ? it is the speech of a people who are the ignorant .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
and you commited what you did , and you are one of the ingrates . ''
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
and a few from the later generations .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses . ”
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they shall abide forever . that is the supreme triumph .
but the factions differed among themselves . woe to those who did wrong from the punishment of a painful day .
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus we reward the doers of good .
allah has begotten a son . indeed , they are liars .
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sight , and hearts . little thanks do you give !
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say , `` you have tarried in god 's book until the day of resurrection , and this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ''
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he established his throne on the throne . the merciful is the most knowing .
have you not considered how your lord dealt with ad ,
but as for him who is given his record in his left hand , he will say : 'would that i had not been given my record !
your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
do they not know that allah eases the sustenance for whomever he wills and restricts it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
and they went early in determination , able .
and they worship besides allah that which neither profits them nor harms them . and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
and we made a covenant with you , and the mount of you , saying : `` hold fast to you , '' , `` hold fast '' , and they said : `` peace ! '' say , `` and they turn away , and say : `` this is a right course . ''
is itthat we shall not die ,
and multiplied therein corruption .
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and him who enters my house a believer , and the believing men and believing women . and do not increase the wrongdoers except in ruin .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
there is not a thing but with us are its stores , and we send it down only in a known measure .
and when you are addressed by the command , it is in order to make it a right course , and if they have made it a way , the two paths has made to them , so that it may be that the two of the people will have the decree of god , and allah is the hearer , the knower .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the christians follow nothing . thus are the jews , the christians , even though they know not on the day of resurrection .
when we revealed to your mother what was inspired .
and if those who disbelieve had fought you , they would have turned their backs and would not find any protector or helper .
we know best what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , ‘ you are only following a man bewitched . ’
and when we recite it , follow its recitation .
and if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge with allah . he is all-hearing , all-knowing .
do they not know that allah eases the sustenance for whomever he wills and restricts it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
and keep your devotional obligations , pay the zakat , and bow down with those who bow down .
so call upon allah , making religion pure for him , even though the disbelievers dislike it .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return it . god takes count of everything .
o you who have faith ! have no more than the best or have a different religion from the earth , and do not desire to be pleased with them , and do not be pleased with them , and know that god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
those before them denied , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and persisted in the great sin .
and indeed he saw him in another descent
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
no laghwshall they hear therein , nor lies .
and they say : `` tales of the ancients , which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and evening . ''
we sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years .
and he has subjected for you the sun and the moon , constant in their courses , and he has subjected for you the night and the day .
on that day they will offer their submission to allah , and all that they have invented will forsake them .
and multiplied therein corruption .
and taught him the mode of expression .
o you who have believed , when you are bidden to be told , `` worship allah , and be a messenger to you . if you do so , he will give you the like of it , and when you are told , `` you will be brought back to god , and then you will be brought back to the best of what you have done . god is well aware of what you do . ''
for what sin she was killed ,
when he came to it , a voice was uttered : o musa !
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
we shall show them our signs in the horizons and in their own souls until it becomes clear to them that it is the truth . is it not sufficient that your lord is witness to all things ?
to you is the case , and of your hearts , and you in the midst of your own abode , and then turn away from the dwellings of the companions of the garden , and they will have what they want .
no ! if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock ,
and alif-lam-ra.knows their meanings ] , but each one of them is a single religion , and a single religion , between them , in six days . and if it is from your lord , the word is not due to him in the least . and in that case it is the right course .
why do you not bring the angels to us , if you are truthful ? ''
verily this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and gives glad tidings to the believers who work righteous works that theirs shall be a great reward .
so , let them be the religion of the life of the world , and in the life to come , exalt with it , and they will have no knowledge except allah ; and they will be the ones who will have the right to ruin , and they will have a painful punishment .
do not speak to those who invoke god ’ s call , lest they are in an ignorant manner , so that they may go about in the footsteps of allah . it is all the same for them that they will be brought back to their lord .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . god has made account of them while they forgot it . god is witness over everything .
and indeed , we are able to show you what we have promised them .
to you will be death , so that they follow the house of your people , and if they are guided , they say , `` this is from allah , if you should harm him . ''
do they not see that we have made a sanctuary secure , while men are despoiled all around them ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favour of allah ?
say , “ who is the lord of the seven heavens , and the lord of the thronesupreme ? ”
o you who believe ! obey allah and obey the messenger , and do not invalidate your deeds .
o you theenwrapped one !
but if they turn away , then we have sent you as a bearer of good news and a warner . indeed , we have sent you out of the truth . indeed , it is an evil way for man , and indeed , the right way is true .
those will be rewarded with the highest placebecause of their patience . therein they shall be met with greetings and peace .
honourablel scribes .
is he then who knows all that is in the presence of god , to be set up for him , and say , `` bring the water to allah ? '' say : `` then bring upon them the water that allah has given to them , for he is the best of those who have been bent on denying the truth and have been guided by the way of god . '' no one can be guided by the right way .
he said : art thou averse to my gods , o ibrahim ? if thou desistest not , i shall surely stone thee , and depart from me for a while .
when they are told , `` prostrate yourselves before the merciful , '' they say , `` and what is the most merciful ? will we prostrate ourselves before that which you command ? '' and it increases them in aversion .
but we wanted to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and inheritors ,
and fear allah , and do not disgrace me .
o you who patiently persevere in the matter of that which you say , glorify the praises of your lord , and proclaim the praise of your lord in the evening and the rising of the sun .
do you not know those who are bound to be loaded with hands or hands , or do you hear ? or , do you say to them , `` call you to account ? '' say , `` do not ask me to talk about your preaching , or do you hear . ''
he said : nay ! so go both of you with our signs ; we shall be with you , listening .
those who believe and are cautious
he is the omnipotent over his slaves , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him away and they do not neglect .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
pharaoh said , `` you have believed in me before i have given you permission . he is the chief of you who has taught you magic . you will soon know . ''
and say to the women of their women , “ be wary of allah , and be conscious of what they have attached to the truth , and do not put off their propertyto their own organs , or as a son. ” and they are to be of those who possess intellect , or the offspring of their own women , and the same one of them is the same to them , and they are in the same way .
while allah has created you and what you make ? ”
and in the morning it was as though it had been reaped .
that is the guidance from allah , and he guides whom he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have been annulled .
they are the ones who say : `` spend not upon those who are with allah 's messenger until they desert him . '' to allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth , but the hypocrites do not understand .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
or the feeding on a day of hunger .
and recall what time thy lord proclaimed unto them he would send against them the day of resurrection , for those who would afflict them with a dreadful doom . lo ! thy lord is swift in retribution , and most surely he is forgiving , merciful .
and he does not fear the consequence thereof .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be set in array ,
and he turned away from them and said , “ alas for joseph ! ” and his eyes turned white with grief , and he choked with suppressed agony .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
our lord , we have heard a caller calling to faith , “ believe in your lord . we have believed in your lord , and forgive us our sins , and make us die with the righteous . ”
but when they measure , or weigh for them , give less .
and they went early in determination , able .
did you think that we created you in vain , and that you would not be brought back to us ?
by the much-frequented house ,
and there are advantages for you in them , and that you may attain upon them a need in your breasts ; and upon them you are carried .
and be not like those who went forth from their homes and showing off to people , and to show off to people , and allah encompasses all that they do .
and they will say , “ submit , and when they are in your presence , some of them are in the night , a part of the night , which you are bound to be joined . therefore , those who are made to go back on the day of judgement . god is sufficient as a witness . ”
it is allah who has given to you in ease , and bounty , and you are not to be able to make the camel to be a jew nor a christian . god has the power to do all things .
he said , “ do you believe i have believed before my permission , and i will certainly make you go astray , and i will certainly find a great deviation in it ? ”
and let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is good for them , and we give them rein that they may grow in sin , so that they may be in sin .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
have they not contemplated the discourse , or has anythingcome to them that did not come to their forefathers ?
then he drew near , and hovered around .
he said , “ do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard upon me . ”
no laghwwill they hear therein , nor any sinful speech .
so your lord poured upon them a scourge of punishment .
this is indeed the supreme triumph .
thus do we explain our signs so that the way of the criminals may become distinct .
say : it is a message of importance ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
arriving thereby in the center collectively ,
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and to allah all matters are returned .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
he said , “ go down from it , both of you are enemies of one another . but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance will not go astray , nor will he go astray . ”
exalted in rank , lord of the throne . he sends down the spirit of his command upon whomever he wills of his servants , that he may warnof the day of meeting .
do they not ponder the quran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
say : `` we have heard the truth , confirming what is before him and what has been revealed to abraham and ishmael and isaac and jacob , and we were not to be obedient to him . ''
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and let every soul look to what it has sent down for the morrow . and fear allah ; surely allah is aware of what you do .
we led you astray . we were seducers . ”
the blind and the seeing are not alike ,
say : allah 's is the intercession altogether ; his is the dominion of the heavens and the earth . then unto him ye shall be brought back .
and wait ! we are waiting . ''
praise be to allah , who has given me ishmael and isaac in my old age . indeed my lord is the hearer of prayer .
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
such is allah , your lord , there is no god but he ; the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian over all things .
and in the morning it was as though it had been reaped .
and it was revealed to noah : `` none of your people will believe except those who have believed already . do not grieve over what they have done .
on the day when every soul will see its good deeds , and as an example for the good of it , it will wish for the evil of it , and allah will lead you into a great distance . god is kind towards the servants .
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection . and who is truer in statement than allah ?
he will say : 'would that i had sent forthformylife ! ''
o you who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and be grateful to allah if it is him that you worship .
allah alternates the night and the day . indeed in that is a lesson for those who have eyes .
do they not see how the thing allah has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before allah in all humility ?
the believers say : `` if a surah is sent down , a chapter is sent down , but when a clear chapter is sent down to them , you see those in whose hearts is sickness , you will see the hearts of those in whose hearts is sickness . ''
abiding therein forever ; and evil is the burden for them on the day of resurrection .
he said , `` do you know what you did to joseph and his brother in your ignorance ? ''
so stand thou straight as thou art commanded , and those who turnwith thee , and transgress not ; verily he is seer of what ye do .
the day when the trumpet will be sounded , you will come in droves ,
they will say : nay ! ye have no welcome for them ; it is ye who have made it to us an evil abode .
ha mim
or enjoins piety ?
and we know that they say , `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
or do they say , `` he has invented it ? '' say , `` then bring a surah like it and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ''
do you see any remnant of them ?
as for those who disbelieved in their religion , if any of them were to see a part of what is before them , or think of a part of the four months , or take a part of the four months , they may be the foremost in the presence of allah , that he may make it an easy way .
there is no blame on the prophet in that which allah has ordained for him . it has been allah 's way with those who passed away before ; and the command of allah is a decree determined .
and in the earth are signs for those who are certain .
as for him who has been sent down to his lord , his messenger has been sent down to him , and a guidance , and a mercy to those who do not believe in the truth , and do not be of the believers .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and when he turns away , he strives in the land , and destroy crops and cattle . and allah does not like corruption .
so that they may not worship allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you disclose .
so i swear by the lord of the easts and the wests that we are able
every one has a direction to which he turns . so strive towards each other in good works . wherever you may be , allah will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
and allah encompasses them from behind .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
a party of the people of the book would fain lead you astray , but they lead none astray , but they do not realize it .
this is a declaration for mankind , a guidance and an admonition to those who guard .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself , then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find god forgiving and merciful .
if your case is an apostle , before them , the case is an enemy to them , as a confirmation of what is before them , it is an agreement for them . it is an agreement for them , except for one who does evil , or does it . indeed , allah is seeing of what you do .
those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of this world , while they think that they are doing good deeds .
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
their prayer at the houseis nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
a provision for you and your cattle .
the believers are only those who believe in allah and his messenger and then have not doubted , and struggle with their possessions and their lives in the way of allah . these are the truthful ones .
“ the tradition of those who are bent on denying the truth and the day of judgement , and the disbelievers are the ones who are conscious of god , and the right path is to him , so what is the matter with the right way , so what is the matter with the right way , so that god is the best to make a great reward ? ” and it is a great reward for the disbelievers .
it is he who has made the earth a wide expanse for you , and for you the abode of the earth . he has made the sky to swallow you , so do not set up with god any way .
the day when their plotting will avail them not at all , nor will they be helped .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
accursed be the conjecturers
none besides allah can unveil it .
so do not assert similarities to allah . god knows and you do not know .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
tell my servants who have believed to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before a day comes in which there will be neither traffick nor befriending .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may become righteous .
he said , “ my lord , as you have blessed me , i will never be a supporter of the guilty . ”
but he tarried not long , and said , “ i have learnt what you did not comprehend . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
he is naught but a man who has forged a lie against allah , and we are not going to believe in him .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will resurrect them , then to him they will be returned .
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if only they knew !
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they swore to pluck the fruits of the garden ,
it gives its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . god presents parables for mankind , so that they may take heed .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came unto you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts ye saw not ; and allah was ever seer of what ye do .
o you who have faith ! have no more than the best or have a different religion from the earth , and do not desire to be pleased with them , and do not be pleased with them , and know that god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
it is he who is god in the heavens and the earth . he is the all-wise , the all-knowing .
it is he who has sent among the unlettered a messenger from among themselves , who recites his signs to them and purifies them and teaches them the book and wisdom , although they were in manifest error .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied about allah with their faces blackened . is not the destination of the arrogant ?
and by the night as it recedes .
and you commited what you did , and you are one of the ingrates . ''
and they worship beside allah that which hath not sent down unto them any warrant , and that whereof they have no knowledge , and for the wrong-doers there shall be no helper .
because he possesses wealth and children .
and we made the ones a covenant with those who say , `` we made a covenant , but they have forgotten much of what they had done . so we have forgotten them until the day of judgment , and god will inform them of what they have done .
nearer to thee and nearer
this is a chapter which we have sent down and madeobligatory and revealed in it clear signs that you may take heed .
no ! if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock ,
we relate to you their story with truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
to send down upon them stones of clay ,
he said : `` allah 's wrath is upon you . will you then dispute with those who have been told to follow the company of your fathers , and your fathers ? so wait , for they are waiting . ''
and they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us . he will say : verily ye are to stay .
except his wife . we have decreed that she will be of those who remain behind . ''
and in your own selves . do you not see ?
but he turned away with his warlords , and said , “ a magician or a madman . ”
we sent a tumultuous wind against them on a day of unremitting misfortune ,
he said : my lord ! lo ! i have called my people night and day
and then there comes to them that which they were promised .
he said , “ my lord , open my breast for me . ”
we know best what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , ‘ you are only following a man bewitched . ’
or who is it that will call upon him , when he calls upon his call , and when he calls upon him in the land , and in the land , will they take heed ?
storming tempestuously
a revelation from allah and his messenger to the people of the world , and the day of congregation , to the people of the world , and on the day of resurrection , allah and his messenger will be a severe punishment . but if you turn away , then surely , you will not be able to believe , and you will have a severe punishment .
say , ‘ allah has spoken the truth ; so follow the religion of abraham , the upright , and he was not of the polytheists . ’
who created you , fashioned you and proportioned you ?
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
have they not seen the earth , that they might see the end of their former generations , and how was the end of those who have gone before them ? and allah is ever free of all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is all-powerful and all-powerful .
it has been revealed to you and to those before you : `` if you associate others with allah in his divinity , your works will be wasted and you will certainly be among the losers . ''
but whoever turns away from my remembrance , he will have a straitened life , and we will raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
and the earth , we have spread out the earth , and cast therein firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it all kinds of things .
whoever desires this fleeting life , we expedite for him whatever we desire in the life of this world , and then we appoint for him hell wherein he will enter , condemned and rejected .
and it is allah who sends the winds and they raise the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land , and we revive the earth after its death . even so will be the resurrection .
and indeed he is tenacious in the love of wealth .
believers , some of your wives and children are enemies to you . so beware of them . but if you pardon and overlook and forgive , then indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
let not him who believes not in it and follows his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
you can not frustrate him in the earth , and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
when the earth is shaken with ashaking ,
how many a creature there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . he is the hearer , the knower .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near .
o ye who believe ! establish the steps of the sun for the time when they are bidden to be sent down after it , and when it is in the midst of it , then after it there is a decree for you , after it is decreed for you , and after it is decreed for you ; and allah is ever knowing , wise .
say , ‘ o people ! indeed i am a messenger for you , and to you , to whom the heavens and the earth belong to god ; and he is the one who gives the heavens and the earth , so that you will follow him , so that you may follow him , for you will be guided .
and when the believers saw the confederates , they said : this is what allah and his apostle had promised us , and allah and his messenger spoke the truth . and it only increased them in faith and submission .
and he thought that he would never return .
and he swore to them , ‘ indeed i am a well-wisher for them . ’
and they will say : we believe in it . but how can they reachfrom afar off ,
the building which they have built will never cease to be askepticism in their hearts until their hearts are cut into pieces . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and hearkens to allah and his messenger , and his noble messenger , and the teaching of them , and if they should go forth , they would have taken it back , and indeed , allah is with those who are patient , and the steadfast .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , nor sell it for a small price ; and fear me .
but satan caused them to slip from it , and caused them to slip in the end of them . we said , `` go down , enemies to one another , and you shall have your abode for a while , and you will have your abode . ''
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardonfaults , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
have they taken awliya besides him ? but allah is the protector , and he gives life to the dead , and he is able to do all things .
it is a written record .
and as for those who have knowledge of knowledge , know that it is the truth from the lord of the truth , and he is the subtle , the merciful .
and composed you in whatever form he pleased ?
“ eat of the good things we have provided you , and do not exceed the limits , lest my wrath descend upon you , and he upon whom my wrath descends has fallen . ”
it is we who bring the dead to life and write down what they have forwarded and what they have left behind . we have recorded everything in a clear book .
and marry the unmarried among you and those who are righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
and madesmooth for him .
taste ! you are indeed the mighty , the noble !
do they not see that we have created for them of our handiwork , cattle , which they are their own hands ?
worship allah , and do not worship any partners in his divinity , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the relatives , and the wayfarer . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
over my servants you have no authority , except the erring ones who follow you .
they will swear to you in the name of allah , that you may leave them , so that you may leave them . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for what they used to do .
shall man have whatever he wishes ?
he knoweth the fraudulence of the eyes , and that which the breasts conceal .
is it the way to those who believe , in their hearts , guidance , and an admonition to allah , the day of resurrection , as a matter with it ? but the hearts of those who are fraudulent in is a barrier , and most of them are disobedient .
and there is no one comparable to him . ''
and indeed in the cattle is a lesson for you . we give you to drink of what is in their bellies , and there are many benefits for you in them , and you eat of them .
and he had recited it to them , they would not have believed in it .
a voice said to them , `` you will see the result of what is before them . '' he said , `` o my people , you have been made to do evil , and be wary of allah , and do not be among the preachers . ''
to bring every wellversed sorcerer to you . ''
and do not consume each other 's wealth in vanity , nor proffer it to the judges in order that ye may devour a portion of the goods of men while ye know .
these are verses of the wise book ,
he said , “ get out of here , despised and rejected . whoever among them follows you , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
then , on the contrary , some of them are like a piece of stones , and of the sky is split asunder , and some of them fear allah , and allah is not unaware of what you do .
a fitting recompense .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of allah , so allah seized them for their sins . god is all-powerful and stern in retribution .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
and indeed , for those who are unjust will be like the portion of their predecessors , so let them not impatiently urge me .
when the wife of 'imran said , `` my lord , i have vowed to you what is in my womb , to be devoted to your service . accept it from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing . ''
how will it be when we gather them together on a day whereon there shall be no doubt , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged ?
and when those who disbelieved plotted against you to take you captive , or to expel you , or to kill you , or to kill them ; and allah is the best of planners .
indeed , we have sent down to you the book with the truth for mankind . so whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . you are not a manager over them .
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
and paradise will be brought near to the pious , not far away .
and others are made to await allah ’ s command , whether he will punish them or accept their repentance . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
so i swear by the slinkers ,
and assuredly we have brought unto them a book which we expounded with knowledge , and a guidance and a mercy unto a people who believe .
it is all the same to him whether you speak secretly , or one who speaks aloud , and he who hides himself in the night , and he who sallies by day .
and thus we have sent it down as clear signs , and indeed allah guides whom he wills .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
then , when he wills , he will resurrect him .
and those who answer their lord , and establish prayer , and their affairs are by consultation , who spend of what we have given them ,
and on that day we shall leave them surging on one another , and the trumpet will be blown , and we shall gather them all together .
thamud and ad denied the consequential calamity .
as for those who were before you , they were destroyed by your wealth and your lives . then by the means of what they have been related to you , are the same , as if they were to be mentioned . they are the ones who are in the same way . they are the ones who are in the same way .
the end of both of them is that they will be in the fire , where they will abide for ever . such is the recompense of the wrongdoers .
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , `` peace ! '' and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
and those who have not taken a covenant from among them , a group of them has taken a party of them who has not made a covenant with them , but it is a great punishment for you to be a great punishment .
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise ,
so that , when the apostles are tried , in fact , a falsehood , that is a falsehood , that is the most disputatious of people . and whoever will be a liar , we shall surely be a liar .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
believers , do not believe in god and his messenger , and his messenger , and his messenger , and his messenger . whoever believes in god and the angels , and the injeel ] and the injeel ] and the injeel ] , in the hereafter , they will be the righteous .
we gave moses the guidance , and we caused the children of israel to inherit the book
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the irresistible ?
they said : o our people ! we have heard a book sent down after musa , confirming what came before it , guiding to the truth and to a straight path .
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed ; but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
when the caravan departed , their father said : `` i smell the scent of joseph , if you do not think '' .
that was a nation that has passed away ; theirs is what they earned and you have earned what you earned ; and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
so be wary of allah and obey me . ”
and that allah may testthe believersand destroy the disbelievers .
and remember the tongue of thy lord , and he said : the messenger is with allah , and i am not going to give you the truth , and they say : verily we are not of the wrong-doers .
say : if there were other gods with him , as they say , then they would have sought a way to the lord of the throne .
these are the heirs
and when the anger of moses was appeased , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
indeed we sent noah to his people , saying , `` warn your people before there comes to them a painful punishment . ''
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes rolledand the hearts leapt to the throats , and you were imagining matters about allah .
and allah created every creature from water , and some of them walk on the belly of it ; and some of them walk on four legs , and some walk on four . god creates whatever he wills . allah has power over all things .
so call not on another god with allah , lest thou shouldst be of those tormented .
and when it is said to them , “ do not make mischief in the land , they say , ‘ we are only reformers . ’
so that they may not worship allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you disclose .
say , `` it is he who created you , and made for you hearing , eyesight , and hearts . little thanks you give ! ''
and verily i desire that thou shalt be laden with my sin and thine sin , and become of the fellows of the fire : that is the meed of the wrong-doers .
only the face of your lord , full of majesty and splendor .
and the sky will be split open—for it will be frail on that day—
and the stupor of death will bring the truth : “ this is what you were trying to avoid . ”
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , and it will begin to quake ?
and my breast will be straitened , and my tongue will not be loosed .
and when we bless man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him , he is despairing .
why did they not bring four witnesses against it ? but when they did not bring the witnesses , then they are liars .
and do not be compliant to the religion , except that you follow the religion of your faith . say , ‘ it is indeed the guidance from allah , and that he is the owner of bounty , and that he is the best of providers . ’
to your lord alone is the recourse .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and they will be secure from terror on the day .
they will have coverings of fire above them and beneath them coverings . that is how allah frightens his servants . so fear me !
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them do not know .
we have sent down the qur'an to you in portions .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger will abide in hell for ever ? that is the supreme disgrace .
who does greater wrong than he who is reminded of his revelations , and denies the signs of his lord ? and when he has made a breach with them , we will pay them in full their remembrance , and if you are to guide them , they will not be guided .
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
so , the right path came to them , to recite to them a way , to whom the messenger came , and to him is a voice , so that you should not be blamed , so that you may be blamed , and that which god has warned you is to be fulfilled .
he will say : by allah , thou hadst wellnigh causedest me to perish .
or as to one who has been brought into the presence of the wicked one on it , he said , “ what is the matter with you that god will bring the dead to life ? ” he said , “ i have been the same to be the people who have been given the lie to the truth , and when we have spoken the truth , then we are rightly-guided . ”
that is the extent of their knowledge . your lord knows best who goes astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
as for those who believe and do good works , they shall have the gardens of paradise ,
on that day you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
eat and drink , and be comforted . if you see any human being say , `` i have vowed a fast to the beneficent god , and i will not speak to any human being today . ''
they ask you that they should take you away . say , `` whatever you spend is good for you , and orphans and the needy traveler what is good for you . but it is god who is the best knower of it . ''
who creates and regulates .
allah deprives interest of all blessing and develops charity ; and allah does not like the ungrateful .
and when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you if you fear the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may attack you . the unbelievers are indeed your sworn enemy .
and when it was said , “ the promise of allah is true , and there is no doubt about the hour . you said , ‘ we do not know what the hour is , we are only convinced . we are not convinced . ’
and that the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter may incline to it and that they may be pleased with it , and that they may be pleased with it .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against allah .
is he who will shield himself with his face on the day of resurrection , and the unjust will be told , `` taste what you used to earn ? ''
but i am only a proclamation from allah and his messages . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , for him is the fire of hell .
in the city there were nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
and if only he had been among the two sayings , it was only a man of his own people , saying , `` indeed , we are a witness to our own people , and if you are truthful , we will surely be among the truthful . '' but if you are truthful , we will be among the truthful .
and when he learns something of our revelations , he mocks them . for such there is a humiliating punishment .
what have theyif they believe in allah and the last day and spendof that which allah hath bestowed upon them ? and allah is ever knower of them .
no one disputes the revelations of allah except those who disbelieve , so let not their strutting about in the land deceive you .
and when the qur'an is recited to them , they fall not prostrate ,
for they were a small band ,
and the cause of peace is to him , and a mercy from the beginning of peace , until the day of judgment , and the remembrance of allah is the right course .
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that retaining ears may retain it .
then we would have made you taste a doublein this life and doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
nay , but that which they concealed before is manifest to them . and if they were sent back , they would surely return to that which they were forbidden . lo ! they are liars .
these are onguidance from their lord , and these are the successful .
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and do not fear anyone except allah ; and allah suffices as a reckoner .
and casts forth what is in it and voids itself ,
`` this is the way of allah , '' say : `` he will call to one whom he will , if only he wills . '' if he is to be a child , he can give you his brother , so that he may make the two of the two a healthy , and the two of the two . god has the knowledge of all things . god has knowledge of everything . god is cognizant of everything .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
they make it a favour to you . say : `` do not make a favour to me . '' say : `` do not make me a favour for me . nay , but allah has conferred a favour upon you , if you are truthful .
that was our argument which we gave to abraham against his people . we raise whom we will . indeed your lord is all-wise , all-knowing .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; but when the promise of my lord comes , he will make it level , and the promise of my lord is true .
there is no one in the heavens and the earth but he comes to the all-beneficent as a servant .
we and our fathers were promised this before . this is nothing but stories of the ancients . ''
and when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will call for destruction .
o prophet ! say to the captives who are in your hands , “ if allah finds any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful . ”
verily there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he has given them . god is exalted above what they associate .
and lot , when he said to his people : `` you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you before you .
and the trumpet shall be blown , and whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth will swoon away save him whom allah willeth ; then the trumpet shall be blown , and lo ! they will be standing .
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they prostrated , except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ”
so give to the kinsman his due , and to the needy , and the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek allah 's countenance , and they are the successful .
and we showed them a sign , but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with punishment so that they might return .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path .
so it is ; and whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has been given , then is again to be wronged , and indeed allah will help him . surely allah is pardoning , forgiving .
so be patient , and be patient , and do not be a skeptic . when the day of judgment is just , just as a confirmation of the matter , it is just a confirmation of the truth .
exalted is he and high above what they say .
on that day people will proceed in scattered groups to be shown their deeds .
and to solomon the stormy wind , blowing at his command to the land which we had blessed . we have knowledge of all things .
so , when they are bent on denying the truth , let them turn away from it , so that they may be greeted with a small , so that they may go into a small way , so that they may be a confirmer of what is in the way of allah , and they will not be held in trial for it .
verily those who believe and do good works shall have a wage unfailing .
he who has made the earth for you as a cradle and threaded roads for you in it , and sent down water from the sky , and we have brought forth from it various kinds of vegetation .
fear him who created you and the generations of the ancients . ''
indeed in this is a message for people who worship .
he said , “ do you give me good news when old age has overtaken me ? what do you give me good news ? ”
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
yet they have attributed to allah the jinns , while he created them , and they impute to him sons and daughters without knowledge . glory be to him , and exalted is he above what they describe .
we have revealed to you as we revealed to noah , and the prophets after him , and we revealed to abraham and isaac and jacob , and we gave to david the psalms , and we gave to david psalms , and we gave to david psalms .
he said , ‘ o my son ! do not relate your dream to your brothers , lest they plot against you ; indeed satan is man ’ s open enemy .
and gave a little , then stopped ?
or we show you that which we have promised them ; surely we have power over them .
and theright on the high-road .
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
some faces on that day will be bright ,
what , do you come to men , and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? '' but the answer of his people was only that they said : `` bring the punishment of allah , if you are truthful . ''
do not weaken or grieve , you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
and a sign for them is the night . we strip it from the day , and lo ! they are in darkness .
and those whom they call upon besides allah are not created , and they are themselves created .
we tested the people of pharaoh before them , a noble messenger came to them ,
so ask them , `` are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? '' we created them from sticky clay .
it is the same for them whether you ask forgiveness for them or do not ask forgiveness for them . god will not forgive them . god does not guide the sinful people .
they will abide therein for ages .
guard yourselves against the fire prepared for the unbelievers .
they plotted against him , but we made them the undermost .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe for the believers , when she said : my lord ! build for me a house in paradise , and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from the wrong folk .
and you will see those who have done evil deeds , and they will not be able to believe in it , and those who have faith and do righteous deeds , for their lord is a great reward .
and said : `` this is nothing but magic from old ,
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and seek to make it crooked ; they are in far error .
the day when he will gather them , on the day of resurrection , the day of resurrection , and whoever believes in allah and his messenger—we will be admitted to the garden wherein they will live forever . that is the supreme triumph . this is the supreme triumph .
and the judgement will surely be fulfilled .
and do not give the feeble-minded your property which allah has made a means of support for you , but feed it and clothe them , and speak to them words of kindness and justice .
the people of the city said : `` o my people ! obey allah , you have no god other than him . he has no other god in the earth ; so he has turned to us in the land . indeed , my lord is quick to return . ''
alif . lam . mim .
he who fearswill be reminded ,
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , just as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
sailing before our eyes , a reward for him who was rejected .
tell them : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ''
as a blessing from us . thus we reward the thankful .
`` o my people ! do whatever you wish , and i will do . you will soon come to know who will suffer a humiliating punishment , and who is a liar . wait , i will be waiting with you . ''
pharaoh pursued them with his troops , but they were overwhelmed by the sea .
he will call for destruction
and mount sinai ,
and that upon him is the second creation ,
for the beggar and the outcast ;
those who do not believe in the signs of allah do not believe in the signs of allah . these are the liars .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
and among his wealth is the wealth of the good , turn away from them ; he will give to them the good pleasure of their houses , and be constant . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
this is the fire which you used to deny !
then it will be said to those who were unjust : taste the torment of eternity . are you recompensed for what you used to earn ?
so indeed , you and what you worship
so fear allah and obey me .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? these will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , `` these are the ones who lied against their lord . '' the curse of god will be upon the wrongdoers .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wills , and restricts , and they rejoice in the life of the world , while the life of this world is but a passing enjoyment .
and the knowledge of the hour is only to allah . to him belongs the treasures of the book , and to the seed of a building which is in the presence of allah , and he will say , “ our lord , we have given you the right way , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! we are of the truthful . ’
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
do they have other gods besides allah ? tell them , `` your proof is true . '' say , `` your evidence is to come to me , and to those who are true to the truth , but most of the people are averse to it . ''
have you seen him who turned away ,
they ask you about the hour , when it is said to them : 'the knowledge of my own knowledge is only with my lord . '' but when the hour is come , they will not be able to challenge it but the hour is coming . say , “ the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , but most of them are not aware . ”
they said , “ it is the same to us whether you exhort us or not . ”
and you eat the inheritance rapaciously ,
yes indeed ; his lord was ever watching him .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
and on the day when we shall set the mountains in motion , and you will see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them all together .
he said , “ so do you worship besides allah that which can not benefit you , nor harm you ? ”
assuredly allah knoweth what they conceal and what they declare . lo ! he loveth not the proud .
and the knowledge of the hour is only to allah . to him belongs the treasures of the book , and to the seed of a building which is in the presence of allah , and he will say , “ our lord , we have given you the right way , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! we are of the truthful . ’
what is the matter with you that you do not attribute to allahgrandeur
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
we have revealed to you as we revealed to noah , and the prophets after him , and we revealed to abraham and isaac and jacob , and we gave to david the psalms , and we gave to david psalms , and we gave to david psalms .
say : he is allah , one ,
be moderate in your bearing and lower your voice . indeed , the most repulsive voice is the donkey 's . ''
those are they whom allah has cursed , and he whom allah curses , you will find no helper for him .
and your people reject it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not responsible for you . ''
who has made us live in the abode of his grace , wherein there will not touch us any toil nor fatigue .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself , then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find god forgiving and merciful .
will you not fight a people who broke their oaths and conspired to expel the messenger ? they were the first to attack you . do you fear them ? god has more better than you , if you are believers .
say , ‘ it has been revealed by him who knows the secret of the heavens and the earth . indeed , he is all-forgiving , all-merciful . ’
and they assign daughters to allah , glory be to him ! - and they desire what they desire .
and round them shall go boys of theirs as if they were hidden pearls .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
it is a way to adhere to the way , to recite it to you . so turn your back towards him , and to him you are to be brought back . as for those who have been given the book , they are not aware of what they do .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they are holding fast ?
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say , `` you have tarried in god 's book until the day of resurrection , and this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ''
so we said : `` o adam ! this is an enemy to you and your wife . let him not expel you from paradise , so that you will be unhappy .
so , we had full knowledge of what he had .
and remember the favor of allah upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah ; surely allah knows the thoughts within the breasts .
eat and drink , and be comforted . if you see any human being say , `` i have vowed a fast to the beneficent god , and i will not speak to any human being today . ''
and that he destroyed the first'aad
where they will hear no idle talk ,
the adulteress and the adulterer , flog them with a hundred lashes . let no pity to them be you in the law of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day , and let a group of believers witness the punishment .
kind words and forgiveness is better than charity followed by injury . god is self-sufficient and forbearing .
he said : lo ! ye are folk unknown .
and do not call on another god besides allah . there is no god but he . all things are perishable except he . his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
and we strengthened their hearts when they stood up and said , `` our lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth . we will not call upon any deity besides him , for then we would have spoken a lie . ''
indeed i fear for you the punishment of an awesome day . ”
indeed , they will be alienated from their lord on that day .
on that day none will punish as he punishes .
prosperous is he who purifies himself ,
have you not seen how your lord lengthens out the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it stationary ; then we made the sun a pointer to it .
arriving thereby in the center collectively ,
among people there are some who wrangle about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil ,
and verily we are a vigilant multitude .
when jesus came with clear signs , he said , `` i have come to you with wisdom , and to make clear to you some of the matters about which you differ . so fear allah and obey me .
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin will be recompensed for what they used to do .
then as for him who is given his record in his right hand , he will say : 'here , take and read my record !
and ask forgiveness of your lord . then we will return to him in order that he may give a time to the extent of a time . i fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day .
and the morning when it brightens ,
when the wild beasts are herded together ;
he said , ‘ what is your business , o samiri ? ’
nor are the living and the dead alike . god makes to hear whomever he wishes , but you can not make those who are in the graves hear .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
said : `` o son of my mother ! do not seize me by my beard nor by my head . i feared that you would say , `` you have caused a division among the children of israel and did not give heed to my word '' .
he said : nay ! it was done by this one of them . ask them , if they can speak .
say , `` nothing shall befall us except what god has ordained for us . he is our protector . in god let the believers put their trust . ''
although before it was sent down upon them , they were in despair .
is he who made the earth a habitat for it , and made it firm mountains and set a barrier between the two seas ? is there a god with allah ? in fact , most of them do not know .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
it will be but one blast , and they will all be brought together before us .
and they say : our hearts are under veils from that which thou callest us to , and there is a deafness in our ears , and between us and thee is a veil . so act ; we are acting .
the beneficent , the merciful
and if it is that we should make it grow on the earth , and see that they would have become the like of it , that day , will be split up in fear , and to be mindful of allah 's command . and we are the senders ,
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
to god belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is just as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . god has power over all things .
my lord , grant me wisdom , and join me with the righteous .
and when it is said to them , “ follow what god has sent down , ” they say , “ nay , we will follow what we found our parents ” ; what ! even if satan were calling them to the torment of the blaze ?
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you perverted ?
we said : fear not ! verily , you are the uppermost .
the angels and the spirit ascend to him in a day whose span is fifty thousand years .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
then after that allah will turn to whom he will , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they used to ridicule .
woe to those who write the book with their hands , then say , `` this is from god . '' so woe to them for a while , and woe to them for what their hands have written , and woe to them for their earnings .
and from one of them is a provision , and he gives them a provision ; and whoever puts his trust in allah , he is indeed an adequate guardian .
or have they a share in the kingdom ? then they would not give the people a speck .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and whatever emerges from it , and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , though the polytheists may dislike it .
do you not see how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
this day you will not be able to benefit or harm one another . we will say to the evildoers , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
say : shall i worship other than allah , who is the lord of all things , and he is the owner of all things , and there is no blame upon you in any way , and then to you is of those who are certain ?
and the messenger of allah said to them : `` this is allah 's she-camel , let her drink . ''
o you who believe ! if you obey some of the people of the book , they will turn you back to disbelief after you have believed .
and you will see every nation kneeling down . every nation will be summoned to its book , `` today you will be recompensed for what you used to do .
and indeed , the course of moses , and the people of moses , made them a pattern for them , and to give them wealth and right , a right way , a right way , and that allah does not like the best .
o you who have faith ! be not in the presence of the one who is given the permission of his own permission , but do not be guided by the permission of his permission , and do not be a guardian for you , for it is an insurmountable enemy for him .
it is he who causes you to die by night , and he knows what you have done on the day of resurrection . then he will bring you to death for an appointed time . and he will inform you of what you used to do .
and you all that you were to take up with the religion of allah , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and the favors of allah were to you , and he was one of those who were to be guided , so that allah may make clear to you the verses of the fire .
we did not send before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked in the markets . we have appointed some of you a trial for others . will you exercise patience ? your lord is always watchful .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
as for those who reject our signs , we will draw them imperceptibly , whence they do not know .
those are they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
do not walk proudly on the earth . you will never tear the earth , nor attain the height of mountains in height .
and say , `` my lord , enable me to disembark with a blessed landing . ''
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you till a stated term . when it comes to the appointed time , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
and we bestowed upon him isaac and jacob , and allwe made righteous .
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven consecutive years , so that you may leave its harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
except what allah wills ; surely he knows what is manifest and what is hidden .
by no means ! verily it is a flaming fire
workingand exhausted .
that is the result of their own deeds . it is they who are the same to them , and it is the same to them that they believe , and those who have faith and say , `` allah will bring it to whom he will . '' but those who have faith and say , “ allah will have made a right way . ”
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' . each onerejected the messengers , and my threat came true .
the lord said to him , `` the lord of the right hand will be set before him , '' and mention fast to him , when he has bestowed his command to him , and he says , ‘ o mary ! what is the matter with you ? ’ he answered , ‘ what is the matter with you ? ’ he said , ‘ what is the matter with you , that god will give you the measure ? ’
it is he who breaks the dawn , and he has made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning ; this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
we have given them their fathers and their fathers until long long for long time . do they not see that we gradually reduce the land at its edges ? will they then be victorious ?
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be of those who prostrate .
has he chosen daughters above sons ?
but if you wish to replace one another with another and you have given one of them a heap of gold , do not take it away from it . would you take it by slander and open sin ?
quittance is it from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had made a treaty .
they have calledlies . they will soon come to know what they mocked at .
whoever thinks that allah will not help him in this world and in the hereafter , let him stretch a rope to the ceiling , and let him hang himself , and see what enrages him .
when he wills a thing , he will say to it 'be , ' and it is .
except him who created me , and he will guide me . ”
we said , `` o fire , be coolness and safety for abraham . ''
surely in that are signs for those who discern .
there is a sign in this , a sign for abraham , a one who has set up a word to his own tongue , and he is a one who does not accept faith in him , and whoever believes in him , god is indeed independent of him .
o my people ! give full measure and weight in justice , and do not defraud people in the land , and do not spread corruption in the land .
'nay , but my signs came unto thee , but thou didst deny them , and wast scornful and wast among the disbelievers .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but man is the most disputatious of things .
they will say , `` to allah . '' say , `` will you not then remember ? ''
o you who believe ! do not take the unbelievers as allies instead of the believers . do you wish to give allah a clear authority against yourselves ?
indeed , your lord is the best knower of the two periods of the night and the day , or a part of the night , and the day for which you are wont to do ; and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
so when he had turned away from them and what they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob and made each of them a prophet .
then their return is to hell .
verily he who hath ordained the qur'an unto thee will bring thee back to the place of return . say thou : my lord knoweth best who bringeth guidance and who is in manifest error .
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , they would not have been able to make it any thing . and allah is the wise , the wise .
save him who hath done wrong and then substitutes good after evil . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
o ye who believe ! persevere and persevere , and be ready , and fear allah that haply ye may thrive .
this is the book whereof there is no doubt , a guidance for the godfearing .
we made a covenant with the children of israel and sent messengers to them . whenever a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire , some they accused of lying , and some they slew .
and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger and transgresses his limits , he will admit him into a fire , to abide therein , and he will have a humiliating punishment .
when you said to the believers : `` is it not enough for you that your lord should reinforce you with three thousand angels sent down ?
those who have believed and emigrated and struggled in the way of allah , and those who are in the cause of god , and those who have spent their wealth and lives , they will have a treaty . but if they have been truthful , they will have no power to help you . god is aware of what you do .
they will be the inhabitants of paradise , abiding therein forever .
have they not seen the earth , that they might see the end of their former generations , and how was the end of those who have gone before them ? and allah is ever free of all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is all-powerful and all-powerful .
is it that whenever they make a covenant , some of them cast it aside ? nay , but most of them do not believe .
and when ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
he said , “ they are close upon my footsteps , and i hastened to you , my lord , that you may be pleased . ”
when the disciples said : o jesus son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? he said : fear allah , if you are believers .
and if they do not respond to you , then know that it is sent down with the knowledge of allah , and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
and we sent to thamood their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but behold , they became two parties quarrelling .
gehennais before him and he will be given to drink of oozing pus ,
nor do you worship what i worship .
and we have not sent you but as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
and then severed his life-vein .
they see it to be far off ,
lord of the east and the west ! there is no god but he , therefore take him for your trustee .
a goblet from a spring will be passed round to them ,
indeed , they will soon come to know .
and those who are patient , the pleasure of their lord , are good and good , and spendout of what we have provided them , and are upright in speech .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , although you were unaware of this quran .
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
and by the earth which splitteth ,
indeed in the heavens and the earth are signs for those who believe .
so , when the messenger came to the side of the two , he said : `` it is the same to a spring . whoever is guided , it is only a right course , and whoever is in the presence of his own right hand , it is the same for him . '' but as for those who have faith in allah , he is indeed a few of those who have faith in god .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and dread the dire reckoning .
enjoin prayer on your people , and be constant in it . we do not ask you for any sustenance , but we provide for you . the outcome is for the cautious .
they will say , `` yes , indeed , a warner came to us , but we denied , and said , 'god has not sent down anything . you are not but in great error '
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and there is a painful punishment for them because they lied .
he invokes instead of allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is indeed straying far away .
your lord said to the angels : `` i am about to be of the angels in the earth . '' they said , `` is there any that will be in the way of allah ? '' , `` do you know that you do not know what you do not know ? '' god said , `` i know what you do not know . ''
rather , we are deprived . ”
peace—a saying from the merciful lord .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth , and the balance . and what will make you know what the hour is near ?
he said , “ do you believe i have believed before my permission , and i will certainly make you go astray , and i will certainly find a great deviation in it ? ”
they said , 'put him and his brother offand send heralds to the cities
and ornaments of gold . yet all this is nothing but the wares of the life of the world , and the hereafter with your lord , for the righteous .
what are they asking one another ?
but those who fear their lord , for them shall be gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; a gift that is with allah , and that which is with allah is better for the righteous .
it is a tree that grows in the nethermost part of hell .
he said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if ye believe .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . these are the fuel of the fire .
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
they said : o shu'aib ! we do not understand much of what you say , and we see you weak among us ; and were it not for your company we would surely have stoned you , and you are not to be able to defend us .
surely in this is a sign for the believers .
they said , `` you know that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ''
indeed satan is an enemy to you , so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his gang to be among the inmates of the blaze .
and let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed therein , and whoever does not judge by what allah has sent down , those are the transgressors .
and these similitudes we strike for mankind , but none shall understand them save those who understand .
and the mother of maryam , to the throne , to be called to the throne , they have said , `` my father , my father is the same , '' and he said , “ my father , my father is the same , and indeed my lord is the most honourable , the most honourable , the most wise . ” indeed , my lord is the knower of what he wants .
say , “ o my servants who have believed , fear your lord ; for those who do good in this world will be good in this world ; for the earth is spacious . indeed , those who persevere will be paid in full for their reward . ”
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
believers , seek help in patience and prayer . god is with those who are patient .
so when they returned to their father , they said , “ o our father ! the measure is denied us , therefore send with us our brother , and we will take care of him . ”
so give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
have you seen him who denies the judgment ?
these are two disputants who have disputed concerning their lord . as for those who disbelieve , garments of fire will be cut out for them , boiling water will be poured over their heads ,
but we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we shall requite them the worst of what they used to do .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make deficient the balance .
those who are godwary are not accountable for them in aught , but that they mayfear allah .
yet before this was the book of moses , a guide and a mercy , and this is a book in the arabic language , to warn those who do evil , and to warn those who do good .
say : i seek refuge in the lord of mankind ,
they will call for every kind of fruit in security .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and allah encompasses all things .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
and we raised the mount above them , for their covenant , and we said to them , “ enter the gate , prostrating ” ; and we said to them , “ do not cross the limits of the sabbath , ” and we took from them a firm covenant .
and he had no party to help him against allah , nor was he able to defend himself .
no nation can outstrip its term , nor can they delay it .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is an open contender !
and those who are judaised , except those who are judaised , those who are hard in the way of allah , are not alike to those who are in the way of allah ; and allah is the most gracious , the most honourable .
his home is the abyss .
he said , “ yes , and you will be of those brought near . ”
or do they envy people for what god has given them of his bounty ? but we have given the house of abraham the book and wisdom , and we have given them a great kingdom .
and by the witness and the witnessed ,
o you who believe ! let not your wealth or your children distract you from the remembrance of allah , and whoever does that—these are the losers .
he said , `` throw ! '' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck them with a mighty spell .
and even if we have put the right course for them , and whether some of them should have a share of you , or have some share of it ; and whoever is fortunate are better in it .
he said : `` o my people ! if you had to show me the way i would have been guided by my lord , i would have received the way from my lord , and i am free from it , but i do not have any power to do right .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect or desires to be grateful .
o you who believe ! fight the unbelievers who are near you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with the righteous .
it is he who shows you the lightning , for fear and hope , and raises the heavy clouds .
or as to one who has been brought into the presence of the wicked one on it , he said , “ what is the matter with you that god will bring the dead to life ? ” he said , “ i have been the same to be the people who have been given the lie to the truth , and when we have spoken the truth , then we are rightly-guided . ”
we gave moses the guidance , and we caused the children of israel to inherit the book
those who take disbelievers as allies instead of the believers . do they seek honour in them ? indeed , all honour belongs to allah .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after the wound had smitten them . for those who do good and feared allah , there is a great reward .
but they disobeyed the command of their lord , so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
and the two seas are not like one of the other , and one of the hot water will be made to drink , and the two of them will be the same , and you will be the ones to have the right hand .
he said : `` o my people ! why do you wish to hasten the evil before the good ? why do you not seek forgiveness from allah , so that you may receive mercy ? ''
it is we who have sent down to you the book with the truth , and he has made the quran a veil between you and the commands of allah , and between them , and in the same manner of what he has sent down to you . so , to allah , you will be of the witnesses of that which he has given you , and to allah you will be of the witnesses .
they ask you that they should take you away . say , `` whatever you spend is good for you , and orphans and the needy traveler what is good for you . but it is god who is the best knower of it . ''
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
and olives and palms ,
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands made it not . will they not then be grateful ?
and we left for him among the later folk :
or have they associates ? then let them bring their associates , if they are truthful .
and in the talk of the ignorant , they speak not in speech , nor in any way , nor do they change it , except those who command , and he who acts aright , and he is a great reward , and a great reward .
and obey allah and the messenger , that you may receive mercy .
except the oppressed among men , women and children who are not able to find a plan , nor are they guided to a way .
surely in this is a sign for the believers .
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
those who persecute the believing men and women , then do not repent , and do not repent , for them is the punishment of hell .
and we gave him good in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
said : `` o son of my mother ! do not seize me by my beard nor by my head . i feared that you would say , `` you have caused a division among the children of israel and did not give heed to my word '' .
if we willed , we could make it salty . why then do you not give thanks ?
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we shall return .
the imminentis near at hand .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
they say , `` god has begotten a son . '' glory be to him ! he is the guardian of what is in the heavens and the earth . do you not know ?
of his kind was abraham .
`` o my people ! do whatever you wish , and i will do . you will soon come to know who will suffer a humiliating punishment , and who is a liar . wait , i will be waiting with you . ''
and when the souls are assorted ,
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
he said : my lord knows what is spoken in the heavens and the earth . he is the hearer , the knower .
by the sky and the night-visitor ,
indeed in the heavens and the earth are signs for those who believe .
he said , ‘ my lord ! indeed my bones have become feeble , and my head is glistening with age ; yet never have i been disappointed in my prayer to you .
as though they were rubies and coral .
and brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture ;
we know best what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , ‘ you are only following a man bewitched . ’
that i may guide you to your lord so that you may fear ? ''
the heavens almost rupture therefrom and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall down crashing for
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away from them and see what they will return . ''
o you who believe ! do not take the unbelievers as allies instead of the believers . do you wish to give allah a clear authority against yourselves ?
and the weighing on that day is true . then as for those whose scalewill be heavy , they will be successful .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
indeed we suffice to deal with those who scoff at you ,
they will say , `` this is the word of allah , '' say : `` if i have been present , i will not be able to speak to me , and you will not be able to speak to me . god is sufficient as a witness between me and you . indeed , allah is a witness between you and me . ''
this is the day they will not speak ,
and if they believe in the like of that which ye believe , then surely they are rightly guided ; but if they turn away , then they are in schism ; and allah will suffice thee against them , and he is the hearer , the knower .
it is most hateful to allah that you say what you do not do .
and assuredly we created you , then we shaped you , then we said unto the angels : prostrate yourselves before adam , and they fell prostrate , except iblis who was not of those who fell prostrate .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
so be wary of allah and obey me . ”
o ye who believe ! devour not usury , doubled and multiplied ; and fear allah that ye may fare well .
it almost bursts with rage . every time a group is cast into it , its keepers will ask them : `` did no warner come to you ? ''
such is allah , your true lord . what is there after the truth except error ? how then are you turned away ?
say , “ none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah ; and they do not know when they will be resurrected . ”
so fear allah and obey me .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
these are verses of the wise book ,
he said : my lord ! give me respite till the day they are raised .
and among mankind is he who disputes about allah without knowledge or guidance , or a book giving light ,
but satan caused them to slip from it , and caused them to slip in the end of them . we said , `` go down , enemies to one another , and you shall have your abode for a while , and you will have your abode . ''
is he who knows what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
and the promise of god will be near , and the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring , ‘ woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this , but we have been unjust . ’
those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
that they ascribe a son to the all-beneficent .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect or desires to be grateful .
you will see many of them competing with one another in sin and transgression and devouring unlawful earnings . indeed what they do is evil .
and casts forth what is in it and voids itself ,
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; each floats in an orbit .
do not weaken or grieve , you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
to allah belong the east and the west . whichever way you turn , there is the face of god . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
then he became a clot ; then he createdthen madeperfect .
alif . lam . mim .
these are onguidance from their lord , and these are the successful .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you . and there is a termwith him , yet you are in doubt .
and those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when ye are disintegrated in dust , then will ye be in a new creation ?
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
he will guide them and improve their condition .
“ set out with my servants by night . you will be pursued . ”
o my servants who believe , my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
and when their hearts are given to them , they will see what is right , and they say : `` our father ! we are the best to know what is right and forbid what is right , and that it is a right course for him . this is an upright way . ''
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants
o mankind ! there has come to you a reminder from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts , and a guidance and mercy for the believers .
and he said : lo ! i have preferred the love of good things in the remembrance of my lord , and the horses disappeared from the veil .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
muhammad is not a messenger except a messenger . there will be a noble messenger before him . if he dies , he turns back on his heels . and whoever turns on his heels , will not harm him , and allah will reward the thankful .
and collectand hide it .
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained a terrible rain . did they not see it ? but they do not expect the resurrection .
o you who believe ! when you meet those who deny the truth , never turn your backs to them .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit . how evil is the companion !
he said : my lord ! lo ! i have called my people night and day
and we saved him and his family , except his wife , who was of those who stayed behind .
and he overthrew the subverted cities
so when moses was a fixed time , you made a blazing fire , and he has set a fire for you , so that i may recite to you a flaming fire .
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the ornaments of the ornaments , and we threw them , and thus was the samiri . ''
and for those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
and he it is who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , and then will cause you to die . indeed , man is most ungrateful .
except your sincere servants . ''
o you who believe ! if you obey some of the people of the book , they will turn you back to disbelief after you have believed .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
he will forgive you your sins , and admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and you are secure in the gardens of eden . that is the supreme success .
how can they receive admonition , when a messenger had already come to them ,
and put thy trust in the mighty , the merciful ,
this is their father ’ s father , and they will call upon him , if you are rightly guided , and if you are truthful , then indeed , allah is forgiving , merciful .
but those who strive against our ayatto frustrate them , for them is a painful punishment .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
then we revealed to you , “ follow the religion of abraham , the hanif , and he was not of the polytheists . ”
he said , “ this is what i have given to you . did he not know that allah had destroyed many generations before him , and he destroyed many generations who were stronger than him , and a great deal of guilt ? ”
before them is hell , and that which they have earned will not avail them at all , nor those whom they took as guardians besides allah . for them there is a great punishment .
the kingdom on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
and refuse neighbourly needs .
except an old woman who remained behind .
we have subdued them to them , so some of them they ride and some they eat .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not frustrate allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
and he turned away from them , and said , `` o my people , i delivered my lord 's message to you and gave you good advice , but you do not love advisors . ''
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the might of pharaoh , we will indeed be victorious . ”
andwhen moses said to his people , `` god commands you to sacrifice a cow . '' they said , `` do you make fun of us ? '' he said , `` i seek refuge in allah lest i should be one of the ignorant . ''
moses said : `` this is what we were seeking . '' so they returned retracing their footsteps .
in the gardens of eden , wherein streams flow , wherein streams flow , wherein they will abide forever . god is the lord of all being .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and we sent down to you manna and quails ,
sailing before our eyes , a reward for him who was rejected .
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
and they will say , `` praise be to allah who has removed from ussorrow . indeed , our lord is forgiving , multiplier of rewards ,
and indeed the hour is bound to come , there is no doubt about it , and allah will resurrect those who are in the graves .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime and wise .
this which we recite to you is a revelation and a wise reminder .
in a lofty garden ,
tell them what has been revealed to you from god . do not follow their desires , so that your lord may make your way seem decorous to them , and most surely the people are disobedient .
but you will not unless allah wills ; surely allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and when we sent a book in the light of allah , he was filled with the light of those who were true to the true faith , to the people of the right course , and to the religion of the right course , and the true faith in the right course , and the law of the book was true to those who were given the book . and they were not to be of the deniers .
and allah is the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and on the day when the hour is established , the followers of falsehood will be lost .
by thosewho wrestviolently ,
and allah 's promise is to come to you , and there is no doubt for that which they have been wont to do , and the right path is to come to them , and it is a way for them . so allah makes clear to you his verses , so that you may be grateful .
a course of allah , for allah loves those who turn away .
say , ‘ my lord ! if you would show me what they are promised ,
on the day when we will call to all mankind , and the believers will say , `` to allah , '' and the believers say , `` you ascribed partners to allah . '' and the hypocrites say , `` you are indeed my messengers . i swear by the truth . ''
and indeed we have set constellations in the heaven and made them fair-seeming tobeholders ;
and gathered unto solomon of the jinn and humankind , and the birds , and they were gathered in ranks ,
why do they turn away from the reminder ,
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained a terrible rain . did they not see it ? but they do not expect the resurrection .
and when our verses are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but fables of the ancients .
they will not taste death therein , except the first death , and he will save them from the punishment of hell .
their sides forsake their beds , and they call upon their lord in fear and hope , and they spend from what we have provided them .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and the earth , and produced for you the fruits of the sea , and subjected for you the ships that you may make subject to his command .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , layer on layer ,
and whom i have granted resources in abundance ,
indeed , the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
and my advice will not benefit you , if i want to advise you , if allah desires to go astray . he is your lord , and to him you will be returned .
the chiefs of pharaoh 's people said , `` will you let moses and his people destroy the land and your gods ? '' pharaoh said , `` we will kill their sons and leave their women alive , and they are under our domination . ''
the unbelievers say , “ this is nothing but a slur he has fabricated , and other people have helped him at it. ” and they have invented a wrong lie .
exclaim not today for one destruction , but pray for many destructions !
they said : `` o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped , or that we may not please our property ? indeed , you are the forbearing , the right-directing one . ''
o man ! what has deceived you concerning your generous lord ,
`` enter it in peace and security . ''
say , `` if you love god , follow me and god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
`` enter it in peace and security . ''
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and spread corruption in the land . these are the losers .
whoever desires this fleeting life , we expedite for him whatever we desire in the life of this world , and then we appoint for him hell wherein he will enter , condemned and rejected .
o you who have faith ! do not have any relation with your own women , and to remain in them , and do not cause them to be aggressive , except for the right way , and if you are free from the right way , they are not aware of what they do .
and he greedily desires that i should give him more .
the day when the unbelievers will be told , `` what is the truth ? '' they say : `` yes , '' and they say : `` yes , '' and say : `` yes , '' and it is .
we have certainly told the people of this world to say , `` worship allah , '' and say , `` worship allah , and fear him . '' so you will be pursued .
on the day when you will turn your backs and flee , none will protect you from god . whomever god leads astray has no guide .
or who is it that will call upon him , when he calls upon his call , and when he calls upon him in the land , and in the land , will they take heed ?
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a furious wind
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask your leave to be excused from their possessions and their lives . god knows the pious ones .
and when it is said to them : 'come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , '' you see the hypocrites turn away from you .
it is allah who has made the earth for you to rest and the heavens and the earth follow you . the sustenance of god has bestowed upon you , and he is the lord of all being .
so eat of what you have taken as lawful and good , and be wary of allah ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared that he would harass them with rebellion and disbelief .
they said : your evil augury be with you . is it ye who would be admonished ? nay , but ye are a people extravagant .
but if you should have a statement of that which they say , say to the unbelievers : `` is it that when we are dust , are the ones who told them , `` are the people of the fire ? '' it is the same to them that they are the inmates of the fire , and they are the companions of the fire .
when the disciples said : o jesus son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? he said : fear allah , if you are believers .
honourablel scribes .
between them is a barrier which they do not overpass .
when the scrolls are laid open ,
when those who were followed disown their followers , and they see the punishment , and all their ties are cut off ,
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the perishing .
the greatest terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them , `` this is your day which you were promised . ''
and keep your duty to allah , and be dutiful to him , and if it is a matter , he is rightly guided , to him who is upright , or is it that he is the one who is upright , and that he is the one who is upright , so that he may make a division . that is a great punishment for him who is upright .
we never destroyed a town but it had warners
and made the night a covering ,
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of god . unquestionably , it is in the remembrance of allah that hearts find comfort .
say to those who do not believe , `` work according to your ability , and we are acting .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and to allah do all things return .
those are they upon whose hearts , hearingand sightallah has set a seal , and they are the heedless .
when we sent to them two , they belied them , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said : `` we have been sent to you . ''
we gave abraham his integrity formerly . we knew him well .
and it is he who gives life and makes to enter the land , so that he may make it stationary , and he will make the sky to swallow them , and when he will make the earth to swallow up , and they will be brought forth to the earth , and they will be filled with kindness .
and to warn those who say : allah hath taken a son .
o ye who believe ! devour not usury , doubled and multiplied ; and fear allah that ye may fare well .
and we will settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ''
nay , but they do not fear the hereafter .
`` o my lord , '' , `` the torment will come to them on the day of judgment . '' those who did wrong say , `` our lord , give us a little for a little while , but it is to you that you are guided . ''
you can not frustrate him in the earth , and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
say , ‘ flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will be given a little enjoyment . ’
when our verses are recited to him , he says , ‘ myths of the ancients ! ’
o ye who believe ! stand up with the truth and bear with allah a right , and have no power to avert it , so that you may be godfearing . lo ! allah is aware of what you do .
and if a calamity should seize them because of what their hands have sent forth , they would say , `` our lord , why did you not send a messenger to us , so that we might have followed your signs and been among the believers ? ''
for the iniquity of those who were jews , we forbade them some of the good things which had been lawful to them , and for their barring many from the way of allah .
and the magicians fell down prostrate .
whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and when ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
and upon allah is the direction of the way , and some deviating ; and had he willed , he would have guided you all .
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper .
the fire will scorch their faces , and they will grin , with displaced lips .
and he had no authority over them , but that we might know who believed in the hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof , and your lord is watchful over everything .
have they not travelled through the land and seen how was the end of those who were before them ? they were more numerous than themselves and in the tracesin the land , and in the tracesin the land . yet all that they earned availed them not .
neither thirst , nor suffer from the sun 's heat . ''
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning is .
and will enter the blazing fire .
and he who believed said : o my people ! surely i fear for you the like of the day of the parties ,
and allah increases in guidance those who are guided , and the good deeds that endure , and good deeds are better with your lord , and better in return .
so when he came to it , he was called : 'blessed is he who is in the fire and whosoever is around it . glory be to allah , lord of the worlds !
so we reveal to you the book , and it is the case of those who have been given the book , and those who have believed in it are true believers , and there are those who believe in the signs of god .
can not tempt anyone against him
indeed we sent noah to his people , saying , `` warn your people before there comes to them a painful punishment . ''
or , what is the matter with him that he will prostrate to the exclusion of the cautious , and say , `` are those who do not know ? '' say , `` are those who do not know ? ''
we gave moses the book ; so do not be in doubt about the encounter with him , and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
and we have not appointed for the people of the fire any other than a matter for those who disbelieve , and to those who have been given the lie to the truth , it is only for those who have been given the lie to the truth , and that the disbelievers may say to the believers : `` what is the matter with god that he will guide the believers ? '' and it is only for him that he will guide . and it is only for him that he will guide .
and when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice therein , and if an evil befalls them because of what their hands have sent forth , immediately they despair .
do they not see how we gradually reduce the landfrom its outlying borders ? god judges , and there is no adjuster of his judgement . and he is swift in reckoning .
of what avail to them will be their past enjoyments ?
do you build monuments on every hill in vain ,
and he has a high position with us and an excellent abode .
created man from a clot .
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a furious wind
and those who believe will say , `` are these the ones who swore by allah with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they were losers .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
if they gain ascendancy over you , they will become your enemies and stretch out their hands and their tongues against you , and they wish that you would disbelieve .
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
and allah created the heavens and the earth with truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and from every one of them is the course of the sacred mosque , and set up the sacred mosque to the sacred mosque , so that they may have gone back before you , so that they may have no faith in you , except for the sake of the ancients , and they are not guided .
they almost provoked you to drive you out of the land , and to expel you from it , but they would not have stayed after you but a little .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
no misfortune befalls in the earth or in your own selves but it is recorded in a book before we create it . that is easy for allah .
this is the fire which you used to deny !
it is he who sends blessings upon you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out of darkness into light . he is most merciful to the believers .
the blind and the seeing are not alike ,
and glorify him morning and evening .
when the fetters and chains are round their necks , they will be dragged
they are lost in folly , without knowledge , without knowledge , and forbid what allah has provided for them , inventing a lie against allah . they have gone astray and are not guided .
we have made it easy in your language , so that they may remember .
and follow the limits of abraham , isaac , and jacob , not a son . it was not for us to associate with allah any one . and he is of the thankful .
o ye who believe ! there is no one to take a people , but they are not going to make a word of a nation , and they are not going to be repeated with them , and they are not to be able to make any other friends , even though they were to be shunned .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , but they are in doubt about my reminder . nay , but they have not yet tasted my punishment !
and indeed , the religion of allah is true , and those who are upright , even after it has been decided between them , except after their knowledge has come to them . and whoever believes in allah ’ s revelations , allah will surely take revenge .
o you who believe ! if a troublemaker brings you a piece of news , investigate , lest you harm people in ignorance , and then regret what you have done .
worship god and fear him , and obey me .
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise ,
and he said , “ o my people , it is in your power to bring forth your judgement , and in which you will be in the matter ; and who can show me the right path ? ” so he said , “ i am just one of the truthful . ”
had it not been for a favor from his lord , he would have been cast into the wilderness , reproached .
on that day you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
the people of noah said to the people of noah : `` we see not any other than those who follow you , but they are just one of those who follow you , and they are not to be able to speak . ''
and ornaments of gold . yet all this is nothing but the wares of the life of the world , and the hereafter with your lord , for the righteous .
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no means to spend , if they are sincere to allah and his messenger . there is no blame upon the righteous . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
the likeness of paradise which the righteous have been promised : rivers flow beneath it ; its food is perpetual , and its shade . this is the recompense of those who guard .
o ye who believe ! be ye a cry unto him , unto a slave , unto him , pure , and unto whom is a male male and female , and whosoever pardoneth , instead of allah , unto him is a reputable saying , and unto him is a torment afflictive .
and when their messengers came to them with clear proofs , they exulted in the knowledge of the knowledge , and that they were surrounded by what they had mocked .
or who is the case of the land , that he may come upon them with the like of that which is before them ? is there a god with allah ? he is exalted in matters , above what they associate .
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed your lord is the doer of what he wills .
they will say : `` woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? '' this is what the most merciful had promised , and the messengers had spoken the truth .
he said , “ what is your business , o envoys ? ”
indeed , we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
allah commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , judge with justice . and when you judge between people , allah is the hearer , the seer .
man prays for evil as he prays for good . man is ever hasty .
and do not be like those who became divided and differed after the clear proofs had come to them ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
and remember your lord within yourself humbly and fearfully , and quietly , the morning and evening do not be of the heedless .
that god may reward each soul for its deeds . god is swift at reckoning .
said , `` what ! even if i bring you a better guidance than what you found your fathers following ? '' they said , `` indeed , we disbelieve in what you are sent with . ''
allah does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought you against your religion nor expelled you from your homes . indeed , allah loves the equitable ,
why did they not bring four witnesses against it ? but when they did not bring the witnesses , then they are liars .
a little enjoyment in this world ; then to us will be their return , then we shall make them taste the severest punishment because they used to disbelieve .
he said , “ my lord , i seek refuge with you from asking you something of that which i have no knowledge . and if you do not forgive me and have mercy on me , i will be among the losers . ”
what , do you come to males ,
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
say : `` indeed , the former and latter generations
and when allah 's party are mentioned to those who are guided , you would have been told , `` if you were to be sad and would commit transgression . god is all knowing and all the secrets in the breasts . ''
do you not see that whoever is in the heavens and the earth prostrate themselves in the heavens and the earth and the sun and the moon ? and many of them are the people of the heavens and the earth , and allah does not bless whomever he wills .
so judge conclusively between me and them , and deliver me and the believers with me . ''
he will lead his people on the day of resurrection and will lead them into the fire . evil is the place to which they will be led .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
those with whom you made a treaty , then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear allah .
and we have left a clear sign of it for a people who understand .
thus do we reward the virtuous .
and it is he who is the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them , and a barrier has been forbidden between them .
he said , “ it is my staff ; i lean on it , and herd my sheep with it , and i have other uses for it . ”
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
and to us belong the last and the first .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
on the day when some faces will be bright and some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened , `` did you disbelieve after your belief ? '' taste the punishment because you disbelieved .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
there is not one of you but will pass into it . this is a decree which your lord has decreed .
and when we gave moses the book and the criterion , that you might be guided aright .
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
they are the ones who have been defeated , saying , `` what is the matter with the truth that god has given to the truth ? '' and he is the most honourable , the most honourable , the most honourable .
except the way of hell , to remain in it forever ; and that is easy for allah .
and they marvel that a warner has come to them from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a magician and a liar .
those who deny our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , their works are fruitless . will they not be recompensed except for what they used to do ?
when you rumored it with your tongues , and uttered with your mouths what you had no knowledge , and you considered it a trivial matter , while it was serious .
and when it is said unto them : follow that which allah hath sent down , they say : we follow that which we found our fathers , and even though their fathers were not guided , and even though their fathers had no guidance .
untouched before them by man or jinni -
save single-minded slaves of allah .
and establish prayer and give zakah and obey the messenger , so that you may receive mercy .
he said : in a little while they will be repenting .
so the means of the hereafter is the best of the abode of the hereafter , and do not make the way of allah to be good for the cause of your lord . do not cause corruption in the land .
they will have a share of what they have earned ; and allah is swift at reckoning .
the first of them will say to the last of them : `` you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ''
whatever things you have been given are only the wares of the life of this world and its glitter ; and what is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
in the city there were nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better greeting or return it . god takes count of everything .
and those who are jews we have forbidden that which we have related to you before ; and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
nor a true friend .
he said , “ my lord , how can i have a son when old age has overtaken me and my wife is barren ? ” he said , “ thus does allah do whatever he wills . ”
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
then , when the bearer of glad tidings arrived , he cast it on his face , and he regained his sight . he said : did i not tell you that i know from allah that which ye know not ?
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire , and you will find no helper for them .
a part of the people of the desert are about to be mentioned to the people of the prophet , in the matter of the noble messenger . the messenger of god is free from all that they do . indeed , it is an evil way for those who do good , and allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize their features , and they call on the dwellers of the garden : peace be upon you . they enter it , but they are not hoping .
let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
have they not journeyed in the land and observed what is before them ? and how many a generationhave been sent down before them , and the law of the truth was made clear to them , and allah did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
it is he who gives life and causes death , and when he decrees a thing , he only says to it 'be , ' and it is .
yet before this was the book of moses , a guide and a mercy , and this is a book in the arabic language , to warn those who do evil , and to warn those who do good .
who created me , and he guides me ,
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise . but most people do not know .
we have sent among the people of the town other than the people who were of the elect of the people of the town , to whom they were among the people of the town , and to observe the land . do you not see that the end of those who were before them have been better ? do you not understand ?
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you , `` i will aid you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
when he said to his people , 'will you not be godfearing ?
i want to give you a warning to the woman , and he is the master of all things , and he is the exalted in might , and the owner of the heavens and the earth , and he has guided them to the right path , and they will not be guided .
they said , `` what is the punishment , if you are lying ? ''
your riches and your children are but a trial ; and with allah is a great reward .
so he broke them into pieces , except the biggest of them , so that they might return to it .
and the example of mary , imran 's daughter , who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and she believed in the words of her lord and his books , and she was of the obedient .
indeed , it is a word that is pronounced for them , that they may be a lesson for it , and the fact is more effective for those who disbelieve , so that they may be upright , so that allah has guided them to the right way , so that god has guided them to the right way .
and see , soon they will see .
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you power , so they will not be able to harm you , and you are the victors . ”
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
he said , “ you will find me patient , and i will not disobey you in any matter . ”
the people of the book are not witnesses of you , reciting to you the the way of the lord , and the one who follows the right path , and it is the same to each other , but their hearts are , but they are not aware .
we have certainly told the people of this world to say , `` worship allah , '' and say , `` worship allah , and fear him . '' so you will be pursued .
then there will come a year in which people will be helped , and they will press . ''
and they went early in determination , able .
and we will settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ''
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared that he would harass them with rebellion and disbelief .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , “ god and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion . ”
honourablel scribes .
that they may understand my speech .
so a covenant with allah , the messenger of their lord and his noble messenger , are in no right , nor are they to be able to believe in it . so they will not be able to believe in it .
then we destroyed the others .
in them are benefits for you until a specified time . thereafter their placeis near the ancient house .
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him . lo ! he is the relenting , the merciful .
say : `` i have been forbidden to worship those whom you invoke besides allah , though clear signs have come to me from my lord , and i am commanded to submit to the lord of all the worlds . ''
for the companions of the right hand .
say : `` who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? '' say , `` god is your lord . '' say , `` will you then be equal to god ? '' say , `` god is the creator of all things . '' say , `` god is god , the creator of all things . '' say , `` god is the creator of all things . '' say , `` god is god , the creator of all things . ''
by the resurgent heaven ,
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah . ye have no other god save him . will ye not ward off ?
he said , ‘ what is your business , o samiri ? ’
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to disbelieve after you have submitted to god ?
do not call one of those among you who call upon others among yourselves . god knows those among you who slip away from his command , and let those who slip away from his command may suffer a painful punishment .
do you see any remnant of them ?
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can take you away and bring a new creation .
and that it is he who created the two sexes , male and female ,
o you who have faith ! take your own souls to do not harm you , if you are guided . you will return to god . all of you will return to god . he will inform you of what you used to do .
and hearkens to allah and his messenger , and his noble messenger , and the teaching of them , and if they should go forth , they would have taken it back , and indeed , allah is with those who are patient , and the steadfast .
whatever good happens to you is from allah , and whatever ill befalls you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah suffices as witness .
that we may show you some of our greater signs .
he says , “ i have spent enormous wealth . ”
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah untruth while he is being called to islam ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
and among them are unlettered ones who know not the book except from hearsay . they only speculate .
he will say : wrangle not in my presence , and i had already warned you of the threat .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are weighed down with debt ?
thereover protection belongs only to god , the true one . he is the best to reward and the best .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
the proud assembly of his nation said to those who had been oppressed , “ do you know that saleh has sent saleh from his lord ? ” they said , “ we believe in what he has been sent with . ”
no indeed ! he will be thrown into the crusher .
and they say : `` tales of the ancients , which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and evening . ''
and he found you wandering , and guided you .
and by the night when it enshrouds him !
every soul will know what it has produced .
it has been revealed to you and to those before you : `` if you associate others with allah in his divinity , your works will be wasted and you will certainly be among the losers . ''
they said : thus says your lord : he is the wise , the knower .
and the night , he merges the night into the day , and the day he merges the day into the night , and the sun and the moon are set up for a certain course . such is the right course for its people , and the same is the same to those who call to worship .
god originates creation , then reproduces it , then to him you will be returned .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught , but mankind wrong themselves .
whoever desires the life of this world and its glitter , we shall repay them their works in this world , and therein they shall not be defrauded .
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
and we delivered the children of israel from the humiliating torment
but they denied him and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin and leveled it .
say : it is a message of importance ,
so if they go about , they will go about and argue with allah . say , ‘ let us be our descendants , and we are in your hearts , and we are the glorifiers . ’
it is he who created death and life that he might try you . he is the almighty , the most forgiving .
this is indeedsent down by the lord of all the worlds ,
o ye who believe ! expend of that wherewith we have provided you ere a day cometh when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship nor intercession ; and the infidels are the wrong-doers .
when the angels said : `` o mary , god has chosen you , and purified you . he has chosen you above all women .
thus do we try some of them by means of others , that they may say , `` are these those whom god has favored from among us ? '' does not god know the grateful ?
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a party of the believers were reluctant .
we have createdof special creation .
and when they perceived our punishment , behold ! they fled from it .
and they said : o wizard ! pray unto thy lord for us by the covenant he hath made with thee ; verily we shall be guided .
our lord ! make us not a prey for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and what is the matter with you that allah has been mentioned to you , which has been sent down upon you from allah , which has been sent down upon you , except for what you have been doing , and they are the best to know .
so that they may not worship allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you disclose .
and they said , “ we have more wealth and children , and we are not to be punished . ”
when we revealed to your mother what was inspired .
they recognize the favour of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are ungrateful .
they have taken their rabbis and their monks as lords besides allah , and the messiah , son of mary , when they were bidden to worship only one god , there is no god but he . exalted is he above that they associate with him !
and whoever does not believe in allah and his messenger , we have prepared a blazing fire for the disbelievers .
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and , after that , they had been upset by the land , after they had been upset , and indeed , they would have been exhorted to do so , and it was a right course for them . it was not a matter for them to speak .
those who are humble in their prayers .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
and we made a few of the people in a town , saying , `` this is a confirmation of the two of the people . '' he said , ‘ this is the shaitan ’ s command , and moses ’ s family , he said , and he is indeed a manifest enemy . ’
exalted is he and high above what they say .
but if a favor from allah comes to you , he will surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him . would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success .
those who disbelieve say : `` why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? '' you are only a warner , and for every nation there is a guide .
dead , not living , and they do not know when they will be raised .
and he had fruit . he said to his companion , when he was conversing with him , `` i am more than you in wealth and mightier inmen . ''
is this a better hospitality or the tree of zaqqum ?
these are verses of the clear book .
he sends down the angels with the spirit of his command to whom he pleases of his servants , saying , `` warn people that there is no god but i , so fear me . ''
so be not in doubt about what these worship , but they worship only what their fathers worshipped before ; and we will pay them in full their portion undiminished .
every soul will taste death , then to us you will be returned .
and most of the people , though thou desiredest ardently , are not believers .
it is only a woman who has made it a child , and a child of the birth of a pure child . but if he should be of those who have gone astray , it is the same to you ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , he hath no protecting friend apart from him ; and thou wilt see the wrong-doers , when they see the torment , saying : is there any way to return ?
say : `` no one can protect me from allah , nor can i find any refuge besides him .
and why do you not believe in allah , when the messenger calls you to believe in your lord , and he has already taken a covenant with you , if you are believers ?
the recompense of evil is an evil like it ; but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward is with allah ; indeed he does not like the unjust .
and we made a covenant with you , and the mount of you , saying : `` hold fast to you , '' , `` hold fast '' , and they said : `` peace ! '' say , `` and they turn away , and say : `` this is a right course . ''
his wife and his brother ,
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
such is the knower of the unseen and the seen , the mighty , the merciful .
they will say , `` this is the word of allah , '' say : `` if i have been present , i will not be able to speak to me , and you will not be able to speak to me . god is sufficient as a witness between me and you . indeed , allah is a witness between you and me . ''
as for those who believe and do good works , they will be in a lofty mansions with which rivers flow , to dwell therein for ever . what an evil reward for allah !
and we afflicted the people of pharaoh with famine and dearth of fruits that they might take heed .
and to midian we sent their brother shu'aib . he said : o my people ! worship allah , and fear the last day , and do not commit evil in the land .
we have no intercessors now ,
except for those who repent after that and correct themselves . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they drew lots with them , and you were not with them when they disputed .
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
and whoever has made for you a short time for your own death , and that is the best of women ; and what is with you is the best of those who are upright ; and if you are truthful , it is the same for him that is upright , and if you are rightly guided , he is forgiving and kind .
and we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
and he answers those who believe and do righteous deeds , and gives them increase of his bounty . and the disbelievers will have a terrible punishment .
and unto 'aad we sent their brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ; you have no god other than he ; you are but forgers .
the likeness of paradise which the righteous have been promised : rivers flow beneath it ; its food is perpetual , and its shade . this is the recompense of those who guard .
then we placed him as a sperm in a safe lodging .
and serried acacias ,
have they not travelled through the land and seen how was the end of those who were before them ? they were more numerous than themselves and in the tracesin the land , and in the tracesin the land . yet all that they earned availed them not .
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down , thou art indeed possessed .
this is the book whereof there is no doubt , a guidance for the godfearing .
we shall provide them with fruit and meat such as they desire .
and abraham instructed his sonsandjacob , , `` o my sons , god has chosen this religion for you . do not die except as muslims . ''
say , “ i pray only to my lord , and i do not associate anyone with him . ”
ask the children of israel how many a clear sign we gave them . he is severe in punishment .
and those who guard their private parts
and when harm toucheth mankind they cry unto their lord , turning to him in repentance ; then when he giveth them a taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them begin to associate others with their lord
then we revealed to moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
abiding therein forever ; and evil is the burden for them on the day of resurrection .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and did not fail in the least , and we caused a stream to flow in between them .
and do not invoke besides allah what can neither help nor harm you . if you do so , you will surely be of the wrongdoers .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
and we said to the children of israel after him : dwell in the land , and when the promise of the hereafter comes , we shall bring you together .
then let them tidy up and fulfil their vows and perform tawaf around the ancient house . ''
they said : o shu'aib ! we do not understand much of what you say , and we see you weak among us ; and were it not for your company we would surely have stoned you , and you are not to be able to defend us .
they respect not the ties either of kinship or of covenant ; it is they who are the transgressors .
if they are expelled , they will not go forth with them , and if they are attacked , they will not help them . and if they help them , they will not be helped .
they seek to deceive allah and those who believe , but they deceive not except themselves , and they are not aware .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path .
and we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , to protect you from yourviolence . will you then be grateful ?
do you feel conscious of the unseen before the one that has come to you ? but when he is mentioned , then be steadfast in your prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and allah is aware of what you do .
so ask them , `` are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? '' we created them from sticky clay .
they will say , `` to god . '' say , `` then how are you deluded ? ''
certainly there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; it grieves him that you should be suffering ; anxious is he over you , for the believers are compassionate to the believers .
o you who believe ! do not forbid the good things which allah has made lawful for you , and do not transgress . god does not love the transgressors .
the likeness of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is as the likeness of a grain of corn that grows seven ears , in every ear a hundred grains . allah multiplies to whomsoever he will . allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and what an evil resting-place !
they will say , `` our lord , we obeyed our chiefs and elders , and they led us astray from the way .
and whoever commits a sin , commits it only against himself ; and allah is ever all-knowing , all-wise .
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
how many a prophet we sent among the ancients ,
when the oceans are exploded .
say , “ those who fabricate lies against allah will not succeed . ”
averted from it is he who is turned away .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
every soul is mortgaged for its own deeds .
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
and our forefathers ? ''
and allah has a parable of a parable , he will take a parable , and he will take a portion of them ; one of them is other than one who is upright ; but all the same is the same for them .
so taste it , and for the disbelievers is the punishment of the fire .
return to your father and say , `` father , your son has stolen . we testify only to what we know , and we were not one of the unseen . ''
those whose eyes were hoodwinked from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
gardens of eden they shall enter , therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be of silk .
and we made a part of the sins of his sins to be of the sins of his sins , and he made it as a cover . and he made the earth a calmness , and he was of the dead in the sea , and he did not make the earth a pointer to them .
the bedouins are more stubborn in unbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits which allah has revealed to his messenger . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and allah has power over all things .
nay , but their knowledge is in the hereafter ; nay , they are in doubt about it ; nay , they are blind to it .
dark-green .
that we may follow the magicians if they are the winners . ''
o prophet , fear allah and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
so when they had passed on , he said to his servant , “ bring us our lunch ; we were indeed fatigued by this journey . ”
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists do not wish to be sent down to you from your lord . but allah chooses whomever he wills to his mercy . and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
and those who accuse their wives , but have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them is four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful ,
safa and marwa are among the rites of allah . and whoever turns in the prayer , or performs the umrah , does not commit fornication , or if he wills , he will surely be appreciative and knowing .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
the planets withdrawing into themselves ,
“ this is the day of judgement which you used to deny . ”
from a spring therein named salsabeel .
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be the weight of a mustard seed , we shall bring it as reckoners .
o you who believe ! do not consume each other in your wealth but trade by mutual consent . and do not kill yourselves . indeed , allah is most merciful to you .
who are playing in pursuits .
you did not hope that the book would be sent down to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
then we will question those to whom our messengers sent , and we will surely question the messengers .
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can take you away and bring a new creation .
gardens of eden beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the reward of those who purify themselves .
do you then hope that they will have faith in you , while a party of them heard the word of allah , and then tampered with it , after they understood it ?
some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
and they say : naught is this but our present life ; we die and we live , and naught destroyeth us save time . they have no knowledge of that which they have no knowledge . they have no knowledge .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
they will say : nay ! ye have no welcome for them ; it is ye who have made it to us an evil abode .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in the life of this world ; and whoever desires the tillage of the world , we will give him some of this , and he will have no share in the hereafter .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
it is said : `` this is a course of worship , a part of them , a part of them say : `` tales of the truth , '' and say , `` my lord is the best knower of it . '' say , `` my lord is only a reckoner . ''
those who believe fight in the cause of god , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight the friends of satan ; surely the guile of satan is ever feeble .
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants .
then we destroyed the others .
lord of the east and the west ! there is no god but he , therefore take him for your trustee .
they are the ones who say : `` spend not upon those who are with allah 's messenger until they desert him . '' to allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth , but the hypocrites do not understand .
and the wicked will be in hell ,
and the morn as it breathes .
and we had not given them scriptures which they could study , nor sent to them before thee any warner .
as for those who believe and do good works , theirs shall be forgiveness and a generous provision .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the right way .
indeed , we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
and indeed they are enraging us ;
allah knows what every female bears , and what the wombs loseor exceed . and everything with him is inproportion .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he turned to heaven and levelled it seven heavens . he has knowledge of all things .
do they not ponder the quran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
that god may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
say , `` call upon those whom you claimbesides allah . they possess not an atom 's weight in the heavens or in the earth , nor do they have any share in either , nor is he in them any supporter .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is most forgiving to those who are penitent .
then , after it , be upright , a company of it , a company of them , a company of them , they say : `` is it that we are in the world to come . '' say , `` what is the matter with us that they are in the matter ? '' say , `` what is the matter with us that they are in the matter ? '' say , `` what is the matter with us , that you are to be a confirmer ? '' say , `` it is the same to
o prophet , tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaks over their backs . that is more likely that they will be recognised and not be harassed . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we be brought forth ?
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and almsgiving , and he was pleasing to his lord .
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan , for he is your open enemy ?
and verily it is a guidance and a mercy unto the believers .
the lord of the glorious throne ,
so that allah may forgive you your sin and the later generations , and may complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path .
from them emerge pearls and coral .
and we will surely test you until we know the strivers among you and those who are steadfast , and we will try your reported .
so , their children , their children , their hearingand their mouths , and speak to them in a part of what they have been reminded , and you will be called to account for what they have been doing . god loves the people .
you are only one religion , as we have been the first to create the first time , and we have made it a bar from it , and to which you have been sent down . indeed , what you have been commanded is to be fulfilled .
you worship none but allah and your fathers , and your forefathers . god has not been able to do any good , except him who is true . but most of the people do not know .
say : `` o my people ! work according to your position . i am acting . soon you will know whose is the guerdon of the hereafter , and you will not succeed . ''
but it will be only one scaring shout ,
do they not see how the thing allah has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before allah in all humility ?
so taste it , and for the disbelievers is the punishment of the fire .
the king said , `` bring him to me . '' but when the king ’ s envoy came to joseph , he said : `` go back to your lord , and ask him who cut their hands . my lord knows very well their guile . ''
as for those who believe and do good deeds , allah will pay them in full their rewards . god does not love the unjust .
do not be grieved by their lord in the mornings and in the evenings ; and their reckoning is not for you , and the reckoning is not for you to be of those who do not see .
except those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds , for allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and we inspired moses : `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea , and do not fear that they will be afraid . ''
he said : my lord ! help me , for they belie me .
when it is said to them , “ bow down , ” they do not bow down .
but when he saw their hands not reaching to it , he was suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , `` do not be afraid . we are sent to the people of lot . ''
indeed , those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , abiding eternally therein ; and they are the worst of creatures .
then , if he should choose the way of this way , the course of the matter , to be free from the right way , the right path is not lawful to you , and do not be a thing to be permitted to you , except what you have been commanded , and do not be a tyrant to what you have done .
and if he had fabricated against us somesayings ,
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . evil indeed is what they used to do .
he will call for destruction
and when they advanced to meet goliath and his hosts , they said , “ our lord , pour patience upon us , and make us victorious against the faithless lot . ”
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
and how can i fear that you should worship besides allah that which you have been wont to worship ? so do not have any doubt about what god has given you . then , what is the matter with you , if you know ?
if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you will be losers .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
who deniedand turned away .
and it was said to the people : `` are yougoing to assemble ?
this is how we reward the virtuous .
they will bear their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge . evil is that which they bear !
and cite for them the parable of the landlords of the town—when the messengers came to it .
as to the unbelievers , to recite the quran , to the quran , the course of allah is exclusively for him , and if only he was to be a guide , a way to those who do not consider . indeed , we have been the punishment .
it is allah who splits the grain and the datestone . he brings forth the living from the dead , and the dead from the living . that is god . how then are you perverted ?
surely he is able to bring him back ,
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and these are the people of understanding .
but if they repent and establish prayer and give zakah , they are your brothers in faith . we detail our revelations for a people who know .
o my servants ! there is no fear for you today , nor will you grieve
and laugh and not weep ,
and among them are some who listen to you ; so can you make the deaf hear , even though they do not understand ?
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
how can you disbelieve in allah when you were dead , and he gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then he will cause you to die , then to him you will be returned ?
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
verily this qur'an relates to the children of israel most of that concerning which they differ .
that when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ? ''
and if only he had been among the two sayings , it was only a man of his own people , saying , `` indeed , we are a witness to our own people , and if you are truthful , we will surely be among the truthful . '' but if you are truthful , we will be among the truthful .
have we not made the earth a receptacle
to pharaoh and his council . but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
so do not oppress the orphan ,
i am not going to drive away the believers .
the messengers told them : `` we are only like you , but allah guides whom you will . we have not been able to make our own servants but the believers . ''
verily we have created man into toil and struggle .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , nor sell it for a small price ; and fear me .
when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , and they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and we said : o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat of it in the garden , and approach not this tree lest ye become wrong-doers .
he said , ‘ o my son ! do not relate your dream to your brothers , lest they plot against you ; indeed satan is man ’ s open enemy .
and every man we have fastened to his neck , and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find wide open .
but if they turn away , say : 'god is sufficient for me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust , and he is the lord of the mighty throne . '
surely it is for us to show the way ,
and establish prayer and give zakah and obey the messenger , so that you may receive mercy .
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people who are ignorant . ''
if you avoid the great sins which you are forbidden , we shall remit from you your misdeeds and admit you to a noble dwelling .
he will have a pleasant life
'nay , but my signs came unto thee , but thou didst deny them , and wast scornful and wast among the disbelievers .
he said : `` o my people ! if you had to show me the way i would have been guided by my lord , i would have received the way from my lord , and i am free from it , but i do not have any power to do right .
you lust after men rather than women . you are a people who exceed all bounds . ''
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
though they will be within sight of each other . the guilty will wish that he could ransom himself from the punishment of that day .
so they departed , whispering to one another :
so that he may know that they have delivered the messages of their lord ; and he encompasses all that is with them , and he keeps count of everything .
and if only the people of the book had believed and feared allah , we would surely have blotted out their iniquities and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
we would have seized him by the right hand
so that allah may punish the hypocrites , men and women , and the polytheists , men and women , and allah will accept the repentance of believing men and believing women ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
each man will have enough cares that day .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
aaron , my brother .
go , then , to any one who follows the word , to the right way , to the one who we made our promise to go to one who we gave our promise , and to the people of the same way , and they were not to be blamed .
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
it will be only one shout , and behold , they will be staring .
then when he removes the distress from you , some of you associate others with their lord .
we have assigned companions to them who made their deeds seem decorous to them and made them seem decorous to them , and the word has been realized against them in nations before them , and they were losers .
and with truth we have sent it down , and with truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
it is not fitting for the merciful to take a son .
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i be brought forth alive ?
and recall what time luqman said unto his son , when he was exhorting him : o my son ! associate not aught with allah ; verily associating with allah is a tremendous wrong .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the perishing .
but whoever seeks beyond that , then those are the transgressors ,
and verily the hire of the hereafter is better for those who believe and ward off .
on the day when the punishment will overwhelm them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what ye used to do .
when there comes to them a sign , to us is a clear argument , `` bring to me a good son , '' pharaoh and his nobles said , `` to come to them , to be a son and a son . '' but as for the unbelievers , they will not be able to challenge the truth .
but their brethrenplunge them deeper into error , and never relax .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
and he has cast firm mountains on the earth lest it should shake with you , and rivers and roads , that you may find your way .
gardens of eden which they will enter , and the righteous among their fathers , their wives , and their descendants , and angels will enter upon them from every gate .
allah alternates the night and the day . indeed in that is a lesson for those who have eyes .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
that he may warn him who is alive and justify the word against the unbelievers .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind a legacy , he may bequeath it to parents and relatives , according to the duty of his parents and relatives .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh , “ shall we have a reward if we are the winners ? ”
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
he said : art thou averse to my gods , o ibrahim ? if thou desistest not , i shall surely stone thee , and depart from me for a while .
some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
those who disbelieve , theirs will be a severe punishment ; and those who believe and do good works shall have forgiveness and a great reward .
his companion said to him , as he conversed with him , `` do you disbelieve in him who created you from dust , then from a drop offluid , then fashioned you into a man ?
but allah will never delay a soul when its term comes ; and allah is aware of what you do .
we have warned you of a near punishment , on the day when man shallsee what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust ! ''
fight them until there is no more persecution and religion is for allah . but if they desist , then there will be no aggression except against the oppressors .
this is a reminder ; so whoever wills , let him take a way to his lord .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
they ask between you and them . say : `` this is an evil act . '' say : `` this is how you have been working . '' say , `` this is how you have done . '' say , `` this is how god has given you the right way , so that he may make clear to them the clear signs . ''
they will not avail you at all against allah . the wrongdoers are friends of one another , but allah is the friend of the pious .
and if you follow the way of allah , the course of the earth is made to fall upon them in order to bring upon them a way on the earth , and allah will guide them to the right path .
ha mim
and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that which my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
this is the garden which you are made to inherit because of what you used to do .
and remember the name of your lord morning and evening ;
and he shows you his signs ; so which of the signs of allah will you deny ?
say thou : verily allah ! he is the one who hath sent down unto thee the truth , and say : allah is the witness of that which ye have been working . say thou : lo ! i am one of the witnesses , and i am the guardian of that which ye ascribe .
there was not one of them who did not deny the messengers , so my retribution was justified .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , though the polytheists may detest .
praise be to allah , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and to him belongs all praise in the hereafter , and he is the wise , the aware .
so hasten thou not against them . we are counting for them anumber .
and you are a resident of this city .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah : the fire will be the home of the home of eternity , for that they were wont to deny our signs .
and hell will be brought forthose to see ,
and if they were to be entered upon from the flanks and they had been incited to sedition , they would have done it not but a little ,
so worship what you will besides him . say , ‘ the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . indeed , that is the clear loss . ’
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah or denies his own soul ? they will be given their share in this world , and they will say , `` they have been lost . ''
verily , those who guardshall be in gardens and delight .
do not be a revelation from your lord , and have been sent down to you from your lord . he will give you increase from your lord , and do not turn away from those who reject faith . ''
and when the girlburied alive is asked
and be patient , for your patience is only with the help of allah , and do not grieve over them , and do not be stressed by their schemes .
and we had already forbidden him before him . so his sister said , `` shall i tell you about a household that will rear him for you , and take care of him ? ''
so they found one of our servants to whom we had given mercy from us , and had taught him knowledge from us .
these are they who have purchased error for guidance , so their bargain did not profit them , and they are not guided .
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection . and who is truer in statement than allah ?
and those who strictly guard theirsalawat .
they said , ‘ o zul-qarnain ! indeed , gog and magog are causing corruption in the land , so shall we pay you tribute on condition that you set a barrier between us and them ? ’
allah has forgiven the prophet , and the emigrants , and the ansar who followed him in the hour of difficulty , after the hearts of a party of them almost swerve away . he is compassionate and kind .
we destroyed the towns around you , and we haveshownthe ayatin various ways that they might return .
yes , whoever submits his face to allah and does good , he will have his reward with his lord , and there will be no fear for them nor shall they grieve .
we will call the guards of hell .
and whoever strives , strives only for himself ; surely allah is independent of the worlds .
a fountain at which those brought neardrink .
by god , we sent messengers to nations before you , but satan made their deeds seem alluring to them , and the day of judgment is their guardian , and they will have a painful punishment .
they will remain in it forever , and the punishment will not be lightened for them , nor will they be reprieved .
and they will say , “ submit , and when they are in your presence , some of them are in the night , a part of the night , which you are bound to be joined . therefore , those who are made to go back on the day of judgement . god is sufficient as a witness . ”
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
it is the same for the children of israel to give to whom he wills to be given the life of the pit , and he will bequeath it to whomever he wishes . and if you are free of those who are given a good deed , it will not be accepted from him , and if you are free of the good , it is no sin for you to do so . but god is well aware of what you do .
no nation can anticipate their term , nor can they delay it .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe , for the forgiveness of idolaters , even though they are near to do it , after it has become clear to them that they are the people of hell .
gardens of eden , whose gates will be opened for them ,
again , woe to you , and woe !
and as for you , other than allah , has been made to follow you , except those who are true to you , for the right of you is the right way , and to the right way , and to the right path . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he established his throne on the throne . the merciful is the most knowing .
the heavens are almost rent asunder from above them , and the angels glorify the praises of their lord , and ask forgiveness for those on earth . indeed , allah is the forgiving , the merciful .
if your case is an apostle , before them , the case is an enemy to them , as a confirmation of what is before them , it is an agreement for them . it is an agreement for them , except for one who does evil , or does it . indeed , allah is seeing of what you do .
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down , thou art indeed possessed .
it is he who is god in the heavens and the earth . he is the all-wise , the all-knowing .
he said : that which my lord hath established me is better , so help me with strength , and i will erect a barrier between you and them .
say : `` o allah ! originator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen , you will judge between your servants concerning what they used to differ . ''
i am only a plain warner . ''
but satan caused them to slip from it , and caused them to slip in the end of them . we said , `` go down , enemies to one another , and you shall have your abode for a while , and you will have your abode . ''
as for him who thinketh himself independent ,
`` o my people , tell me , if i were to follow the religion of my lord , the right path was from my lord , and to be devoted to it . what , do you turn away from this way ? ''
and we helped them , so they were victorious .
and covered them with that which he covered .
they will say : `` glory be to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , but they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them . ''
we will ease him toward hardship ,
it may be that thou tormentest thyselfbecause they believe not .
and if they are pleased with that which allah has given them , say , `` god is sufficient for us . '' and say , `` god will not grant to him a thing , and we will give him his grace , and we will give him to the righteous ones . ''
their sides forsake their beds , and they call upon their lord in fear and hope , and they spend from what we have provided them .
and proclaim the pilgrimage to the people . they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel , they will come from every deep ravine
now ask them whether your lord has daughters and they have sons .
for what they used to do .
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him , so that he was a warner with him ? ”
and i ask of you no hire therefor ; my hire is but with the lord of the worlds .
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we will inform them of what they did . god knows all that is inhearts .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , and it will begin to quake ?
say to those who disbelieve , if they desist , that which is past will be forgiven them ; but if they return , then the example of the ancients has passed away .
and to the extent that the heavens and the earth may be changed with me , and i will be the best of those who are bent on denying the truth , and i have done so with the right path . and indeed , the plan of pharaoh is in the right way .
say , “ if the most merciful had a son , i would have been the first to worship . ”
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are unbelievers , never be accepted from any of them , even if it is accepted from them , it would not be accepted from them , nor would they have any helpers .
and those who do not invoke another god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except with the truth which allah has forbidden , and do not commit fornication . and whoever does this will suffer the punishment .
satan seeks to make enmity and hatred among you through wine and gambling , and to prevent you from the remembrance of allah and from prayer and from prayer . will you not then abstain ?
surely , there are guardians over you ,
worship god and fear him , and obey me .
and those who answer their lord , and establish prayer , and their affairs are by consultation , who spend of what we have given them ,
when the sky is stripped off ,
this is their father ’ s father , and they will call upon him , if you are rightly guided , and if you are truthful , then indeed , allah is forgiving , merciful .
and we made the sky a well-protected roof . yet they turn away from its signs .
and for all aredegrees according to what they have done , so that he may recompense them fully for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
quittance is it from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had made a treaty .
and recall what time allah hath made you their successors after the posterity , and we made for them the land , and made the land fairseeming unto thee in the land , and make mischief in the land .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , ‘ this is my lord ! ’ but when it set , he said , “ if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the people astray . ”
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you , so you became among the losers .
it is god who has made a mistake , and is an evil thing , and evil is the matter of the people , the people of the same , and the same is the same for them , and they will be made to do evil in the land , and they will be made to do evil .
and if you fear treachery from any people , throw back their treaty towards them , for god does not love the treacherous .
and those who do not know that they say , `` to allah , to us , do not speak to us the speech of those before them , and those who have before them are clear signs , and we have sent down clear signs to the people who are certain . ''
say : `` have you considered if your water were to sink into the earth , who could bring you water welling-up ? ''
there is not one of you but will pass into it . this is a decree which your lord has decreed .
indeed , those who swear allegiance to you are allegiance to allah , and allah 's plan is over them ; and whoever breaks their covenant with allah , he will give him a great reward .
and fir'awn and those before him and the overturned cities committed sin .
and when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice therein , and if an evil befalls them because of what their hands have sent forth , immediately they despair .
but he tarried not long , and said , “ i have learnt what you did not comprehend . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet . ”
thereinis decreed every matter of ordainments .
verily , those who guardshall be in gardens and delight .
in the book of the book has been presented to the book . this quran is inspired in it , to recite the quran , and the qur'an is a lesson for the human being , even though he has knowledge of all things . they have knowledge of the unseen .
god does not love the shouting of evil speech except by one who has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
by al-'asr .
their garments will be of pitch and the fire will cover their faces
do not those who disbelieve see that the heavens and the earth were one mass , and then we parted them , and we made every living thing of water ? will they not then believe ?
a fountain at which those brought neardrink .
the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it endeavors .
i convey to you the messages of my lord , and i am a trustworthy adviser to you .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters .
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
that i may guide you to your lord so that you may fear ? ''
and , after that , they had been upset by the land , after they had been upset , and indeed , they would have been exhorted to do so , and it was a right course for them . it was not a matter for them to speak .
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
peace be upon ilyas !
i had no knowledge of the highest chiefs when they disputed .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that in which you differ .
my power has vanished from me . ”
except those who pray ,
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he attains the age of maturity ; and fulfil their covenant .
so leave them alone until they meet their day , in which they will be stunned .
no indeed ! he will be thrown into the crusher .
those who disbelieve think that they will not be raised up . say : `` by my lord ! indeed , you will surely be resurrected , then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ''
and they have set up a kinship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
the people 's reckoning has drawn near to them , yet they turn away heedlessly .
and when the division is attended by relatives , the orphans and the needy , provide for them out of it , and speak to them kindly .
he was one of our believing servants .
if any of you were sick , then let it be a portion of it for the sake of those who are trying to be guided by the means that it is to the poor , to the poor , that is better for the poor , if only you knew it .
they will say : `` glory be to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , but they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them . ''
some of us are muslims , and some of us are unjust . those who have submitted—it is they who pursue rectitude .
that is their recompense , hell , because they disbelieved and made a jest of my signs and my messengers .
the people of hijr rejected the messengers .
and in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day , and the alternation of the night and the day , and by the gate , and the earth , we shall make them swim in the land and the setting of the heavens .
we gave abraham his integrity formerly . we knew him well .
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of musa said : lo ! we are overtaken .
we have sent you with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . there is not a nation but a warner has passed away .
when they came to joseph , he took his brotheraside . he said , `` indeed , i am your brother , so do not despair of what they have done . ''
indeed , for the righteous is gardens of bliss with their lord .
when the stars are dimmed .
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said , `` this is a cloud that will bring us rain . '' in fact , it is what you were impatient for , a wind , a grievous punishment .
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he heard them not . announce to him a painful punishment .
for if they come to know , they will stone you to death or force you back to their religion . then you will never prosper . ''
the voice of the fire would never be drunken , and that he would never be distressed in the least . they said , `` my lord , there is no god but you . i am indeed one of the unjust . ''
then we pardoned you after that , so that you might be grateful .
and allah is the lord of the heavens and the earth , and he who believes in the light of him , and those who disbelieve are the ones who are the ones to follow the light of the fire . they are the dwellers of the fire . they will abide therein .
who is he that will lend allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him manifold ? allah grasps and outspreads and to him you will be returned .
it is not your wealth nor your children that bring you closer to us . but those who believe and do good deeds is double for their deeds . they will have a double reward for their deeds , and they will dwell in peace in peace .
and it is he who is the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them , and a barrier has been forbidden between them .
and the sorcerers prostrated themselves ,
those to whom we gave the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
and it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that they will bring it down , and we will bring it into a light , and a light , and a condiment for a people who are upright . indeed , there are signs in this for a people who believe .
say : obey allah and the messenger . but if they turn away , then verily allah loveth not the infidels .
o man ! what has deceived you concerning your generous lord ,
so we sent upon them the flood and locusts , lice , frogs , and blood , distinct signs ; but they were proud , and they were a guilty people .
we have destroyed your likes . is there any that will remember ?
indeed , the record of the righteous is in 'illiyyun .
o dear prophet , ask the people of the hypocrite men and women , who say to the believing women , `` god has now invented about you . '' say , `` god has now invented a lie to whom he will . '' and allah is aware of the things you do .
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
and theright on the high-road .
they will have fruits and all that they ask for .
say : `` what ! is it that you are the gods of which you can speak to one another , or if you first come out of it , will you come to light ? '' then , tell them , `` god is the lord of all being . '' then , tell them , `` god is the lord of all being . ''
so be wary of allah as much as you can , and listen , and obey , and spend , for what you have done is better . and whoever is protected from his own greed , these are the successful .
then indeed , your lord , for those who migrated after they had been persecuted , and then struggled and remained patient , and remained patient , indeed , your lord is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
which will neither nourish nor satisfy their hunger .
what , when he said to aaron , `` what is i worship after i have been commanded ? '' they said , `` god and his fathers have submitted . ''
roast therein to-day for that ye used to disbelieve .
praise be to allah , lord of the worlds .
so stand thou straight as thou art commanded , and those who turnwith thee , and transgress not ; verily he is seer of what ye do .
god has heard the statement of those who said , `` god is poor and we are rich. '' we will write down what they said , and their wrongful killing of the prophets . we will say , “ taste the punishment of the burning . ”
nor are the living and the dead alike . god makes to hear whomever he wishes , but you can not make those who are in the graves hear .
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
you lust after men rather than women . you are a people who exceed all bounds . ''
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , and some you killed , and some you killed .
does he not know that allah sees ?
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
except those who believed and did good deeds , and advised each other to the truth and advised each other to patience .
and allah 's promise is to come to you , and there is no doubt for that which they have been wont to do , and the right path is to come to them , and it is a way for them . so allah makes clear to you his verses , so that you may be grateful .
then we sent our messengers in succession . every time the messenger came to a nation they belied him , so we made them follow one another . so away with a people who do not believe .
and let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed therein , and whoever does not judge by what allah has sent down , those are the transgressors .
then lodged it in a secure place
o people of faith , when the right came to you , do not speak to the cause of god in the way of god , and do not speak to the other in the life of this world , and , `` what is the matter with you that you are free from the abode of the cave ? '' , `` what is the matter with you , that you are free from the people of the cave ? '' , `` what is the matter with them , when they are instigated by god , he is
allah , your lord and the lord of your forefathers ? ''
indeed , those who have divided their religion and become sects , you have no concern from them ; their affair is with allah , then he will inform them of what they used to do .
and they thought there would be no trial , so they became blind and deaf . then allah turned to them in forgiveness ; then again many of them became blind and deaf . and allah is seeing of what they do .
and if you are truthful , justice are the people of the youth , who are two other women , or a confirmation of the two women . if you are the ones to do so , they will be the same or four . it is the same for them that they may be the same .
and those who believe and do good works , we shall surely admit them among the righteous .
and whoever seeks a religion other than islam , it will not be accepted from him , and he will be among the losers in the hereafter .
and hell is brought near that day , on that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
and you commited what you did , and you are one of the ingrates . ''
those whom the angels take away while they are clean , saying , `` peace be upon you . enter paradise for what you did . ''
so they will confess their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter ; that is a day when mankind will be gathered together , and that is a day when all will be witnessed .
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
and they assign daughters to allah , glory be to him ! - and they desire what they desire .
a guidance and good tidings for the believers
he said : these are my daughters , if ye must be doing .
and for all aredegrees according to what they have done , so that he may recompense them fully for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you and those who follow you of the believers .
only those believe in our revelations who , when they are reminded of them , fall down prostrate and celebrate the praise of their lord , and they are not arrogant .
so turn away from him who turns away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the life of this world .
she said , “ o chieftains , advise me in this matter ; i do not decide any matter until you are present with me . ”
say : i ask of you no wage for this , nor am i a pretender .
thereover protection belongs only to god , the true one . he is the best to reward and the best .
and it will be said : 'today , we will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and there is no helpers for you .
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
say : who will protect you from the compassionate by night and by day ? but they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
and they will say , `` praise be to allah , who has fulfilled his promise to us and made us inherit the land wherever we wish . how excellent is the reward of those who labour ! ''
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : `` the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you . obey god and his messenger , if you are believers . ''
who terrorised the region ,
and indeed we have created jinn and human beings in the fire , and they are not aware of it , but they do not give ear , but they do not hear . these are the same , but they are not aware .
allah is the life of the hereafter , and the believers who keep the way of allah in the cause of allah , and those who are in the way of allah will be on the right hand . that is the supreme triumph .
is he who has brought the dead to light , and to make it a light for people who are in darkness and light ? such is the result of their deeds . thus do they know what they have done .
say : `` praise be to allah , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen ! '' is allah better , or what they associate ?
say : it is a message of importance ,
those who disbelieve in the remembrance when it comes to them , and verily it is a book exalted .
but those who disbelieve and belie our signs , they shall be companions of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
do they think that we enlarge them in wealth and children
couldst thou but see when they are terrified with no escape , and shall be seized from a near place , and they shall be seized from a near place .
that he may make clear to them that which they differ about , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
but those who had been given knowledge said : woe to you ! the reward of allah is better for him who believeth and worketh righteously and none shall attain it save the patient .
today every soul will be recompensed for what it earned . no injustice today . indeed , allah is swift at reckoning .
about the guilty .
`` o dear prophet , ask the story of the heavens for what is revealed to you . '' they said , `` the truth has come to them , '' and they said , “ the result of the truth is to come to them , and we are the senders . ”
whom allah has cursed . he said , `` i will certainly take a share of your servants ,
and do not make your hand tiedto your neck , nor stretch it forth to its utmost reach , so that you become blameworthy and destitute .
we know well that you are disheartened by what they say .
it gives its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . god presents parables for mankind , so that they may take heed .
the day when they will be shoved forcibly toward the fire of hell ,
surely we shall cast upon you a weighty word .
the knowledge of the unseen is only with allah , and he is the knower of all that is in the right , and he knows whatever is in the way of allah ; and what is in the way of allah , is not a thing , or a noble seed .
say , `` yes , and you will becontemptible . ''
and those who avoid the heinous sins and indecencies and when they are angry forgive ,
they will say : nay ! ye have no welcome for them ; it is ye who have made it to us an evil abode .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add chastisement to punishment because they used to cause corruption .
i am for you a faithful messenger ,
and to establish prayer , and fear allah , and to him you will be gathered .
and when the right of you are recited to you , he said , “ do you kill me , so that you may bring you to a right , so that we may bring you to a clear heart , so that we may make you go into a new land ? ”
and the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
but if they break their oaths after their covenant and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief , for they have no faith—so that they may desist .
and it is not a jest .
when the disciples said : o jesus son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? he said : fear allah , if you are believers .
and we placed in the earth firm mountains lest it should shake with them , and we placed therein passages for paths that haply they may be guided .
shall i take other gods apart from him ? if the most merciful should intend me any harm , their intercession will avail me not , nor will they save me .
eat and drink , and be comforted . if you see any human being say , `` i have vowed a fast to the beneficent god , and i will not speak to any human being today . ''
he said to his servants , `` put their moneyinto their saddlebags . perhaps they will recognize it when they are returned to their people , so that they may come back . ''
do you think that you will be left as though god has not yet ascertained those among you who strive and do not take any sincere friends besides allah and his messenger , and the believers ? god is aware of what you do .
they will abide therein for ages .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
what , do you come to men , and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? '' but the answer of his people was only that they said : `` bring the punishment of allah , if you are truthful . ''
they will have fruits and all that they ask for .
and whoever comes to him with a believerhe has done righteous deeds , for them is the highest ranks ,
do not groan today . you will not be helped by us .
as if they had never lived there . lo ! thamood disbelieved in their lord ; away with thamud !
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running . he said , “ o moses , the chiefs are conspiring to kill you , so leave . i am your well-wisher . ”
these are onguidance from their lord , and these are the successful .
say , ‘ you will not be questioned about our sins nor will we be questioned about your deeds . ’
woe to me ! would that i had not taken so-and-so as a friend .
that you will have whatever you choose ?
he says , “ i have spent enormous wealth . ”
the shadows of the darkness , the like thereof , it is the darkness of the darkness , and the shadows of the darkness , the light of which allah will never find his light .
and those whom they invoke besides him have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and they know .
when he said to his father : `` o my father ! why do you worship that which heareth not and seeth not ? -
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed ; but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
he said , `` it was she who sought to seduce me . '' and a witness from her own household testified : `` if his shirt is torn from the front , she is telling the truth and he is one of the liars .
when they entered into his presence , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ a strange people ! ’
by al-'asr .
how many a creature there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . he is the hearer , the knower .
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them ? he has appointed for them a term whereof there is no doubt ; but the unjust refuseexcept with ingratitude .
allah does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought you against your religion nor expelled you from your homes . indeed , allah loves the equitable ,
they make it a favour to you . say : `` do not make a favour to me . '' say : `` do not make me a favour for me . nay , but allah has conferred a favour upon you , if you are truthful .
and remember the name of your lord morning and evening ;
whomsoever allah sendeth astray , there is no guide for him , and he letteth them wander perplexed in their exorbitance .
indeed allah knows those among you who hinder others , and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , '' and come to battle but little .
till he was two bows ' length or even nearer ,
god has heard the words of her who argued with you concerning her husband and complains to allah . god hears both among you . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
are they waiting for the angels to come to them , or the command of your lord should come to pass ? those before them did . god did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
those who do not expect to meet us , and are pleased with the life of this world , and are satisfied with it , and those who pay no heed to our signs ,
saying : `` restore to me the servants of allah . i am a trustworthy messenger to you ,
they can not overhear the higher assembly for they are pelted from every side ,
and they have misled many , and do not increase the wrongdoers except in error . ''
and allah has made a clear book for the sun and the moon , and the alternation of the night and the day , and to recite it to the commands of allah , the means of truth is due to the people . and he has created the verses for a people who are guided .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the virtuous .
and what you do not see .
he it is who has made the qur'an to be a revelation from those who take heed and do not remember .
again , you will soon come to know .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among you , who recites to you our verses and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
when the wild beasts are herded together ;
and how many a town have we destroyed that exulted in its lifestyle ! those are their dwellings , uninhabited after them except a little ; and we were the inheritors .
or have you a book wherein you read
whoever is an enemy to allah and his angels and his messengers , and gabriel and michael , then indeed allah is an enemy to the disbelievers .
they will come forth from the graves with downcast eyes as if they were scattered locusts .
and they dispute concerning me , when they dispute with me , and the right path is guided to the words of your lord , and he is the best knower of what you do .
indeed there came to them a messenger from among them , but they denied him , so the punishment overtook them while they were unjust .
looking towards their lord .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution , then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
he said : i am better than he . thou createdst me of fire , and him thou createdst of clay .
when it is said to them : `` beware of that which is before you and what is behind you , in order that you may receive mercy . ''
so worship what you will besides him . say , ‘ the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . indeed , that is the clear loss . ’
abaseand exalt .
as for the women , they are to come to your place , to remain in it , or to be directed to your own in a state of yours , a way for you , in a state of justice , that he may take you away from the remembrance of allah , and do not remember the favour of allah to you . god has knowledge of all things .
will be gathered together for a known day .
and this is a book we have sent down , blessed , so follow it and fear allah so that you may receive mercy .
and we did not make them bodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
let man consider his food .
then howwhen the angels take them , beating their faces and their backs ?
as for those who have believed and those who migrate and struggle in the way of allah , those have hope of the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
so how were my punishment and my warnings ?
say , “ o people of the book ! do not exceed the limits in your religion , and do not follow the fancies of a people who went astray before , and led many astray , and misled many from the right path . ”
and ask forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
this which we recite to you is a revelation and a wise reminder .
but they called their companion , and he tookand slew .
and they fall down on their faces weeping , and it increases them in humility .
he said , “ they are close upon my footsteps , and i hastened to you , my lord , that you may be pleased . ”
but they turned away . so we sent upon them the inundation of the dam and replaced their gardens with two other gardens , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
we would have been the chosen servants of god . ''
they said , `` call upon your lord to make clear to us what she has done . '' he said , `` he says , `` he says , 'it is a cow neither old nor young ; so do what you are commanded '
but as for him who believes and does good , he will have a reward for him , and we shall speak to him a mild command .
they say : `` why are not signs sent down upon him from his lord ? '' say : `` signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner . ''
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . god does not like aggressors .
except an old woman who remained behind .
exclaim not today for one destruction , but pray for many destructions !
thenrest and bounty and a garden of bliss .
so he has no friend today ,
and say to him , 'would youpurify yourself
and of men and beasts and cattle , and cattle are different from allah 's ; surely those who have knowledge of allah fear allah ; surely allah is mighty , forgiving .
but why do they come to you for judgment when they have the torah , wherein is the judgement of allah ? yet they turn away after that . they are not believers .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
and we have not appointed for the people of the fire any other than a matter for those who disbelieve , and to those who have been given the lie to the truth , it is only for those who have been given the lie to the truth , and that the disbelievers may say to the believers : `` what is the matter with god that he will guide the believers ? '' and it is only for him that he will guide . and it is only for him that he will guide .
and it is he who spread the earth and placed therein firm mountains and rivers ; and of every fruit he has made in it two kinds ; he makes the night cover the day . indeed in that are signs for a people who reflect .
“ go to pharaoh , he has rebelled . ”
indeed , allah has conferred a great favour upon the believers when he sent among them a messenger to recite to them his signs , and purifying them and teaching them the book and wisdom , although they were in manifest error .
and the people of the woods were wont to be of the people of the two eastsand a blessed word that we had blessed . and it was he who was a fast to the children of israel , and that they were in the way .
he said , “ we have tried your people in your absence , and the samiri has led them astray . ”
he begetteth not , nor was he begotten .
so that they are the ones who told the truth , and the devils will not be called to account for the people of the truth . they are the ones who have received the truth , and they have no knowledge of this , and they will have no power to do anything .
the revelation of this book is from the lord of the worlds .
and it is said , “ who can cure ? ”
and that they say what they do not do ?
and then there comes to them that which they were promised .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
and they swear by allah their strongest oaths that allah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , it is a promise binding on him , but most of mankind know not .
and he said , “ o my people , it is in your power to bring forth your judgement , and in which you will be in the matter ; and who can show me the right path ? ” so he said , “ i am just one of the truthful . ”
alif lam ra . a book we have sent down to you that you may lead mankind out of darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the almighty , the praiseworthy .
it is he who created you from a single person , and a place of residingand a place of residingand a place of storageor in your father 's loins . we have indeed spelled out our signs for a people who understand .
they will say : nay ! ye have no welcome for them ; it is ye who have made it to us an evil abode .
and i have told you the treasures of the lord , and i do not know that i am the guardian of the believers , and allah is the best of those who are mindful of you , and allah is the wakilover him .
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word will be fulfilled , and i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
do you think that you will be left as though god has not yet ascertained those among you who strive and do not take any sincere friends besides allah and his messenger , and the believers ? god is aware of what you do .
and by the earth which splitteth ,
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
we have incorporated death in your constitution , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
theheart lied notwhat hesaw .
behaving arrogantly , and reviled them .
you have no concern in the matter , whether he turns towards them or punishes them . they are wrongdoers .
your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
and verily we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
these are the unbelievers , the wicked .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself . he said , “ i do not think that this will ever perish . ”
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of shadowseized them . surely , it was the punishment of a great day .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . to him belongs all praise . he is powerful over everything .
then , has the news of the people of the past come to them , and the people of the earth and those who were after them had come to them , the messenger had come to them with the truth , and they did not have any knowledge of what they had been sent with , or they had been sent back to their own souls , and they did not have any faith in that which you had been sent with . they would have been sent to the two people .
as for those who hold fast to the book and keep up prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
and we communicated to him the decree that the last remnant of the disbelievers would be cut off .
we will call the guards of hell .
they will say , `` to god . '' say , `` then how are you deluded ? ''
and when he reached his maturity and full strength , we gave him wisdom and knowledge ; and thus do we reward the doers of good .
and when the messengers are collected at the appointed time ,
and it is he who gives life and makes to enter the land , so that he may make it stationary , and he will make the sky to swallow them , and when he will make the earth to swallow up , and they will be brought forth to the earth , and they will be filled with kindness .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and have disputed with us , so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
this is naught but an admonition unto the worlds-
how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were stronger in valour than they , and they searched about in the land ? is there any asylum ?
had these been gods , they would not have entered it . they will all abide therein .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
they will say , `` yes , indeed , a warner came to us , but we denied , and said , 'god has not sent down anything . you are not but in great error '
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they shall abide forever . that is the supreme triumph .
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of those before . most of them were idolaters .
these—god may pardon them . allah is ever pardoning and forgiving .
and wait ! we are waiting . ''
then he turned back and was haughty .
do you not see that whoever is in the heavens and the earth prostrate themselves in the heavens and the earth and the sun and the moon ? and many of them are the people of the heavens and the earth , and allah does not bless whomever he wills .
and they say : naught is this but our present life ; we die and we live , and naught destroyeth us save time . they have no knowledge of that which they have no knowledge . they have no knowledge .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
he said : `` the son of this matter is to be directed to the course of this matter , '' he said , `` no one can save him on this day , except for him whom god has chosen . ''
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
in a book well-guarded .
except from their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
joseph said , `` my lord , i have the great charge of what they call upon , and if you are senile , do not be arrogant , and do not be of the ignorant . ''
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against allah .
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i favoured you and that i preferred you tocreatures .
indeed the godwary will be amid shades and springs ,
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a terrible punishment would have touched you for what you ventured into .
`` peace be upon you for what you patiently endured . how excellent is the final abode ! ''
that is the result of their own deeds . it is they who are the same to them , and it is the same to them that they believe , and those who have faith and say , `` allah will bring it to whom he will . '' but those who have faith and say , “ allah will have made a right way . ”
they almost provoked you to drive you out of the land , and to expel you from it , but they would not have stayed after you but a little .
o you who believe ! be wary of allah , and then take care of him ; and they are the ones who are good to the believers , and they are the ones to whom he pleases , and to the way of allah , and allah is the embracer , the knower .
and his companion will say : `` here isready with me ! ''
surely in this is a sign for the believers .
and we placed in the earth firm mountains lest it should shake with them , and we placed therein passages for paths that haply they may be guided .
saying : `` i am your lord , the most high '
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and these are the people of understanding .
and this is my straight path , so follow it , and do not follow other ways ; they will scatter you away from his path . he has enjoined upon you the bidding of your lord that you may guard .
and joseph has put his staff to him before he came to his own gain , and then we sent a messenger to him , and we had sent them a casting of his brother , and we were in the heaven , and we would have set up the right path with him , and we are the best to know .
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
until death came to us . ’
but they have rejected it , and they will soon come to know .
but allah will never delay a soul when its term comes ; and allah is aware of what you do .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will neither fear any privation nor burden .
and we bestowed upon him isaac and jacob , and allwe made righteous .
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
woe , then , to those who disbelieve in their day which they are promised .
o you who have faith ! do not take a friends of the friends of your own souls , and do not be a skeptic in the way of allah , and they disbelieve in that which you have been commanded , and if you are going to do so , they will be in the hearts of those who have been bent on denying the truth .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or bring allah and the angels before us .
does every man of them hope to enter the garden of bliss ?
and your lord inspired the bee : `` make your homes in the mountains , and in the trees and in what they erect .
and if you turn away from them , seeking mercy from your lord which you hope , then speak to them a gentle word .
they will say , `` we stayed a day or part of a day . ask those who have kept count '' .
on the day when the hour comes , they will be separated into categories .
that you will have whatever you choose ?
and when allah promised you one of the two parties , you wished to be yours , and you wished that the unarmed one would be yours , and allah desired to prove the truth with his words , and to cut off the root of the disbelievers .
it may be that allah will create love between you and those with whom you are at enmity ; and allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
but when he gave them of his bounty they became niggardly , and turned away in aversion .
and the one who has created you of an object of your own , so that you may be set up in it , so that the example of which is in the heavens and the earth , and a variety of oil , and the like of it , in the sky , and the like of it , are the best of beautiful plants .
and those who cried lies to the truth , they said , “ recite the qur ’ an , ” , and they said , “ you are not going to follow the command of allah , and say , ‘ no , indeed , allah does not have any faith . ’ in fact , they say , ‘ no , indeed , allah ’ s command is not right . ’
so they turned their backs on him and went away .
who know all that you do .
and no sign comes to them from the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
so he has no friend today ,
when the heaven is split asunder
and no sign comes to them from the signs of their lord except that they turn away from it .
but his lord chose him and made him among the righteous .
allah commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , judge with justice . and when you judge between people , allah is the hearer , the seer .
and nothing prevented men from believing when guidance came to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord , except that the example of the ancients should come to them , or that the punishment should come upon them face to face .
we created man from an extract of clay .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , the unbelievers say to the truth when it has come to them , “ this is clear magic . ”
then we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the perishing .
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself wholly to allah , and follows his religion , and follows the religion of abraham , the upright , and allah took abraham for a friend ?
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
those who say , `` our lord , we have believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire . ''
he said : my lord ! because thou hast put me astray , i will surely make them go astray on earth , and i shall lead them astray ,
and among them are some who listen to you , but when they leave the presence of your presence , they say , `` what has he said now ? '' those are they whose hearts allah has sealed , and they follow their lusts .
you will never attain righteousness until you spend out of what you love . whatever you spend , god is aware of it .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may become righteous .
were we wearied by the first creation ? but they are in doubt about a new creation .
lot was also one of the messengers .
and said : `` shall we follow a mortal , from among us ? we will surely be in error and madness .
so taste , so that you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . we have forgotten you . taste the punishment of eternity for what you used to do .
who taught by the pen ,
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and almsgiving , and he was pleasing to his lord .
and they urge you to hasten the punishment . and if there had not been a specified term for them , the punishment would have come to them ; and it will come upon them suddenly while they are unaware .
and they will say , “ submit , and when they are in your presence , some of them are in the night , a part of the night , which you are bound to be joined . therefore , those who are made to go back on the day of judgement . god is sufficient as a witness . ”
your lord will gather them together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
allah does not forgive that compeers be ascribed to him , but he forgives whom he wills . and whoever ascribes partners to allah has strayed far away .
he said , “ i only complain of my grief and grief to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
there was not one of them who did not deny the messengers , so my retribution was justified .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book , when they are called to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a group of them turns away ?
they do not speak before he speaks , and they act by his command .
he was one of our believing servants .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
`` who set up another god with allah , thencast him in the severe torment . ''
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
he said : take hold of it and fear not . we shall restore it to its former state .
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , wherein they shall abide forever . that is the supreme triumph .
their security during winter and summer journeys .
those are they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he turned to heaven and levelled it seven heavens . he has knowledge of all things .
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
we had commanded adam before , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
for every nation is a term ; when their term comes , they will not delay it at a single hour , nor will they advance it .
over my servants you have no authority , except the erring ones who follow you .
he said : therein ye shall live , and therein ye shall die , and therefrom ye shall be brought forth .
when they are told , `` prostrate yourselves before the merciful , '' they say , `` and what is the most merciful ? will we prostrate ourselves before that which you command ? '' and it increases them in aversion .
and mention in the book abraham . he was a man of truth , a prophet .
till a known term .
say : travel in the land and see what was the end of those who belied .
and we will settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ''
it is not the speech of a poet . how little do you believe !
o prophet , tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaks over their backs . that is more likely that they will be recognised and not be harassed . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desertcame to the prophet , seeking exemption , and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home ; a painful punishment will afflict those who disbelieved .
and to the people of 'ad said : `` o my people ! worship allah , for you have no other god besides him . you have no other god but he . so do not be a sign from your lord . you will be unable to make a mistake . ''
it is he who is god in the heavens and the earth . he is the all-wise , the all-knowing .
those who have believed and emigrated and struggled in the way of allah , and those who are in the cause of god , and those who have spent their wealth and lives , they will have a treaty . but if they have been truthful , they will have no power to help you . god is aware of what you do .
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
he will say , “ how many years did you stay on earth ? ”
he said , “ it is my staff ; i lean on it , and herd my sheep with it , and i have other uses for it . ”
say : `` do you worship besides allah that which has no power to harm or benefit you ? god is all-hearing and all-knowing . ''
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : `` did we bar you from the guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but you were guilty . ''
and you will be three sorts .
and we shall drive the guilty to hell thirsty
is it you who sent it down from the clouds , or is it we who bringdown ?
indeed in this are signs , and indeed , we are ever testing .
they said , ‘ woe to us ! indeed , we were taghun
he said , “ you are of those reprieved . ”
and indeed we favoured moses and aaron ,
my lord , grant me wisdom , and join me with the righteous .
and they say : hallowed be our lord ! verily the promise of our lord must be fulfilled .
when they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a distant place .
he who made the earth a bed for you , and made for you roads in it , so that you may be guided .
but those who deny our revelations and scorn them , they shall be the inmates of hell , where they will remain forever .
so we destroyed those who were mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
and he who is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him who has created the heavens and the earth , and he has created it , and he has created it , and has created it in a variety of various colors .
you are but a human being like us , and we think you are a liar .
but the wretched will avoid it .
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
and we sent not a prophet to a town but we seized its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and leave them a level plain ,
and they were not able to stand up , nor were they helped .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; but when the promise of my lord comes , he will make it level , and the promise of my lord is true .
and grapes and clover ,
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all together . ''
or do you feel secure that he will not send you back to sea again , and send against you a hurricane of wind and drown you for your ingratitude ? then you will not find any avenger against us .
as for the women , they are to come to your place , to remain in it , or to be directed to your own in a state of yours , a way for you , in a state of justice , that he may take you away from the remembrance of allah , and do not remember the favour of allah to you . god has knowledge of all things .
he said , `` o my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? you put him behind your backs . my lord encompasses all that you do .
and if you are in doubt about it , then know that we have created you from dust , and then to drink , and then it is the same to you that we may give you a right course , so that you may make it clear to the ground , and to the earth , as you are commanded . as for the earth , it is a right course for you , and to the earth , as you will .
say , “ whether you hide what is in your hearts or disclose it , god knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ; and allah has power over all things . ”
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above all beings ?
and when moses said to his people : `` o my people ! work according to your own people , and you will return to it , and to him go back to the right way , and he is the most acceptor of repentance , the most merciful . ''
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
loving , equals in age ,
say thou : verily allah ! he is the one who hath sent down unto thee the truth , and say : allah is the witness of that which ye have been working . say thou : lo ! i am one of the witnesses , and i am the guardian of that which ye ascribe .
and those who keep away from the right path , your lord is the best doer of good , and your lord is the one who is upright , and he is not aware of it . he is the best knower of it .
and if the debtor is in difficulty , give him respite till the time of ease . but if you remitas charity , it is better for you if you only knew .
so he prayed to his lord : `` i am overcome , so help me . ''
your lord has not forsaken you , nor is he displeased with you ,
verily the god-fearing shall be among gardens and fountains ,
in themwill be two springs gushing forth .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
but whoever turns away and disbelieves ,
and the word will be fulfilled against them because of their wrong-doing , and they will not speak .
and when the matter is quoted to them , we shall make you go to leave , or you may go back to the land , and to be a great thing for the sake of this world , and so that you may turn away from it . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger will abide in hell for ever ? that is the supreme disgrace .
and for the matter , it is only for him that he is the same , and it is only for his own soul ; and it is only for him that he is the same , and do not be one of the doubters .
say , `` is it that he will guide you to the right guidance ? '' say , `` god will guide the truth to the truth . '' what , do you not guide the true way ?
now clasp your hand to your armpit : it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
and those before themrejected , and the messenger , and their own souls , and their own lives , and they said , “ the fire is the fire , if you are unaware . ”
to prayer , to prayer which you have been commanded to pray to the first of the first time , and for the first of them are the righteous , and allah loves those who purify themselves .
the first of them will say to the last of them : `` you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ''
or lest you should say , `` our fathers ascribed partners to allah , and we were descendants after them . will you then destroy us for what the falsifiers have done ? ''
and do not invoke besides allah what can neither help nor harm you . if you do so , you will surely be of the wrongdoers .
he will have no strength , and no helper .
and with truth we have sent it down , and with truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
he said , “ this is the parting between me and you . i will inform you of the interpretation of that which you could not have patience . ”
as a grace from your lord . that is the great triumph .
except the companions of the right hand .
then eat of every fruit and follow the ways of your lord made easy . there comes forth from their bellies a drink in which there is healing for mankind . indeed in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
o ye who believe ! know that the idolaters are the ones who are the ones to come down by the sacred mosque , and if they fear allah , then know that allah is the knower , the wise .
your lord said to the angels : `` i am about to be of the angels in the earth . '' they said , `` is there any that will be in the way of allah ? '' , `` do you know that you do not know what you do not know ? '' god said , `` i know what you do not know . ''
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and maintains piety—god loves the pious .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
the day when the trumpet will be sounded , you will come in droves ,
follow what has been revealed to you from your lord ; there is no god but he , and turn away from the polytheists .
and when it is said unto them : what is it that your lord hath sent down ? they say : fables of the ancients .
then it will be said to those who were unjust : taste the torment of eternity . are you recompensed for what you used to earn ?
and the one who has created you of an object of your own , so that you may be set up in it , so that the example of which is in the heavens and the earth , and a variety of oil , and the like of it , in the sky , and the like of it , are the best of beautiful plants .
every soul is mortgaged for its own deeds .
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then are you perverted ?
“ eat of the good things we have provided you , and do not exceed the limits , lest my wrath descend upon you , and he upon whom my wrath descends has fallen . ”
so we seized him and his hosts and threw them into the sea . so see how was the end of the unjust .
and certainly we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and reminder for the righteous ,
behold , they commit the word on the day of judgment , they will be looking on in the fire , they will say , `` our lord , do not make us a representation of what we have been commanded . '' so he will have the punishment of hell , so that you will have no helpers .
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
and it is said , “ who can cure ? ”
averted from it is he who is turned away .
the day when they will be tried at the fire ,
and spend in the way of allah , and do not cast yourselves into destruction by your own hands . do good ; indeed allah loves the doers of good .
but those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
indeed the day of decision is the appointed time for all of them ,
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as a guardian .
if you are eager to guide them , indeed allah does not guide those who mislead , and they will have no helpers .
`` and what is that in your right hand , o moses ? ''
and they said , “ we have more wealth and children , and we are not to be punished . ”
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
say , `` if the sea were ink for the words of my lord , the sea would be exhausted before the words of my lord were exhausted , even if we brought replenishment the like of it . ''
no soul knows what delights of the eye is kept hidden for them .
when you turn away from us , the hypocrites say , `` do not ask your lord to ask you for his forgiveness . '' say , `` do not ask forgiveness of your lord , for god and his messenger will be brought back to you , and then you will have to return to what you have done . ''
and those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when ye are disintegrated in dust , then will ye be in a new creation ?
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
will surely eat from the zaqqum tree
yet before this was the book of moses , a guide and a mercy , and this is a book in the arabic language , to warn those who do evil , and to warn those who do good .
and when the servant of allah stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn away .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings an evil deed will only be recompensed for what they used to do .
and we placed in the earth firm mountains lest it should shake with them , and we placed therein passages for paths that haply they may be guided .
speak to them as a way to you , to be guided by you , and allah is the most merciful to give you the right way , and he will give you a good share of the night , and so do not make the way of allah to be a trial for you . so do not make the way of allah to be a manager .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : would that my people knew
but when they saw it , they said , “ we are lost . ”
we made a covenant with the children of israel and sent messengers to them . whenever a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire , some they accused of lying , and some they slew .
surely the dwellers of the garden will be in pastimes .
have you considered the fire which you kindle ?
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and let every soul look to what it has sent down for the morrow . and fear allah ; surely allah is aware of what you do .
we gave moses the book ; so do not be in doubt about the encounter with him , and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
the people of noah denied before them , and the dwellers of rass and the thamud ,
they will say , `` to allah . '' say , `` will you not then remember ? ''
but those whose scales are light are those who have lost their souls , in hell they will abide .
surely those who believe and do good works shall appoint for them love .
joseph , turn away from this , and you will ask forgiveness for your sin . you are indeed of the sinners . ''
abiding therein forever . indeed with allah is a great reward .
the revelation of this book is from allah , the all-mighty , the all-knowing ,
all that is in the case of the messenger , do not be held accountable for the people of the truth , and do not serve the way of allah , for they are the ones who have come to believe in the way of god , so that you are not unjust to the people . it is god who has the power to do so .
and they ask you to hasten the good , though the people of the same end will come to them . your lord is the lord of all being , and indeed , your lord is a great punishment .
and allah will guide you with the truth . but if the two of them were to be mentioned , the two of them were to say to the two of them , “ it is the same for the parents and the relatives , and if only a right had been accepted from them , it was only a confirmation of what is before them , and if only he was a noble messenger , it was a proper matter for him . ”
that it is the speech of a noble messenger .
and who originates creation , then repeats it , and who gives you sustenance from the sky and the earth ? is there a god with allah ? say , “ bring your proof , if you are truthful . ”
verily he reflected and guessed ,
this is the word of their wives , and that they should be told , `` go into the night , '' , `` so take the part of their own nights and kinsmen . '' then they will have no power to do what is right before them , and allah is well aware of what they do .
and to allah prostrates whosoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and their shadows in the morning and evening .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are resurrected
and you will not , unless allah wills , the lord of the worlds .
“ this is what you were promised—for every careful penitent .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have done , so that they may have a part of what they have done , in order that they may return .
say , “ my lord does not care for you , but you do not worship him ; but you have denied the truth , and the inevitable will come to you . ”
he said , “ yes , and you will then be among the near-stationed . ”
and the devil had made clear to them the same , and of his people is the same , and their shameful parts became fair to them , and their heads turned around , and their lord said , “ did i not forbid you , that the devil is not to be a man of yours ? indeed , the shaitan is indeed the most honourable , the most merciful .
and they dispute concerning me , when they dispute with me , and the right path is guided to the words of your lord , and he is the best knower of what you do .
they will say : `` glory be to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , but they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them . ''
o ye who believe ! take your precaution , then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
the believers will not be able to believe in the believers and those who are bent on denying the truth , and have no supporters in their faith . as for those who are bent on denying the truth , it is only a confirmation of what you have done , and to allah is your return .
in their stories are abraham , the people of abraham , to whom he pleases , to be their eyes , to whom he pleases , and he who turns away from the path of god , for him is the punishment , and he is the most worthy of all kinds .
but my pleas have only increased their aversion .
and those who disbelieve say : `` no faith will believe in this before this , but if the wrongdoers are guided , they say , `` if you are truthful , ''
then he frowned and scowled ,
when the unbelievers see you they do not take you except for mockery , `` is this the one who talks of your gods ? '' and they are disbelievers in the remembrance of the merciful .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
they say : `` why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? '' have not a sign come to them in the former books ?
o reassured soul ,
when the sun is rolled up .
and when the matter is quoted to them , we shall make you go to leave , or you may go back to the land , and to be a great thing for the sake of this world , and so that you may turn away from it . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and when the messengers are collected at the appointed time ,
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the holy valley of tuwa .
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening , and on the day when the hour is established , 'admit the people of pharaoh into the most terrible chastisement . ''
upon the disbelievers , which none can avert ,
striking sparks of fire
then he turned back and was haughty .
o prophet , fear allah and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
this is the word of their wives , and that they should be told , `` go into the night , '' , `` so take the part of their own nights and kinsmen . '' then they will have no power to do what is right before them , and allah is well aware of what they do .
as for the right way , your right way is a lesson for them , and a lesson for them , in order to make a clear statement to you , until , when they come to you , they say , `` it is not but the tales of the ancients . ''
without adding , `` if god may please . '' and remember your lord when you forget , and say , “ perhaps my lord will guide me to something nearer to rectitude than this . ”
and the disbelievers are the ones who are arrogant ; and indeed , we are going to follow you ; so do you take a way on this day ? so do you have a way to be directed . so woe to us for what we have done .
muhammad is not a messenger except a messenger . there will be a noble messenger before him . if he dies , he turns back on his heels . and whoever turns on his heels , will not harm him , and allah will reward the thankful .
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal anything from allah .
upon her neck a rope of palm-fibre .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is most forgiving to those who are penitent .
and the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
they said , `` they swear by allah to each other in the night , and we will then say to his family , `` we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we did not say to his family , `` we were witness to the destruction of the destruction . ''
do not be like the women of those who were given the same , and follow the right path , and to your own covenant , lest you should attend to some of them , lest some of you are a group of some of them , lest some of you try to make a clear insight .
as for those who believe and do good works , theirs shall be happiness and an excellent resting place .
when he came to it , he was called from the right side of the valley in the blessed spot of the tree , `` moses , i am god , the lord of the universe . ''
when you turn away from us , the hypocrites say , `` do not ask your lord to ask you for his forgiveness . '' say , `` do not ask forgiveness of your lord , for god and his messenger will be brought back to you , and then you will have to return to what you have done . ''
he said : my lord ! appoint for me a sign . he said : thy sign is that thou shalt not speak to mankind for three nights , though thou art not to be able .
tell those who believe to forgive those who do not fear the days of allah , that he may recompense a people for what they used to earn .
so worship what you will besides him . say , ‘ the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . indeed , that is the clear loss . ’
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you shall have whatever you judge ?
have they not thought that allah did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth and for a term appointed ? yet many people disbelieve in the meeting with their lord .
and those hurling a reminder
they will have no food except bitter thorn ,
no nation can anticipate their term , nor can they delay it .
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill it returns like an old shrivelled palm-leaf .
but the wretched will avoid it .
and say : my lord ! cause me to enter the truth , and cause me to go forth with a rightful outgoing , and grant me from you a helpful authority .
and hell is brought near that day , on that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
my people , i ask of you no reward for it . my reward is only from him who created me . will you not then understand ?
do not call one of those among you who call upon others among yourselves . god knows those among you who slip away from his command , and let those who slip away from his command may suffer a painful punishment .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
and when the heaven is cleft asunder ,
say : `` no one can protect me from allah , nor can i find any refuge besides him .
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion is wholly wholly . but if they desist , allah is seeing of what they do .
and we would have given them from us a great reward .
and allah is the lord of the heavens and the earth , and he who believes in the light of him , and those who disbelieve are the ones who are the ones to follow the light of the fire . they are the dwellers of the fire . they will abide therein .
my wealth has not availed me .
and if you ask them , “ who created the heavens and the earth ? ” they will surely say , “ the almighty , the all knowing . ”
countenances on that day will be resplendent ,
and purify your clothes ,
they are the ones who say : `` spend not upon those who are with allah 's messenger until they desert him . '' to allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth , but the hypocrites do not understand .
those who disbelieve think that they will not be raised up . say : `` by my lord ! indeed , you will surely be resurrected , then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ''
and remember the tongue of thy lord , and he said : the messenger is with allah , and i am not going to give you the truth , and they say : verily we are not of the wrong-doers .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that in which you differ .
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . god is kind and merciful to you .
and when harm toucheth mankind they cry unto their lord , turning to him in repentance ; then when he giveth them a taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them begin to associate others with their lord
as for the thief , male or female , cut off the hands of the thief , the male and the female . as for what they have done , a punishment from allah is mighty .
and they will say , “ submit , and when they are in your presence , some of them are in the night , a part of the night , which you are bound to be joined . therefore , those who are made to go back on the day of judgement . god is sufficient as a witness . ”
do you feel conscious of the unseen before the one that has come to you ? but when he is mentioned , then be steadfast in your prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and allah is aware of what you do .
so turn away from them for a while ,
and when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will call for destruction .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
on the day when it will be heated in the fire of hell , and their foreheads and their sides and their backs will be branded with them : 'this is the thing you have treasured up for yourselves . taste the torment for your herds '
surely we shall cast upon you a weighty word .
they have no knowledge of it . they follow nothing but conjecture , and conjecture is no substitute for the truth .
they ask you about the mountains . say , `` my lord will scatter them as dust
and we divided them into sections on the earth , some of them otherwise , and some of them are righteous ; and we tested them with good things and evil in order that they may return .
it will be only one shout , and behold , they will be staring .
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
father , i fear lest a punishment from the most beneficentovertake you , and you become a friend of satan . ''
god has decreed : `` i will surely prevail . i and my messengers will certainly prevail . ''
those who took the calf , incurred the wrath of their lord and abasement in the life of this world . thus do we reward those who invent falsehoods .
and put thy trust in the mighty , the merciful ,
we have sent you with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
on the right side of the book there is a lesson for the people in the book . this quran is inspired in it , to say , `` god knows the unseen and the seen , '' and they have knowledge of the unseen .
we will narrate to them with knowledge , for we were not absent .
and when they see some merchandise or sport , they break off to it and leave you standing . say , “ what is with god is better than diversion and dealing . and allah is the best of providers . ”
a recompense for what they did .
it is god who has made a mistake , and is an evil thing , and evil is the matter of the people , the people of the same , and the same is the same for them , and they will be made to do evil in the land , and they will be made to do evil .
worship allah , and do not worship any partners in his divinity , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the poor , and the relatives , and the wayfarer . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
and set not up with allah another god ; verily i am unto you from him a warner manifest .
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have done , so that they may have a part of what they have done , in order that they may return .
aaron had already told them before : `` o my people ! you are only being tested by it . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my command . ''
thus we recompensed them for their ingratitude . do we penalize any but the ungrateful ?
as for the boat , it belonged to masakinworking in the sea .
say , `` the angel of death who has been given charge of you will gather you , then you will be brought back to your lord . ''
and by the night when it retreats
they say , `` be jews or christians , you will be guided . '' say , `` nay , the religion of abraham , the upright , and he was not of the polytheists . ''
do not let satan bar you . he is your sworn enemy .
so he has no friend today ,
and the sky will be split open—for it will be frail on that day—
who are steeped in ignorance and heedlessness .
and thus we have told them , `` this is our command , '' and a one of them said : `` do we have a day , other than a day ? '' he said , `` it is only a day of which your lord will bring you to life , and let him have a share of it , and let him have no one to do it . '' so let him be a confirmer !
nor are theshade and theheat of the sun .
those who fear their lord unseen , while they are apprehensive of the hour .
we did not send before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked in the markets . we have appointed some of you a trial for others . will you exercise patience ? your lord is always watchful .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a terrible punishment would have touched you for what you ventured into .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan ? he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward .
your allah is only allah , there is no god but he . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
say , “ my lord has established the command of justice , and in all things they hear , and their hearts and their skins are in different parts . and to him you will be brought back . ”
god is the only lord , the living , the one who is the sustainer of the heavens and the earth . he is the guardian of what is in the heavens and the earth , and whose is the knowledge of the world , and the law of allah . it is he who is the almighty , the great .
he said , “ my lord , open my breast for me . ”
that allah may acquit them of the worst of what they did , and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
does he have knowledge of the unseen , so he sees ?
we called to him , `` abraham ,
and we gave david solomon . how excellent a servant he was ! he was penitent .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they believe not .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be harsh with them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
nay , each one of them desires to be given unrolled scrolls .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates whatever he wills . he grants daughters to whomever he wills , and grants males ,
by the scatterersscattering ,
the originator of the heavens and the earth . when he decrees a thing , he only says to it , “ be , ” and it is .
and we sent him to a hundred thousand , or more .
they said , “ by allah , you know we did not come to do evil in the land , and we are not thieves . ”
we have preferred them above them , and some of them spoke to the right path , with a right course , and a right course with the psalms , and if allah had so willed , they would have taken their faith in the right course , but if allah had so willed , they would have taken it in their differences .
then eat of every fruit and follow the ways of your lord made easy . there comes forth from their bellies a drink in which there is healing for mankind . indeed in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
i am for you a faithful messenger ,
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? and they shall have no helpers .
and we caused a plant of gourd to grow over him .
the indubitable event !
go both of you to pharaoh , for he has transgressed all bounds .
so judge conclusively between me and them , and deliver me and the believers with me . ''
so we answered him and removed his affliction , and we restored his family to him , and the like of them with them , as a mercy from us and a reminder for the worshippers .
return to your lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing .
that is the guidance from allah , and he guides whom he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have been annulled .
the messenger is only to deliver the message . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
and whoever is spared from it on that day , he will have mercy on him ; and that is the manifest triumph .
but they have rejected it , and they will soon come to know .
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
those who deny the book and what we had sent with our messengers will soon come to know .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is an open contender !
and on the day when the enemies of allah are gathered to the fire , they will be collected at the fire ,
when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be resurrected ?
it may be that your lord will have mercy on you , and if you revert , we will revert . we have made hell a prison for the unbelievers .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
and those who race in a race
give tidings to the hypocrites that there is for them a painful punishment .
this is how he has revealed the quran , so that we may make it clear to you , in which there is no doubt . some of them will enter paradise , and will be admitted to hell .
and allah will guide you with the truth . but if the two of them were to be mentioned , the two of them were to say to the two of them , “ it is the same for the parents and the relatives , and if only a right had been accepted from them , it was only a confirmation of what is before them , and if only he was a noble messenger , it was a proper matter for him . ”
every soul will taste death , then to us you will be returned .
shall we turn away the reminder from you , because you are a transgressing people ?
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and allah encompasses all things .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them in whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs , will they not listen ?
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide therein forever .
who have made the quran into fragments .
and let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is good for them , and we give them rein that they may grow in sin , so that they may be in sin .
and allah is the likeness of a man of whom is not of any benefit to him , and for him is the sustenance of the sustenance he has given , and he grants good to them , and he grants them the right way . all praise is to allah , who do not know .
the unbelievers say , `` you are not a messenger . '' say : `` god is sufficient as witness between me and you , and he who has knowledge of the book . ''
we recite to you some of the news of moses and pharaoh with truth for people who believe .
god has heard the words of her who argued with you concerning her husband and complains to allah . god hears both among you . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
nor any food except foul pus
and let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed therein , and whoever does not judge by what allah has sent down , those are the transgressors .
it is from solomon , and it is in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
we have honoured the children of adam and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above many of our creatures .
and glorify him during the night and after theprostrations .
that allah may acquit them of the worst of what they did , and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
those who believe , and those who are jews , and the christians , the jews , the sabaeans , or the sabians , the sabaeans , or the christians , allah will judge between them . god is witness over all things .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what has escaped you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
do not groan today . you will not be helped by us .
the fruits whereoflow and near .
so that , when the apostles are tried , in fact , a falsehood , that is a falsehood , that is the most disputatious of people . and whoever will be a liar , we shall surely be a liar .
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , `` this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our forefathers . ''
nay , allah raised him up unto himself ; and allah is ever mighty , wise .
indeed , those who oppose allah and his messenger , in order that he may disgrace them , and in their trespasses will be lost , and we have indeed sent down clear signs .
except those on whom your lord has mercy . he has created them . and the word of your lord has been fulfilled : “ i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . ”
then we sent after him messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had denied before . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
andwhen the lord of abraham tried abraham withcommands , and he fulfilled them . he said : `` i am going to make you a leader of the people , and my offspring said : `` my covenant ! ''
he is naught but a man who has forged a lie against allah , and we are not going to believe in him .
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me patiently ?
and when the case of mary , jesus , son of mary , is the case , `` i call to witness the name of your lord , and he said : `` glory be to you ! '' he said , `` glory be to you . indeed , you know what i have given you , and you know not what you know . you are aware of what they do . ''
and of his signs is that he created for you mates from yourselves , that you may find repose in them , and he has set between you affection and mercy . indeed in that are signs for a people who reflect .
nor do you urge one another to feed the poor ,
these are the salawat from their lord , and mercy , and those are the guided .
when a party of them said : `` why do you admonish a people whom allah will destroy or sternly punish ? '' they said , `` to be an excuse to your lord , and that they may be careful ofallah . ''
our lord , we have heard a caller calling to faith , “ believe in your lord . we have believed in your lord , and forgive us our sins , and make us die with the righteous . ”
and they say : hallowed be our lord ! verily the promise of our lord must be fulfilled .
those who fulfil the covenant of allah and do not break the covenant ;
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and we give it to drink of the cattle , and many of the people .
ask the city where we were and the caravan in which we came . we are truthful . ”
and nuh said : my lord ! leave not one of the disbelievers on earth .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins , and knows what you do .
and allah has made a revelation of the inspiration to stand with his hands , and of the people , and the glories of a fixed measure ; and that which is in the heavens and the earth know that allah is cognizant of all things .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up all that they have wrought ; but what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick . a magician will not succeed wherever he will . ’
then he made his progeny from an extract of a mean fluid ,
allah loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as if they were a solid structure .
he said : that which my lord hath established me is better , so help me with strength , and i will erect a barrier between you and them .
indeed , in the two parties is to be upright , and some of you are upright , and some of them are upright , and allah does so as he wills . indeed , in that is a lesson for those who do evil .
we have sent down the qur'an to you in portions .
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds .
then she said : `` what is the matter with you that you have been stoned to my own conduct ? '' but he who spoke to me spoke the truth , and to remain in it .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became nothing to be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the sinful people .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
, `` o abraham , leave this . your lord 's command has gone forth , and there is coming upon them a punishment that can not be averted . ''
so whoever wills may remember it .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . verily , his seizure is painful , severe .
those whom they call upon , are seeking to visit themselves with their lord ’ s mercy , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment ; surely the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
and indeed we have made the qur'an easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
how many a town have we destroyed while it was unjust , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty castles !
lot was also one of the messengers .
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and we give it to drink of the cattle , and many of the people .
to god belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is just as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . god has power over all things .
and the mountains as pegs ?
and what he has created for you in the earth of diverse hues , surely in this is a sign for people who remember .
he said : therein ye shall live , and therein ye shall die , and therefrom ye shall be brought forth .
they ask thee about the hour , -'when will be its appointed time ?
and all that we relate to you of the accounts of the messengers is that whereby we strengthen your heart ; and in this there has come to you the truth , and a reminder for the believers .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins , and knows what you do .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
but they divided themselves into sects , each rejoicing in what it had .
he said : we shall see whether thou hast spoken the truth or whether thou art of the liars .
and for all aredegrees according to what they have done , so that he may recompense them fully for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
remember , when your lord revealed to the angels , “ i am indeed the truth , therefore fear allah , and continue to fear him ; and you will be in awe of the faithless . ”
indeed , those who turn back after the guidance had become clear to them , satan has embellished their ways for them and has given them false hopes .
and we know that they say , `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be a fuel of the fire , and the fuel of which the fire is made to swallow them , and it is an appropriate matter of what they have been commanded .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
and do not disgrace me on the day when they are resurrected .
and the sorcerers prostrated themselves ,
god explains his revelations to you . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
those who are the lord of the throne will not respond to those who glorify the praises of allah , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and ask forgiveness for them , and say , `` our lord , give us mercy from those who have faith and say , `` our lord , give us your full knowledge . ''
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . none payeth heed except him who turns to him .
those who obey god and the messenger will be with those whom allah has blessed , the prophets and the truthful , the martyrs and the righteous , and excellent companions are those !
and whoever avenges himself after he has been wronged , there is no blame upon them .
when the wild beasts are herded together ;
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me patiently ?
and with them shall be damsels of refraining looks , large- eyed
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . their gods availed them not when your lord came to them , and they did not increase them in anything except their destruction .
indeed , we sent messengers to their people before you , and they brought them clear signs , but we took vengeance on those who sinned , and it was incumbent on us to help the believers .
and allah created the heavens and the earth with truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and he made the day a revival .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , ‘ myths of the ancients ! ’
he said : my lord ! verily my people have belied me .
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
o prophet , say to your wives : `` if you desire the life of this world and its adornment , come , i will provide for you and release you in a handsome manner .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
theheart lied notwhat hesaw .
they see it to be far off ,
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
then , on the contrary , some of them are like a piece of stones , and of the sky is split asunder , and some of them fear allah , and allah is not unaware of what you do .
those to whom we gave the book before it believe in it .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will have a better abode , and a better resting place .
before them is hell , and that which they have earned will not avail them at all , nor those whom they took as guardians besides allah . for them there is a great punishment .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a hanif , and he was not a polytheist .
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . but the wrongdoers have prepared for them a painful punishment .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and those in whose wealth is a known right
know that allah is severe in retribution , and that allah is forgiving , merciful .
is he who knows what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
they denied and followed their own desires ; and every matter has its appointed time .
then moses said : `` o my people ! be in the case of his people , '' he said , `` o my people , the promise of your lord is true , or you will not be able to take my promise , or you will not be able to take my promise . ''
if you turn your backs , i do not ask you any reward for you . my reward is only with allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit . ''
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and maintains piety—god loves the pious .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
they are nothing but names which you have named , you and your fathers . god has sent down no authority for them . they follow only conjecture and their own desires . yet guidance has come to them from their lord .
those will be rewarded with the highest placebecause of their patience . therein they shall be met with greetings and peace .
the warnings also came to the people of pharaoh .
our lord ! bring us out of this . then if we return , we will be unjust . ''
say : `` bring the truth that god has given you , '' and if they bear witness , do not speak with them , and if they are truthful , do not follow their desires , and do not follow their desires .
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : `` fear not ! '' and they gave him glad tidings of a knowledgeable son .
and not equal are the good deed and the evil deed , and repel the evil deed . then you will see that he between whom and you was a close friend .
as for those who were before you , they were destroyed by your wealth and your lives . then by the means of what they have been related to you , are the same , as if they were to be mentioned . they are the ones who are in the same way . they are the ones who are in the same way .
it is he who has made the earth a wide expanse for you , and for you the abode of the earth . he has made the sky to swallow you , so do not set up with god any way .
or as to one who has been brought into the presence of the wicked one on it , he said , “ what is the matter with you that god will bring the dead to life ? ” he said , “ i have been the same to be the people who have been given the lie to the truth , and when we have spoken the truth , then we are rightly-guided . ”
so they pursued them at sunrise .
those who believe , and those who are jews , and the christians , the jews , the sabaeans , or the sabians , the sabaeans , or the christians , allah will judge between them . god is witness over all things .
he said : this is a straight path .
all that is in the case of the messenger , do not be held accountable for the people of the truth , and do not serve the way of allah , for they are the ones who have come to believe in the way of god , so that you are not unjust to the people . it is god who has the power to do so .
they said , “ glory to our lord ! indeed we were unjust . ”
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
when the earth is shaken with ashaking ,
who believe in the signs of their lord ,
and those who are patient , the pleasure of their lord , are good and good , and spendout of what we have provided them , and are upright in speech .
o you who believe ! do not be in your own hands except to be your enemies , and do wrong with your own selves ; and what is with you is the result of their deeds , and what you have done is evil , and we have already appointed a covenant with you .
when it is said to them : `` to allah , to allah belongs the revelation , and to him say : `` this is allah ’ s fathers , and the recompense of what we had sent down to him , and why was it not that they were being guided ? ''
and my breast will be straitened , and my tongue will not be loosed .
and cushions ranged
have they not journeyed in the land and observed what is before them ? and how many a generationhave been sent down before them , and the law of the truth was made clear to them , and allah did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
he said : my lord ! lo ! i have called my people night and day
and obey not every mean swearer ,
o mankind ! there has come to you a reminder from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts , and a guidance and mercy for the believers .
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
and every soul is given the book ; but thou art filled with doubts , and their hearts are in doubt , but they say : `` woe to us ! but it is only a way , but your lord is not unjust to them . ''
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
then he followed a road
those who are godwary are not accountable for them in aught , but that they mayfear allah .
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth in truth , and the day when the truth is true , and the day when it is proclaimed , and the day the trumpet is blown , and he is the wise , the aware .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
say , “ none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah ; and they do not know when they will be resurrected . ”
striking sparks of fire
and he inspected the birds , and said : how is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
they used to sleep but little by night ,
upon them will be garments of fine green silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver ; and their lord will give them a pure drink .
if any of you were sick , then let it be a portion of it for the sake of those who are trying to be guided by the means that it is to the poor , to the poor , that is better for the poor , if only you knew it .
i ask of you no wage for it ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
on the day when the hour comes , they will be separated into categories .
and they said , “ we have more wealth and children , and we are not to be punished . ”
they said : build for him a building and cast him into the furnace !
we have assigned companions to them who made their deeds seem decorous to them and made them seem decorous to them , and the word has been realized against them in nations before them , and they were losers .
'nay , but my signs came unto thee , but thou didst deny them , and wast scornful and wast among the disbelievers .
they have sold the signs of allah for a paltry price and have barred others from his way . evil indeed is what they have been doing .
but theysplit their affair between them , all shall return to us .
she said : oh woe to me ! shall i bear a child before me , and my husband is an old man ? this is indeed a strange thing .
say : `` tell me , if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will the people of the wrong be destroyed ? ''
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved insolently and they were a tyrannical lot .
have they contrived some scheme ? we too are contriving .
have we not opened up your breast
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion .
therefore remind ; by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
and cite for them the parable of two men , to one of whom we had provided two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with palm trees and placed between them tillage .
allah , there is no god but he . his are the most beautiful names .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any friends besides him . little do you remember .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ,
round about them willyouths of perpetual ,
and the devil had made clear to them the same , and of his people is the same , and their shameful parts became fair to them , and their heads turned around , and their lord said , “ did i not forbid you , that the devil is not to be a man of yours ? indeed , the shaitan is indeed the most honourable , the most merciful .
his wealth and his childrenwill not avail him .
those who deny the book and what we had sent with our messengers will soon come to know .
so , enter it : `` enter the truth . '' she said , `` my lord , i have been made to be a cow to me . ''
pharaoh said : 'haman , build me a tower that i may reach the ways ,
and when they commit an indecency they say : we found our fathers doing it , and allah hath enjoined it on us ; say thou : verily allah enjoineth not indecency ; say thou : verily allah enjoineth not indecency , or do ye know .
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we will inform them of what they did . god knows all that is inhearts .
whatever good happens to you is from allah , and whatever ill befalls you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah suffices as witness .
and the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , is exalting him . and he is not aware of what they do , and he is ever pardoning and kind .
or , what is the matter with him that he will prostrate to the exclusion of the cautious , and say , `` are those who do not know ? '' say , `` are those who do not know ? ''
indeed , those who disbelieve and have done wrong , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to any way .
and we will proceed to what they did , and we will make it as dust wind-scattered .
and they say : `` tales of the ancients , which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and evening . ''
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her alone to graze in allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest they should be near .
but they divided themselves into sects , each rejoicing in what it had .
they ask you that they should take you away . say , `` whatever you spend is good for you , and orphans and the needy traveler what is good for you . but it is god who is the best knower of it . ''
and who turns away from the religion of abraham except one who debases himself ? we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then fasten him with a chain seventy cubits long .
o ye who believe ! be enmity and lewdness , and make things lawful for those who have been wont to worship ; so follow it , so that ye may be successful .
by the day when it reveals it ,
to prayer , to prayer which you have been commanded to pray to the first of the first time , and for the first of them are the righteous , and allah loves those who purify themselves .
say : `` if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a great day . ''
the likeness of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is as the likeness of a grain of corn that grows seven ears , in every ear a hundred grains . allah multiplies to whomsoever he will . allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
then , the believers were seduced with you , but the believers say : `` yes ! '' and so , , , `` you have departed in your hearts , so that the believers may be told , `` god has forsaken them . '' so allah has forsaken them , so averted them from the day of resurrection .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it , and were it not for a prior decree of your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
o you wives of the prophet ! hold fast to your religion , like the like of the creation of the first , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and obey the messenger . indeed , allah only desires to be of the faithful .
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
does man think that he will be left sudaon him ?
is it you who foster it , or are we the grower ?
thus , and we made other people inherit them .
and mention in the book moses . he was chosen , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
moses said to them , “ throw whatever you are going to throw . ”
our lord ! admit them to the gardens of eden which you have promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their spouses and their offspring . you are the almighty , the wise .
o you who believe ! do not be in your own hands except to be your enemies , and do wrong with your own selves ; and what is with you is the result of their deeds , and what you have done is evil , and we have already appointed a covenant with you .
and when we settled for abraham the site of the house , “ do not associate anything with me , and purify my house for those who circle around it , and those who bow and prostrate . ”
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
worship none but allah . i fear for you the punishment of a painful day . ''
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book , that haply they may be guided .
and with them will be women limitingglances and of equal age .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women , and good men are for good women , and good men are for good women . these are forgiveness and generous provision .
say , “ none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah ; and they do not know when they will be resurrected . ”
and in heaven is your provision , and what you are promised .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
those who had gone before this had said , `` woe to us ! '' and said , `` woe to us ! '' and allah increases and determines the sustenance of whomever he wants . and the disbelievers will not be able to make the earth to succeed .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , and they perceived not .
and your lord inspired the bee : `` make your homes in the mountains , and in the trees and in what they erect .
the beneficent , the merciful
couldst thou but see when they are terrified with no escape , and shall be seized from a near place , and they shall be seized from a near place .
on the day when the trumpet is blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
then the angels called out to him when he stood praying in the sanctuary , and allah announceth unto thee yahya confessing to a word from allah , and a prophet and a prophet .
so follow the truth of the truth which is with allah , and do not ascribe any partner to him , and do not ascribe any partner to him , as he has made a wind for him .
and scatterfar and wide ;
and verily it is a reminder unto the god-fearing .
and speak to the people of the book , except with the truth , except for those who do wrong , they say , 'we believe in us , and we are only one of those who believe , and we are only one of the guided .
that is the true day . so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
the king of mankind ,
had we wished to take a pastime , we would have taken it from ourselves , if we were to do so .
we shall provide them with fruit and meat such as they desire .
they said , `` what is the punishment , if you are lying ? ''
so we destroyed those who were mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
as for women past child-bearing , who have no hope of marriage , it is no sin for them if they discard their cloaks , though they discard their cloaks , though they put their fingers in their garments . and allah is hearing , knowing .
only those who believe in allah and the last day , perform the prayer , and pay the zakat , and fear none except allah , the almighty , the merciful , so that they may be among the guided .
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness , and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and made good your shapes ; and to him is the destination .
on the day when they behold the angels , there will be no good tidings for the guilty , and they will say : `` a ban forbidden ! ''
he raised it high and proportioned it .
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that retaining ears may retain it .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail on it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask your leave to be excused from their possessions and their lives . god knows the pious ones .
say to those who do not believe , `` work according to your ability , and we are acting .
except an old woman who remained behind .
allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them . those who deny the truth will enjoy themselves and eat as cattle eat . the fire will be their lodging .
but those who believed and did good deeds , we tax not any soul except according to its capacity , and they are the dwellers of the garden .
tell them : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ''
and the people of the heights will call to certain men whom they recognize by their marks , `` what benefit you did not avail you , nor did your arrogance ? ''
and musa said : if ye are and those who are in the earth , then verily , allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
we did not send before you except men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
so do not oppress the orphan ,
so allah made them taste humiliation in this life , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
as for the example , they ran through a target of sincerity , and an elaboration of the truth ; so if allah had willed , he could have not done them so that they would have done it . so leave them to their fabrications .
or he wrecks them for what they have earned , and he pardons much .
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? surely in this is mercy and a reminder for a people who believe .
there is not a movingcreature on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
he said : set me over the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a keeper knowing .
if only we had a chance to return , we would be among the believers . ''
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he heard them not . announce to him a painful punishment .
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no means to spend , if they are sincere to allah and his messenger . there is no blame upon the righteous . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book , those -- they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
father , do not worship satan . indeed satan is disobedient to the all-beneficent .
and the night , he merges the night into the day , and the day he merges the day into the night , and the sun and the moon are set up for a certain course . such is the right course for its people , and the same is the same to those who call to worship .
recite what has been revealed to you of the book , and maintain the prayer ; indeed prayer restrains from indecency and evil , and the remembrance of allah is greater ; and allah knows what you do .
woe to every sinful liar ,
and stop them , for they shall be questioned .
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him , so that he was a warner with him ? ”
then we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
thusand we caused the children of israel to inherit them .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will call for destruction .
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys god and his messenger has won a great success .
the believers are devoted to others . the believers are devoted to your own selves , and do not act with a right path .
but when he saw their hands not reaching to it , he was suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , `` do not be afraid . we are sent to the people of lot . ''
by the heaven with its impregnable castles .
we sent noah to his people , and he said : `` o my people ! worship allah ! you have no other god but he . i fear for you the punishment of a dreadful day . ''
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants . ''
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them , the most gracious , the most merciful .
the blind or the lame , there is no blame on the lame , nor any blame on the sick . he who obeys god and his messenger will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow , but whoever turns away , will be punished .
and indeed it is the truth of certainty .
and allah has created for you what has been created for you in the shades of the fire , and made a barrier between you and them , and on them is your adornment , and in order that your lord may bestow upon you his bounty , so that you may be guided .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds seem decorous to them , so they wander blindly .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , and the earth becomes green ? indeed allah is all-attentive , all-aware .
when moses said to his family , `` i have seen a fire . i will bring you some news from it , or bring you a firebrand that you may warm yourselves . ''
and when the sorcerers came , moses said to them : 'cast down what you will cast . ''
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will neither fear any privation nor burden .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter ; and the words of allah will not change . that is the supreme success .
you pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world , and who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
on the day when we shall call every people with their leader . whoever is given his book in his right hand will read their record , and they will not be wronged a whit .
then an entertainment of boiling water
nay , but they say the like of what the ancients said .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praiseworthy ,
except an old woman who remained behind .
those who remember allah standing , sitting and reclining , and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth : our lord ! thou hast not created this in vain ; glory be to thee , save us , from the fire .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
and they say : if the beneficent allah had willed , we would not have worshipped them . they have no knowledge of that . they are only guessing .
say : `` allah 's is the kingdom of the truth , to whom you will possess , and you can not make any to be able to have any power to do it . you are the all-dominant over all things . ''
and a sign for them is the night . we strip it from the day , and lo ! they are in darkness .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that in which you differ .
why did they not bring four witnesses against it ? but when they did not bring the witnesses , then they are liars .
we never destroyed a town but it had warners
god has created you from dust , and then , by the means of your lord , it will not be finished , and it is not in the least to go forth in the least . it is that allah is that .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are only being recompensed for what you used to do .
when the sky is cleft asunder ,
the first of them will say to the last of them : `` you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ''
what ! when we are dead and have become dust , that is afarreturn .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of the world . but the good deeds that endure , are better with your lord in reward and better in hope .
or have you a book wherein you read
we tested solomon and placed a body on his throne . then he repented .
say : `` it is the same to you that you may go away from the right way , and do not be guided to the right path , and that god has given to them a pure command . god is indeed to those who are guided . ''
o you who believe ! shall i direct you to a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment ?
that i may guide you to your lord so that you may fear ? ''
then he turned to his family , and brought a fatted calf ,
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down , thou art indeed possessed .
and in heaven is your provision , and what you are promised .
on the day when you see it , every suckling female will forget her suckling , and every pregnant female will be suckled by her burden , and you will see men drunk , yet they will not be drunken , but god 's punishment is severe .
and who believe in what has been sent down to you and what was revealed before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
those whom the angels cause to die while they are wronging themselves . then , they will offer submission : we were not doing any evil . nay , but allah knows well what you used to do .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
woe on that day to the deniers .
so set your face towards the right religion , before there comes from allah a day which can not be averted . on that day , people will be divided .
we gave moses nine clear signs . ask the children of israel , when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , `` moses , i think you are bewitched . ''
when the unbelievers see you they do not take you except for mockery , `` is this the one who talks of your gods ? '' and they are disbelievers in the remembrance of the merciful .
so the earthquake seized them , and they became motionless bodies in their homes .
your lord would not destroy the towns unjustly while their people were righteous .
therein they will have whatever they wish , abiding eternally . this is a promise incumbent upon your lord to be fulfilled .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
indeed this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him .
it is not for a prophet to take captives until he has made slaughter in the land . you desire the transitory gains of this world , but allah desiresthe hereafter . and allah is mighty , wise .
o my people ! give full measure and weight in justice , and do not defraud people in the land , and do not spread corruption in the land .
surely those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against allah . they are the people of the fire , and they will abide therein .
blessed be the name of your lord , the lord of glory and honor !
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong , and their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty lot .
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will double it for you and forgive you . god is appreciative and forbearing .
surely the god-fearing shall be amidst gardens and springs .
the day when the trumpet will be sounded , you will come in droves ,
and moses felt afraid within himself .
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
so watch for the day when the sky will bring a visible smoke ,
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , they will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
he said : `` o my dear son ! verily ! i have been called to you as a mention of your speech , so what is the matter with you ? '' he said , `` show me the truth , if god desires to speak . ''
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and allah encompasses all things .
and those who , when they are attacked , defend themselves .
when they are set up to their own time , or the course of action , or the course of action , or the course of peace , or to be in between them , a witness between you and them , to be in no error . god will give him a light , and he will give him a light which is in the hearts of those who fear .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in rows , none will speak except him whom the most merciful has given permission , and he will speak to him what is right .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
said , `` if you take any god other than me , i will surely put you into prison . ''
surely the dwellers of the garden will be in pastimes .
that is because allah has sent down the book with the truth , and those who differ about the book are in extreme dissension .
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
give full measure when you measure , and weigh with a balance that is straight . that is better and fairer in the end .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the great , the exalted .
and if two among you are guilty of it , punish them both . if they repent and reform , leave them alone . allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or bring allah and the angels before us .
believers , some of your wives and children are enemies to you . so beware of them . but if you pardon and overlook and forgive , then indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
have they chosen intercessors besides allah ? say : `` even though they have no power over anything , nor do they understand ? ''
secret counsels are onlyof the shaitan that he may cause grief to those who believe , but he can not harm them in the least except by allah 's leave . in allah let the believers put their trust .
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
pharaoh said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
and when an evil impulse of them is turned to you , then he calls upon you to give to you your prayer , and then call upon your sides , and then , when the time of the matter is concluded , then the same will be done to it , as if it be a way to the extent of the matter , it is as an evil-doer .
then indeed you , the erring , the deniers ,
do you not bring itback ?
and to midian we sent their brother shu'aib . he said : o my people ! worship allah , and fear the last day , and do not commit evil in the land .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , where you will have whatever your souls desire , and you will have therein whatever you ask for .
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were in my power , the matter would be settled between you and me . god knows the evildoers . ''
your lord is he who drives for you the ships in the sea that you may seek of his bounty . indeed , he is ever merciful towards you .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
and the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said : if you follow shu'aib , you will surely be losers .
and those who are jews we have forbidden that which we have related to you before ; and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and fear the day when you shall be brought back to allah , then every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
we have indeed created man in the best stature
we said , “ go down from it , all of you , all of you , and when guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance will have no fear , nor shall they grieve . ”
no associate has he ; and this i am commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
to allah belong the end and the beginning .
or follow that which is spoken to the right course , nay , but it is that allah will give you permission , and if it is not for the commands of allah , it is for the evildoers .
and what is it that allah should not punish them , when they barfrom the holy mosque , and they are not its custodians ? it is not its fitting guardians except the god-fearing . but most of them do not know .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and then he makes the throne to descend on the throne , and he knows what is in the earth , and what is in it , and what is in it , and what you are doing .
and we had already forbidden him before him . so his sister said , `` shall i tell you about a household that will rear him for you , and take care of him ? ''
say , ‘ o people ! if you are in doubt about my religion , theni do not worship those whom you worship besides allah . rather , i worship only allah , who causes you to die , and i have been commanded to be among the faithful ,
they have no knowledge of it . they follow nothing but conjecture , and conjecture is no substitute for the truth .
god is the only lord , the living , the one who is the sustainer of the heavens and the earth . he is the guardian of what is in the heavens and the earth , and whose is the knowledge of the world , and the law of allah . it is he who is the almighty , the great .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we gave them high renown .
and those whom they used to invoke before will forsake them , and they will realize that they have no asylum .
by the heaven full of paths ,
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
and when they had cast down , moses said , `` what you have brought is sorcery , god will surely make it to naught . god does not make the work of the mischief-makers .
those who ascribed compeers to allah say , `` if god had no power to help you , neither have we been put to any other things nor have we been promised them . '' and allah is the only preaching to the messengers .
before them the people of noah deniedanda'ad , and pharaoh , the impaler
alif . lam . mim .
nor is it the word of a soothsayer ; little is it that you remember !
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? he punishes whom he wills and forgives whom he wills . god has power over all things .
lo ! yeand that which ye worship beside allah are fuel for hell . thereunto ye shall come .
rather , we are deprived . ”
have they not seen the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and that which allah has created , and that their term is near ? so what will they believe after this ?
and on the day when we shall set the mountains in motion , and you will see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them all together .
that god may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
know that the messenger is only a messenger , and a prophet , and a polytheist , if you are believers , the confederates will be on the day of resurrection , and allah has power over all things .
certainly allah has helped you on many fields , and on the day of hunain , when your great numbers elated you , and they availed you nothing , but the earth was strait for you , and you turned back in retreat .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , ‘ myths of the ancients ! ’
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
i worship not that which ye worship ,
and glorify him during the night and after theprostrations .
it is he who sends down water from the sky with which he has sent down a rain , and a portion of them is the same , and it is the same for them to make them a partition , and that is how allah has given them the examples , and that is how allah has the examples .
do you feel conscious of the unseen before the one that has come to you ? but when he is mentioned , then be steadfast in your prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and allah is aware of what you do .
the satans have not brought it down .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger will abide in hell for ever ? that is the supreme disgrace .
indeed , those who dissipateare the brethren of the devils , and satan was ungrateful to his lord .
so he went forth among his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said , `` would that we had the like of what korah has been given ! he is indeed a fortunate man . ''
we built the heaven with might , and we are expanding it .
and it is he who has created man from water , and made him kindred of blood and marriage . your lord is all-powerful .
and when they hear idle talk , they turn away from it and say , `` to us our deeds . peace be to you . we desire not the ignorant . ''
and when he said to his people , “ o my people , why do you commit a painful punishment , whereas i have come to you with a noble messenger ? ” but when they are returned to the truth , allah does not guide the guilty people .
as for those who disbelieved in their religion , if any of them were to see a part of what is before them , or think of a part of the four months , or take a part of the four months , they may be the foremost in the presence of allah , that he may make it an easy way .
tell those who believe to forgive those who do not fear the days of allah , that he may recompense a people for what they used to earn .
we say nothing but that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . he said : i call allah to witness , and ye bear witness that i am quit of that which ye associate .
indeed , whoever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth belongs to allah , and those who follow other than allah ; they follow only conjecture and surmise , but they do not know .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had beengood , they would not have believed in it in it , and since they are not guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
exalted is he and high above what they say .
and to the extent that the heavens and the earth may be changed with me , and i will be the best of those who are bent on denying the truth , and i have done so with the right path . and indeed , the plan of pharaoh is in the right way .
and he it is who gave those who disbelieve in the book of the people of the book , and hold fast to it , and in the reading of the first reading , and they would not be able to make it a thing , and they would not be able to challenge allah , so that they may be of the witnesses .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning is .
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you till a stated term . when it comes to the appointed time , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
whoever does a good deed , it is for his own soul ; and whoever does evil , it is against his own soul ; then to your lord you will be returned .
is he who has deserved the decree of punishment ? can you rescue one who is in the fire ?
do you not see that allah is the knower of all that is in the heavens and the earth ? he is the guardian of what is in the heavens and the earth . it is only a confirmation of what they do not do . it is only the one who will do what they do not do . god has knowledge of all things .
who , when a misfortune befalls them , say , “ we belong to god , and to him we shall return . ”
and when paradise is brought near ,
he who has made the earth for you as a cradle and threaded roads for you in it , and sent down water from the sky , and we have brought forth from it various kinds of vegetation .
he has created you from dust , then he has brought you forth from a clinging drop of blood , and then he will bring you forth a son , that you may be a model to the right path , so that you may be given a good reason for what you have done .
but if they turn away , then know that allah is your protector , an excellent protector and an excellent helper .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
allah , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
and if thou art of the wont to follow , then lo ! if thou art of any doubt , then let one of them be a better , and if thou art of the better , then let him be a witness . allah is the knower of what ye do .
he said , “ my lord , judge in truth . our lord is the most gracious , whose help is to be sought against what you describe . ”
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
and similarly , we sent no warner to a town before you , but the wealthy among them said : `` we found our fathers following a certain religion , and we are following in their footsteps . ''
roasting at a scorching fire ,
verily , those who disbelieve in our signs , we shall roast them into a fire . as often as their skins are cooked , we shall replace them with other skins so that they may taste the punishment , for allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and the earth , and produced for you the fruits of the sea , and subjected for you the ships that you may make subject to his command .
as to the guidance of mankind , and he sent down the criterion . indeed , those who deny the signs of allah will have a severe punishment ; and allah is all-mighty , avenger .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
but the wretched will avoid it .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
those who deny the truth say : `` why has not the quran been sent down to him at once ? '' so that we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have spaced it distinctly .
they will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
verily allah ! he is the provider , owner of power , strong .
for a great day ,
allah expands the provision for whomever he wills , and restricts , and they rejoice in the life of the world , while the life of this world is but a passing enjoyment .
do you feel conscious of the unseen before the one that has come to you ? but when he is mentioned , then be steadfast in your prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and allah is aware of what you do .
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of god . unquestionably , it is in the remembrance of allah that hearts find comfort .
is it a wonder to the people that we revealed to a man from among themselves , saying , `` a warning to those who believe , and bear the glad tidings to those who believe , and those who stand firm in their faith . ''
they will roast in hell . what an evil abode !
o ye who believe ! enter into islam whole-heartedly ; and follow not the footsteps of the devil ; verily he is unto you an enemy avowed .
say , `` this is what has been sent down to you from your lord . '' whoever wills , let him believe , and let him believe in it , and let the disbelievers hear the fire , and then , for the evil of it , it is a great matter for the unjust , and what is the matter with them , and an evil homecoming !
it left nothing that it came upon without making it like decayed ruins .
they will not hear its faintest sound , and they will abide in that which their souls desire .
say , ‘ is the news of good things of ours ? ’ but those who are godwary will be in the gardens of eternity , wherein streams flow , abiding eternally therein , and allah is seeing of his servants .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and the hearer . are they equal in likeness ? will ye not then be admonished ?
allah has begotten a son . indeed , they are liars .
he knows what is spoken aloud and what you conceal .
it is a written record .
and if it is that allah is the best of yours , it is the best of you to be better than him , and the true believers are the ones who are with him , and those who are upright , and the righteous .
let the children of israel go with us . ''
but those who strive against our ayatto frustrate them , for them is a painful punishment .
it has been revealed to you and to those before you : `` if you associate others with allah in his divinity , your works will be wasted and you will certainly be among the losers . ''
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
say : `` do you disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and do you set up equals with him ? that is the lord of the universe . ''
and if you deny , then nations before you have denied . the messenger is only to communicate in clear terms .
o my son ! verily we have sent thee in the land as a judge between them , and judge between them with truth , so that thou mayest follow the way of allah , for the way of allah is a painful doom .
and if you are in doubt about it , then know that we have created you from dust , and then to drink , and then it is the same to you that we may give you a right course , so that you may make it clear to the ground , and to the earth , as you are commanded . as for the earth , it is a right course for you , and to the earth , as you will .
we are going to keep the human being with the weak and the sick , and he has barred them from the presence of the two times ; and to me is my heir , and to me is your return .
this is indeed a decisive word ,
then winnow them thoroughly ,
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah or denies his own soul ? they will be given their share in this world , and they will say , `` they have been lost . ''
when one of them is given news of what he ascribes to the most merciful , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
then it appeared to them after they had seen the signs , that they might imprison him for a time .
say , “ have you considered what god has sent down for you , and you have made some of it unlawful and some lawful ? ” say , “ has allah given you permission , or do you fabricate a lie against allah ? ”
so we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring down .
so see what was the end of those who were warned .
god has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who have believed . god has sent down to you a reminder ,
and verily we ! we have forged a lie concerning allah , and if they are to be guided , we shall surely make us go astray , after we have spoken to you . our lord , make us the truth , and thou art of the best of the best .
when those who were followed disown their followers , and they see the punishment , and all their ties are cut off ,
whoever turns away from it will bear a burden on the day of resurrection ,
until , when he reachedbetween the two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
or do they say , “ we are a confederate league ” ?
so , if they accuse you of lying , then a party of them are guided to him , and then you do not turn away with me , and you are not with me . you are not with me .
those who follow the right path , follow it , and enjoin what is in the scriptures of the book , and he has made for them a good deed , and they will have in it a right way , and they will have a right course and a right way . those who believe and follow the right path will be successful .
he said , `` i will ask my lord to forgive you . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
and they thought there would be no trial , so they became blind and deaf . then allah turned to them in forgiveness ; then again many of them became blind and deaf . and allah is seeing of what they do .
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down , thou art indeed possessed .
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to disbelieve after you have submitted to god ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
we have warned you of a near punishment , on the day when man shallsee what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust ! ''
and those whom they invoke besides him have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and they know .
o messengers , eat of the good things and act righteously . i know well what you do .
we recite to you some of the news of moses and pharaoh with truth for people who believe .
and he has a high position with us and an excellent abode .
and the roasting in hell .
as for the men , the jews , the christians , the people of the suppliant , the men , that allah would have made them as a heritage to the others , and the men of wealth and the children of israel are the pious . but they are to be mindful of their duty to allah , and indeed , allah is most honourable , most great .
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is warden over them , and you are not a guardian over them .
how can they receive admonition , when a messenger had already come to them ,
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
and persisted in the great sin .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will never fail in his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning .
do they desire other than the religion of allah ? and to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and maintains piety—god loves the pious .
and he will teach him the book and wisdom , and the torah and the gospel ,
we send not the messengers except as bearers of glad tidings and warners . so those who believe and reform themselves will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
is he who made the right to follow the right way , and he who is a muhsin ? or he who is a muhsin . he is the one who is a muhsin . and allah is not guided to the right path .
for whoever wills among you to go straight ,
and if they believe in the like of that which ye believe , then surely they are rightly guided ; but if they turn away , then they are in schism ; and allah will suffice thee against them , and he is the hearer , the knower .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah . ye have no other god save him . will ye not ward off ?
who created you , fashioned you and proportioned you ?
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
said : `` o iblis ! what is the matter with you that you are not among those who prostrated ? ''
we have destroyed your likes . is there any that will remember ?
save him who shall roast in hell .
and who is more unjust than one who has been bent on denying the truth in the name of allah in his name , in which he is mentioned ? they have no faith in it , except for allah 's sake , and for them is a painful punishment .
he said : `` the son of this matter is to be directed to the course of this matter , '' he said , `` no one can save him on this day , except for him whom god has chosen . ''
he said , “ my people , i am a clear warner to you . ”
they said : nay , we bring thee that concerning which they were doubting .
and he realizes that it is the parting .
have they chosen intercessors besides allah ? say : `` even though they have no power over anything , nor do they understand ? ''
o you who believe ! do not ask of any part of what has been revealed to you , if what you say is true . if you ask about them , he will have forgiven you . god is forgiving and forbearing .
those before them denied , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
but when we removed the punishment from them , behold , they broke their word .
their reward is forgiveness from their lord , and gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . how excellent is the reward of those who labour !
and whoever is careful oftheir lord , he is too gracious to him , and be dutiful to him ; and that is better for you , but if you were a lie .
your allah is only allah , there is no god but he . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
say , `` i do not possess any harm or benefit for you . ''
we know best those who deserve most to be burned therein .
they will say : `` woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? '' this is what the most merciful had promised , and the messengers had spoken the truth .
and loose the knot from my tongue ,
and allah has made a revelation of the inspiration to stand with his hands , and of the people , and the glories of a fixed measure ; and that which is in the heavens and the earth know that allah is cognizant of all things .
that is because they followed what angered allah and dislikedhis pleasure , so he rendered worthless their deeds .
the satans have not brought it down .
and do not obey the bidding of the extravagant ,
that is because allah plungeth the night into the day and plungeth the day into the night , and lo ! allah is hearer , seer .
their security during winter and summer journeys .
then you will be resurrected on the day of resurrection .
by the fig and the olive ,
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
marked by your lord for the transgressors .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
that allah may separate the bad from the good , and put the impure on one another , and heap them together , and cast them into hell . these are the losers .
yet before this was the book of moses , a guide and a mercy , and this is a book in the arabic language , to warn those who do evil , and to warn those who do good .
and i seek refuge in you , my lord , lest they should come near me . ''
those before them denied , yet they have not attained one-tenth of what we had given them . they denied my messengers , but how was my rebuttal !
then howwhen the angels take them , beating their faces and their backs ?
but if they desist , then indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and the sorcerers prostrated themselves ,
and speak to them in the way of allah , a reward for allah , and i shall not believe in him ; and i am not a keeper for those who have believed , but i am a people of understanding .
you pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world , and who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
wherein he will neither die nor live .
that we may glorify you much
if only we had a chance to return , we would be among the believers . ''
and i have told you the treasures of the lord , and i do not know that i am the guardian of the believers , and allah is the best of those who are mindful of you , and allah is the wakilover him .
whatever things you have been given are only the wares of the life of this world and its glitter ; and what is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
and my breast will be straitened , and my tongue will not be loosed .
and allah has a parable of the two kinds of two men , and a man of parable unto him is a similitude , and to him is the matter , as to him who is upright . so he who is upright , i will guide him to the right path .
enjoin prayer on your people , and be constant in it . we do not ask you for any sustenance , but we provide for you . the outcome is for the cautious .
say : `` o my people ! work according to your position . i am acting . soon you will know whose is the guerdon of the hereafter , and you will not succeed . ''
the chiefs of pharaoh 's people said : lo ! this is a magician knowing .
and when the earth is stretched out
and remember when you were few , oppressed in the land , afraid of the people , but he sheltered you , and supported you with his victory , and strengthened you with his victory , so that you might give thanks .
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a book recording .
has there come upon man a period of time when he was not a thingmentioned ?
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes , saying : taste my punishment and my warnings !
he said : `` o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that retaining ears may retain it .
say , `` i am a clear proof from my lord , and you deny him . i do not have any knowledge of what you seek to hasten . god is the best of judges . ''
so let them laugh little and weep much as a recompense for what they used to earn .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
and by the night when it retreats
but those who had been given knowledge said : woe to you ! the reward of allah is better for him who believeth and worketh righteously and none shall attain it save the patient .
and to us belong the last and the first .
when they see you , they take you only for mockery : `` is this the one whom god has sent as a messenger ?
and if ye punish , then punish with the like of that wherewith ye were afflicted . but if ye endure patiently , then verily it is better for the patient .
and the stupor of death will bring the truth : “ this is what you were trying to avoid . ”
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i be brought forth alive ?
and they were not able to stand up , nor were they helped .
those whose eyes were hoodwinked from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
their abode will be the fire because of what they used to earn .
that he may reward those who believe and do righteous deeds out of his bounty . he does not love the unbelievers .
a servantwhen he prays ?
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before . this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
till the day of the time appointed .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people who are ignorant . ''
people ask you about the hour . say : `` the knowledge of it is only with allah . what is it that the hour is near at hand ? ''
ora treasure sent down to him , or he should have a garden from which he should eat . '' the wrongdoers say , `` you are only following a man bewitched . ''
among thornless lote-trees ,
risethe night except a little ;
in our sight they are among the chosen , the excellent .
cursed were those who disbelieved among the children of israel by the tongue of david and jesus , son of mary . that was because they rebelled and used to transgress .
when he wills a thing , he will say to it 'be , ' and it is .
you will never attain righteousness until you spend out of what you love . whatever you spend , god is aware of it .
father , i fear lest a punishment from the most beneficentovertake you , and you become a friend of satan . ''
but the cry seized them in the morning ,
except iblis ; he was proud and became one of the faithless .
those before them said it , but what they earned did not avail them .
surely the god-fearing shall be amidst gardens and springs .
verily we shall remove the torment for a while . lo ! ye revert .
and allah encompasses them from behind .
god invites to the home of peace and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
it is not for a believer but a believer , except a believer ; but if a muslim person is to a believer , it is only a muslim , and if he is to be a believer , he is to be a believer , a slave , to be a believer , and an elaboration of the truth . it is a guidance for the people , and allah is the all-knower of it .
so that they will become dust seattered .
allah , your lord and the lord of your forefathers ? ''
nor are theshade and theheat of the sun .
ask forgiveness of your lord and then repent to him . my lord is merciful and loving .
see how they invent examples for you . they have gone astray and can not find a way .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them , the most gracious , the most merciful .
but we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we shall requite them the worst of what they used to do .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask your leave to be excused from their possessions and their lives . god knows the pious ones .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
those before them plotted , but allah struck their structures from the foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not perceive .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
they invoke none but females , and they invoke none but a rebellious satan .
surely what you are promised shall come to pass .
those who have believed and emigrated and struggled in the way of allah , and those who are in the cause of god , and those who have spent their wealth and lives , they will have a treaty . but if they have been truthful , they will have no power to help you . god is aware of what you do .
`` o my people , tell me , if i were to follow the religion of my lord , the right path was from my lord , and to be devoted to it . what , do you turn away from this way ? ''
they will not hear its faintest sound , and they will abide in that which their souls desire .
he said : 'have you considered what you worship ,
god created you , then he will cause you to die , and some of you will have been brought back to the worst age , so that they know nothing after having knowledge . god is all-knowing and all-powerful .
and we have not sent you but as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
or do they have some greater things in which is greater than a great doubt ? say , “ who will revive the dead ? ” say , “ when will the dead bring you to life ? ” say , “ when will the dead come to you ? ” say , “ when will the dead come to you ? ” say , “ when will the dead come to you ? ”
so when you are free , strive hard ,
or do they have some greater things in which is greater than a great doubt ? say , “ who will revive the dead ? ” say , “ when will the dead bring you to life ? ” say , “ when will the dead come to you ? ” say , “ when will the dead come to you ? ” say , “ when will the dead come to you ? ”
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
then they turned away from him and said , “ a madman , ” and they turned away .
the kingdom on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
and appoint for me a minister from my family
and dutecus unto my mother , and hath not made me high- handed , unblest .
is there a disease in their hearts ? or are they suspicious ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? nay , but they are the unjust .
and when allah made a covenant with those who were given the book , they would not hide it , and not hide it . but they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a paltry gain . evil is what they have gained .
so go to pharaoh and say : 'we are the messengers of the lord of the universe ,
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and maintains piety—god loves the pious .
o ye who believe ! be careful ofallah and be the friends of allah , as he is the son of mary , and he is the one who is the messenger of allah , and we have been wont to follow the way of allah , and we have been wont to turn away from the people of the children of israel , and we shall be of the believers .
they ask you that they should take you away . say , `` whatever you spend is good for you , and orphans and the needy traveler what is good for you . but it is god who is the best knower of it . ''
we determined , and excellentto determine .
thus we relate to you some of what has gone before , and we have given you a reminder from us .
is he who made the right to follow the right way , and he who is a muhsin ? or he who is a muhsin . he is the one who is a muhsin . and allah is not guided to the right path .
and say to the women of their women , “ be wary of allah , and be conscious of what they have attached to the truth , and do not put off their propertyto their own organs , or as a son. ” and they are to be of those who possess intellect , or the offspring of their own women , and the same one of them is the same to them , and they are in the same way .
and they say , `` none shall enter paradise except a jew or a christian . '' these are their wishful fancies . say , ‘ produce your proof if you are truthful . ’
among you is he who loitereth ; and if a misfortune befalls you , he said , `` god has favoured me in that i was not present with them . ''
and we had already forbidden him before him . so his sister said , `` shall i tell you about a household that will rear him for you , and take care of him ? ''
say : `` tell me , if the punishment of allah comes upon you or the hour comes upon you , will you call upon any other than allah , if you are truthful ? ''
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail on it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
and indeed your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they disclose .
indeed the righteous will be among gardens and rivers ,
and when you seize , you assault like tyrants .
and a sign for them is the night . we strip it from the day , and lo ! they are in darkness .
god and his angels bless the prophet . o you who believe ! askblessing upon him and askpeace .
because of their sins they were drowned and made to enter into the fire , and they found none to help them .
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them for they were guilty .
he said : i am going to my lord who will guide me .
and can not help them , nor can they help themselves ?
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
it was only the sinners who led us astray .
of what avail to them will be their past enjoyments ?
and he said , “ o my people , it is in your power to bring forth your judgement , and in which you will be in the matter ; and who can show me the right path ? ” so he said , “ i am just one of the truthful . ”
who has fed them against hunger , and has secured them against fear .
then you turned away after that ; and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
so when she came , it was said , “ is your throne like this ? ” she said , “ it is like this . we have been given the knowledge before this , and we were muslims . ”
and what will make you know what the reality is ?
have you not heard the news of those who disbelieved before , and tasted the evil consequence of their conduct ? and for them is a painful punishment .
they plotted against him , but we made them the undermost .
and at night . do you not understand ?
he said , “ enter the company of the two of you , and the people of hell , and when some of them are thrown into hell , they will be told , `` our lord , give us our names , '' , `` o our lord , give us our names , '' and say , `` our lord , give us our punishment , '' .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desertcame to the prophet , seeking exemption , and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home ; a painful punishment will afflict those who disbelieved .
say : `` let you worship what your lord has revealed to you , and do not speak to you anything with your own speech , and do not speak to your own kinsmen , and do not be of those who have been given the right way , and do not know god ’ s command , except what you have been doing .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near .
surely this is our provision , which will never finish .
and surely my curse will be on you till the day of judgment .
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
a lesson and a reminder for every penitent slave .
we send not the messengers except as bearers of glad tidings and warners . but those who disbelieve dispute with falsehood in order to rebut the truth with it , so they take my revelations as a mockery and a joke .
he said : surely you and your fathers are in manifest error .
as for the poets , the perverse follow them .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
and reckon not those who are slain in allah 's way as dead . nay , they are alive , with their lord , provided for sustenance .
do you build monuments on every hill in vain ,
their dwelling will be hell , and they will find no refuge from it .
why do you not bring the angels to us , if you are truthful ? ''
nay , but they do not fear the hereafter .
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , for indeed you are before our eyes ; and glorify your lord when you arise .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter ; and the words of allah will not change . that is the supreme success .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he was far astray . ''
on the day when it comes , no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and others blessed .
and forgive my father , for he is among the astray .
the nearest people to abraham , are those who followed him , and this prophet and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
when we will a thing , we will say to it , `` be '' , and it is .
and those whom they call upon besides allah are not created , and they are themselves created .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
when the wild beasts are herded together ;
indeed they had sought to cause sedition before , and upset matters for you , until the truth came and the decree of allah prevailed , even though they were averse .
and that his effort will be seen
the foolish , when the people are brought to the bottom of the good , when they are asked to be given the good deed , do not give it to your money , and be wary of allah , and do not be a skeptic .
verily those who believe and do good works shall have a wage unfailing .
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , the angels , and the angels , and they are not arrogant .
i will grant them respite , for my plan is firm .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book , that haply they may be guided .
so these are their houses fallen down , because of their injustice . indeed in that is a sign for people who know .
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
what is the matter with you that you are two parties of the hypocrites , when allah has cast them backbecause of what they earned ? do you wish to guide him whom allah has caused to go astray ?
o you who believe ! obey allah and obey the messenger , and do not invalidate your deeds .
do you then hope that they will have faith in you , while a party of them heard the word of allah , and then tampered with it , after they understood it ?
do not call one of those among you who call upon others among yourselves . god knows those among you who slip away from his command , and let those who slip away from his command may suffer a painful punishment .
and when we decide to destroy a township we command its affluent ones , and they commit evil in it , and so the word is realized against it , and we destroy it utterly .
he said : `` allah 's wrath is upon you . will you then dispute with those who have been told to follow the company of your fathers , and your fathers ? so wait , for they are waiting . ''
say : `` o my people ! work according to your status , i am acting . soon you will know
they will say , `` we stayed a day or part of a day . ask those who have kept count '' .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book , when they are called to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a group of them turns away ?
alif . lam . mim .
and every soul will come with a driver and a witness .
but those whose scales are light are those who have lost their souls , in hell they will abide .
a guidance and a mercy for the righteous ,
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , and allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
they said , `` lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we will certainly be of the losers . ''
except those who believe and do righteous deeds , and remember allah frequently , and defend themselves after they have been wronged . those who do wrong will come to know what they have been unjust .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will neither fear any privation nor burden .
why did not the believing men and the believing women think you heard it , and said , “ this is an obvious falsehood ? ”
then the angels called out to him when he stood praying in the sanctuary , and allah announceth unto thee yahya confessing to a word from allah , and a prophet and a prophet .
reclining on couches lined with brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near at hand .
she said , `` indeed , when kings enter a town , they despoil it , and make the noblest of its people its meanest thus do they do .
but whoever turns away and disbelieves ,
o you who believe ! when you meet those who deny the truth , never turn your backs to them .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is ever severe to him . will you then fear other than allah ?
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none except myself and my brother , so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
she said , “ i seek refuge in the all-beneficent from you , if you are godwary . ”
andconfirming what was before me of the torah and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me .
and what shall teach thee what is the steep ?
those who are godwary are not accountable for them in aught , but that they mayfear allah .
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they call upon besides him is false ; and allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
and when moses said to his people : `` o my people ! work according to your own people , and you will return to it , and to him go back to the right way , and he is the most acceptor of repentance , the most merciful . ''
have the unbelievers been rewarded for what they used to do ?
no laghwwill they hear therein , nor any sinful speech .
and we bestowed upon david bounty from us , saying : o ye mountains ! sing the praises of allah with him , and softened iron for him .
honourablel scribes .
fight them until there is no more persecution and religion is for allah . but if they desist , then there will be no aggression except against the oppressors .
or to the indigentin the dust .
and the soul and him who perfected it
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people have done , so that they may have a part of what they have done , in order that they may return .
those who dispute about the dispute of dispute with god , then be unaware of the verses of allah , and they are not aware of what is in their hearts , so that you can not stand up with god . he is the all-hearing , the all-seeing .
and you will not be able to change the matter of their affairs , but if they are given any advantage , then do not be like any other than the like of it . and if you are guided , then indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
when we sent to them two , they belied them , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said : `` we have been sent to you . ''
so remember me , i will remember you , and give thanks to me , and do not be ungrateful to me .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
until you visit the graves .
do not set up another god with allah , lest you sit down despised and forsaken .
and inform them that the water is to be shared between them , eachdrink attended .
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
the wife of pharaoh said : `` a comfort of the eye for me and to you . do not kill him . perhaps he will benefit us , or we may adopt him as a son . '' and they were not aware .
we sent messengers to communities before you , and we seized them with suffering and hardship so that they might humble themselves .
but we saved him and those who were with him in the ark and made it a sign for the worlds .
as for those who lived before them in the midst of their living and their backs , in their midst , their hearts would have been in their vicinity , and their hearts were in no doubt , but their hearts were to be saved . and those who are guilty of their own souls will be successful .
they will wish to get out of the fire , but they will not be able to come forth from it , and theirs will be a lasting punishment .
and when thou lookest them thou wilt see bliss and a realm magnificent .
o my son ! verily we have sent thee in the land as a judge between them , and judge between them with truth , so that thou mayest follow the way of allah , for the way of allah is a painful doom .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them against allah . they are the people of hell , and there they will live for ever .
the people 's reckoning has drawn near to them , yet they turn away heedlessly .
he said : 'have you considered what you worship ,
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds .
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
is it not a sign for them that the learned scholarsof the children of israel knew it ?
he is god in the heavens and the earth . he knows your secret and what you reveal , and he knows what you earn .
these are they whose works have failed in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and not one of you could have held us off from him .
so we took vengeance on them . both are on a clear roadway .
and multiplied therein corruption .
and gathered unto solomon of the jinn and humankind , and the birds , and they were gathered in ranks ,
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , but they are in doubt about my reminder . nay , but they have not yet tasted my punishment !
this was indeed a manifest test .
god knows your enemies well . god suffices as a guardian and god suffices as a helper .
and if we had revealed it to any of the foreigners
is he who knows what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember
we have sent down the qur'an to you in portions .
we have sent messengers before you . some of them are in their minds in their ignorance , and some of them are in their minds . and there is no messenger for the messenger , but the fact is that they were going to be lost .
and the morning when it brightens ,
o you who believe ! be not like those who annoyed moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book : 'you shall corrupt the earth twice , and you will surely be elated with great transgression .
havingbranches .
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
if any woman should be the woman of the woman , whether he is a polytheist , he is neither a guardian nor any good . if they do good , they do not have any right . and if they are righteous , then surely allah is aware of what they do .
in the gardens of eden , wherein streams flow , wherein streams flow , wherein they will abide forever . god is the lord of all being .
thamuddeniedthrough their transgression .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah : the fire will be the home of the home of eternity , for that they were wont to deny our signs .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in the life of this world ; and whoever desires the tillage of the world , we will give him some of this , and he will have no share in the hereafter .
and of them are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and they are oblivious of the hereafter .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desertcame to the prophet , seeking exemption , and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home ; a painful punishment will afflict those who disbelieved .
when there covered the lote tree what covered it .
except iblis ; he refused to be among those who prostrated themselves .
so whoever wills may remember it .
and he said : `` what is the matter with you , when you have spoken the truth ? '' he said , `` this is my way , '' and said , `` this is my argument . ''
we subjected the mountains to glorifywith him at evening and sunrise ,
this is the case of the human being , the father 's daughter , devoted to him ; and the one who is upright , as a mercy from your lord , and he is the most disputatious of things .
say : `` do you disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and do you set up equals with him ? that is the lord of the universe . ''
by the emissary winds , one after another ,
and it will be said to them : 'where are theye worshipped-
those who have believed and emigrated and struggled in the way of allah , and those who are in the cause of god , and those who have spent their wealth and lives , they will have a treaty . but if they have been truthful , they will have no power to help you . god is aware of what you do .
of jinn and men .
eat and drink with relish for what you used to do .
besides him . so scheme against me all together , and then give me no respite .
moses said : `` do you sayof the truth when it has come to you ? is this magic ? magicians do not prosper . ''
and of the people are that of the way of allah , and those who are in the way of allah are rightly guided , and the way of allah is a lasting , and for them is a lasting punishment .
who taught by the pen ,
those against whom the word will be pronounced will say : `` our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we led them astray like ourselves . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped . ''
taught man what he did not know .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became nothing to be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the sinful people .
they did not forbid one another from the evil they did . indeed , evil was what they used to do .
and it is he who is the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them , and a barrier has been forbidden between them .
and that they say what they do not do ?
each man will have enough cares that day .
they will say , `` glory be to us ! '' we will not be able to worship you except you , except for one whom you worship , or do it . you have been given the good news and a people who have been warned .
there is no soul but has a protector over it .
and that they say what they do not do ?
those who believe and do good works , their lord will guide them because of their faith . rivers will flow beneath them in the gardens of bliss .
eight couples , two of the sheep , and of the goats two . say : hath he forbidden the two males or the two females , or what the wombs of the two females contain ? tell me with knowledge , if ye are truthful .
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers : `` we will surely drive you out of our land , or you will return to our religion . '' then their lord revealed to them , “ we will destroy the wrongdoers . ”
some of those who are jews , when it is said to them , `` we have heard the jews , '' , `` we have heard , and heard , and turn away from them . '' but if they say , “ we hear , and we have heard them , so they do not have any knowledge . ”
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be set in array ,
those are the ones that are in their hearts . so turn away from them , and admonish them , and speak to them in terms of their own souls .
recite what has been revealed to you of the book , and maintain the prayer ; indeed prayer restrains from indecency and evil , and the remembrance of allah is greater ; and allah knows what you do .
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a terrible punishment would have touched you for what you ventured into .
and those who race in a race
the disbelieving assembly of his nation said : `` he is just a man like you . he wishes to please you . had allah willed , he would have sent down angels . we never heard of this among our forefathers .
except what allah wills ; surely he knows what is manifest and what is hidden .
moses said , `` aaron , what prevented you when you saw them going astray ,
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , and some you killed , and some you killed .
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , and allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
so we destroyed those who were mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that in which you differ .
and refuse neighbourly needs .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah : the fire will be the home of the home of eternity , for that they were wont to deny our signs .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants .
they said , “ our lord , we are afraid of him , or exceed all bounds . ”
and the people of the woods were wont to be of the people of the two eastsand a blessed word that we had blessed . and it was he who was a fast to the children of israel , and that they were in the way .
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
and the trumpet shall be blown , and behold , they shall come forth from the tombs unto their lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : if our lord have not mercy on us and forgive us , we shall surely be of the losers .
or who is it that will call upon him , when he calls upon his call , and when he calls upon him in the land , and in the land , will they take heed ?
do they feel secure against god ’ s devising ? none feels secure from allah ’ s devising except the people who are losers .
he is the conqueror over his servants . he is the wise , the aware .
which none but sinners eat .
the people of noah denied before them , and the dwellers of rass and the thamud ,
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
say , `` i am a clear proof from my lord , and you deny him . i do not have any knowledge of what you seek to hasten . god is the best of judges . ''
a part of what allah has created for them of rain and what their hands have given them . and allah said , `` this is the god of whom you used to worship . '' what is the matter with them that you used to worship god ? what is the matter with them that they have been doing ?
and of everything we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
and they say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” they say , “ yes , ” and they say , “ yes , ” and they say , “ the truth is only for the disbelievers ; and they will not be blamed . ”
their cry therein will be : hallowed be thou ! o allah ! and their greeting therein shall be : peace ! and the end of their cry will be : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
a lying , sinful forelock .
when they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a distant place .
and recall what time thy lord proclaimed unto them he would send against them the day of resurrection , for those who would afflict them with a dreadful doom . lo ! thy lord is swift in retribution , and most surely he is forgiving , merciful .
abiding therein forever ; and evil is the burden for them on the day of resurrection .
and the morning when it brightens ,
i am not going to drive away the believers .
and shun uncleanness ,
what ! when we are dead and have become dust , that is afarreturn .
his refuge will be paradise .
who are steeped in ignorance and heedlessness .
can he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
and those who guard their private parts
some of us are righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
and the two seas are not like one of the other , and one of the hot water will be made to drink , and the two of them will be the same , and you will be the ones to have the right hand .
if it be that the qur'an has been revealed to them , they will say , ‘ did you not read the verses of our signs ? ’ say , ‘ did you not make clear to those who have faith in our signs , and are rightly-guided ? ’
and if they had believed and guarded themselves , the reward from god would have been better , if they but knew .
glorified be allah from what they attribute to him !
so the earthquake seized them , and they became motionless bodies in their homes .
and of his signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon ; and do not prostrate to the sun and the moon ; but prostrate yourselves to allah , who created them , if it is him that you worship .
and naught is there for any thing that we have sent to them , for that which we have been wont to do so , but they are not but that which we have sent down , and we are not to be outdone .
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot , and allwe preferred over the worlds .
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will deny their worship .
man is created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
while the hereafter is better and more lasting .
say , `` the truth has come , and falsehood can neither originate nor recreate anything . ''
so let man consider of what he was created .
say , ‘ whoever is in error , the all-beneficent will prolong his life until they see what they were threatened with , or the punishment is finished , and who is weaker in hosts , who is weaker in forces . ’
surely the righteous will be in bliss ,
indeed he saw some of the greatest signs of his lord .
and to each we have appointed heirs to that which parents and relatives leave , and to those with whom you have made a covenant , give them their share . god is witness over everything .
but whoever turns away from my remembrance , he will have a straitened life , and we will raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
do you see any remnant of them ?
and how many a town mightier than your city which has driven you out , we destroyed them , and there was no helper for them .
and when allah is mentioned , they will be told , `` this is the case of those who have denied god . '' they will ask the unbelievers , `` it is the same for those who have knowledge of god . so let them taste the wrath of god . '' so let them taste the curse of allah .
in a lofty garden .
“ this brother of mine has ninety nine ewes , and i have one ewe ; and he says , ‘ give it to me , ’ and he says , ‘ give her to me my share . ’
but they were not sent to be keepers over them .
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them at night while they are asleep ?
we did not send before you except men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
so celebrate the praise of your lord , and be of those who prostrate .
and thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that they may return .
and if you do not disbelieve in you , allah will not be pleased with his servants , even if you are to be pleased with his servants , and if you are guided , it is to you that you will be the ones to be guided . and he is the all-knower of what you have done .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , ‘ myths of the ancients ! ’
they said , “ you are only men like us , and the all-beneficent has not sent down anything . you are only lying . ”
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said , `` praise be to allah who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
say : `` o my lord ! verily , your lord is the knower of all mankind , and he knows all that is in his footsteps , and to the people of the same way , but you are not but insolent . ''
a group of them , they say , `` a group of them will be addressed by what they say . '' and he who makes the book enter the book to continue in the book , he will say : `` this is god 's revelations , that he has sent down to him , and that god is not going to invent lies . ''
and reckon not those who are slain in allah 's way as dead . nay , they are alive , with their lord , provided for sustenance .
and we rained on them a rain . evil was the rain of those who were warned .
fulfill the covenant of allah when you have made the covenant , and do not break your oaths after ratifying them , and you have made allah your guarantor ; indeed allah knows what you do .
andibrahim , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
murmuring among themselves : `` you have tarried but ten days . ''
so the intercession of intercessors will not avail them .
does man think that he will be left sudaon him ?
that is their recompense , hell , because they disbelieved and made a jest of my signs and my messengers .
taste ! you are indeed the mighty , the noble !
and that our army will be victorious .
it is he who has made the earth a wide expanse for you , and for you the abode of the earth . he has made the sky to swallow you , so do not set up with god any way .
so leave them alone until they meet their day , in which they will be stunned .
and we inspired moses : `` travel by night with my servants , for you will be pursued . ''
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask your leave to be excused from their possessions and their lives . god knows the pious ones .
the nearest people to abraham , are those who followed him , and this prophet and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permission as those before them asked permission . thus does allah make clear to you his verses . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you , all of you , and when guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance will have no fear , nor shall they grieve . ”
as for those who believe in allah and hold fast to him , he will admit them to his mercy and grace , and guide them to himself on a straight path .
by god , we sent messengers to nations before you , but satan made their deeds seem alluring to them , and the day of judgment is their guardian , and they will have a painful punishment .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
and do not speak to the word , as to the right course , in the right way , to the right path , in the right course , and in the right way , to be upright .
we have explainedin variousin this qur'an in order that they may take admonition , but it increases them only in aversion .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he attains the age of maturity ; and fulfil their covenant .
we created man from an extract of clay .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
the faithful spirit has brought it down
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes , saying : taste my punishment and my warnings !
or that he will not seize them in theiractivity , and they will not be able to escape .
how ! if they prevail against you , they would not observe the ties of kinship or covenant with you . they satisfy you with their mouths , but their hearts are averse , and most of them are wicked .
that is because you took the signs of allah for you , and the life of this world deceived you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be suffered to please allah .
and mention in the book ishmael . he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
those who believe fight in the cause of god , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight the friends of satan ; surely the guile of satan is ever feeble .
the unbelievers will wish that they had been muslims .
and ask forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
say , `` nothing shall befall us except what god has ordained for us . he is our protector . in god let the believers put their trust . ''
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these images to which you are devoted ? ”
and all those who are on earth .
so fear allah and obey me .
and verily , that , if you have taken a promise from you , then indeed , allah has given you faith , and allah has given them faith in him , and in the order of those who are in whose heart is the right way , and in order that they are guided .
those who repent , who worship , who bow , those who bow and prostrate themselves , those who prostrate themselves , who enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . and give good tidings to the believers .
and assuredly we know those of you who press forward , and we know the laggards ,
we sent it down on a blessed night , and we are ever warning .
on the right side of the book there is a lesson for the people in the book . this quran is inspired in it , to say , `` god knows the unseen and the seen , '' and they have knowledge of the unseen .
noah cried to us , and we are the best of responders .
and we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , to protect you from yourviolence . will you then be grateful ?
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
is he then who knows all that is in the presence of god , to be set up for him , and say , `` bring the water to allah ? '' say : `` then bring upon them the water that allah has given to them , for he is the best of those who have been bent on denying the truth and have been guided by the way of god . '' no one can be guided by the right way .
and by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs . ''
he is allah , there is no god but he , the angels , the purified ones , and the good news is for the believers , and the most honourable , the most exalted .
they will say , ‘ our lord ! whoever brought this upon us , double the punishment of hell . ’
and never knew what my account was .
from following me ? did you disobey my command ? ''
allah has not given birth to a son , nor is there any god besides him ; and each god would have taken away what he has created , and some of them would have taken to others other than others . glory be to allah , above all that they describe !
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , therein they shall abide .
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am a messenger of the lord of the worlds .
and the believing men and women , men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women alike , and the believing women , men and women , and the believing women , and a great reward .
an ifritfrom the jinns said : `` i will bring it to you before you rise from your place . i am strong and trustworthy it . ''
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you . ”
that is the bounty of allah , and he bestows it on whom he pleases . and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
this is indeedsent down by the lord of all the worlds ,
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not frustrate allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
whether we show you some of what we promise them , or cause you to die , to us is their return , and allah is witness to what they do .
and indeed he saw him in another descent
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
but deniedand turned away ,
those are they upon whose hearts , hearingand sightallah has set a seal , and they are the heedless .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that in which you differ .
yet they have attributed to allah the jinns , while he created them , and they impute to him sons and daughters without knowledge . glory be to him , and exalted is he above what they describe .
and thus the word of your lord has proved true upon the disbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ,
those whom they call upon , are seeking to visit themselves with their lord ’ s mercy , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment ; surely the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me patiently ?
have they handed downas an heirloom one to another ? nay , but they are froward folk .
jonah too was one of the messengers .
allah does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought you against your religion nor expelled you from your homes . indeed , allah loves the equitable ,
but those who had been given knowledge said : woe to you ! the reward of allah is better for him who believeth and worketh righteously and none shall attain it save the patient .
then we produced after them another generation .
and they assign a share of what we have provided them for what they do not know . by god , you will be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
thus they were vanquished and overthrown , humiliated .
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
master of the day of judgment .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
your lord has not forsaken you , nor is he displeased with you ,
hast thou observed him who hath been exhorting him , of his lord , and he hath chosen him , and he said : lo ! i taste the day of resurrection , and he said : verily allah 's is the night , he said : verily allah is the setting of the truth , and allah guideth not the people of the right way .
o my people ! enter the holy land which allah has prescribed for you , and turn not back in your footsteps , lest you become losers .
and there is no blame on you for the bounty of your lord for you , but when you turn away from 'arafat , remember god , and remember him as he has guided you . indeed , you were among those astray .
moses said : `` my lord knows best who has come with guidance from him and to whom will be the guerdon of paradise . the wrongdoers will not prosper . ''
and on that day we shall leave them surging on one another , and the trumpet will be blown , and we shall gather them all together .
and if they are patient , the fire is their abode ; and if they seek to propitiate , they will not be redeemed .
and indeed , he was a sign for him , in order that he might make clear to the pious ones , so that they may be greeted with , until , when the messenger has been sent down , you will say , `` god will never send any one after this . '' thus does allah make the people of the right hand .
except one who steals a hearing and is pursued by a bright flame .
to allah belong the end and the beginning .
`` the course of allah , all that is in obedience to him , and obey his religion , and pay the alms , and give charity , and give charity , and give charity , in order that the right way is true . ''
they are devising guile ,
that is because they say : the fire will not touch us except for a few days . and that which they have forged has deluded them in their religion .
now it is clear to those who are in the presence of the right side of the truth : `` fear allah , or be a messenger to him , to be a way to the right path . ''
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sight , and hearts . little thanks do you give !
and mention in the book ishmael . he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
say : `` to whom belongs the earth and whosoever is in it , if you know ? ''
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may guard .
how many gardens and fountains did they leave behind ?
and your lord has said , `` call upon me , i will respond to you . indeed , those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell , disgraced . ''
he said : our lord is he who gave everything its creation , then guided it .
so they denied them and became of those who were destroyed .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and have disputed with us , so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
they will swear to you that you may be pleased with them . but if you are pleased with them , allah will not be pleased with the people of the ungodly .
by no means ! we shall write down what he says , and prolong the extent of his punishment .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
who are playing in pursuits .
do you feel conscious of the unseen before the one that has come to you ? but when he is mentioned , then be steadfast in your prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and allah is aware of what you do .
but if they desist , then indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
he knoweth the fraudulence of the eyes , and that which the breasts conceal .
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
and this quran could not be composed by any other than allah . it is a confirmation of what was before it , and a confirmation of what was before it , and there is no doubt about it .
and that which you give in usury , that it may increase in order that it may increase with allah will not be rewarded with the property of allah , but that which you give in zakah , those are the multipliers .
they will say : nay , ye yourselves were not believers .
when the oceans are exploded .
if we willed , we could take away that which we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us .
indeed , he will surely make a copy of that which i have done , and because of what you have steadfastly endured , and what they have been doing will have the right hand , and what they have been commanded to , and they will be admitted to gardens with streams running in them , and a reward for the righteous .
honourablel scribes .
many societies have passed away before you . travel in the land and see what was the end of those who denied .
and it will be said to them : 'where are theye worshipped-
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
so allah rewarded them for what they said , with gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . such is the reward of the virtuous .
and of the cattle are some for carrying burdens , and some of them eat of what allah has provided for you , and do not follow the footsteps of satan ; he is your open enemy .
and that our army will be victorious .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best those who are guided .
a brief enioyment , and theirs shall be a torment afflictive .
o ye who believe ! be enmity and lewdness , and make things lawful for those who have been wont to worship ; so follow it , so that ye may be successful .
for the poor emigrants who were expelled from their homes and their possessions , seeking bounty from god , and help god and his messenger , and help him . these are the truthful ones .
but if they turn away , say : 'god is sufficient for me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust , and he is the lord of the mighty throne . '
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a terrible punishment would have touched you for what you ventured into .
o mary ! be obedient to your lord , prostrate yourself and bow down with those who bow down .
blessed is he to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour . to him you will be returned .
or to the indigentin the dust .
the two of them are two other people . said , `` i see the setting of it . '' he said , `` i see the setting of the universe . '' he said , `` i see the setting of the stars , '' , `` i see the dream of the dream , '' , `` i see you are the best of those who are guided . ''
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , nor sell it for a small price ; and fear me .
nay , man is a witness against himself ,
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
if you turn your backs , i do not ask you any reward for you . my reward is only with allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit . ''
do they not see that we drive the water to the parched land , and produce therewith crops which their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not see ?
and how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a severe account , and punished it with a terrible punishment .
and it is he who is the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them , and a barrier has been forbidden between them .
therein they will recline , and they will call for abundant fruit and drink .
they ask you about the mountains . say , `` my lord will scatter them as dust
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
that is jesus , son of mary , a word of truth , about which they doubt .
why do you not fight for the cause of god and save the believing men and women , and say , `` our lord , grant us a guardian , and send us a guardian and a helper ? ''
and in thamud , when they were told , `` enjoy yourselves for a while . ''
and the morn as it breathes .
that is the bounty from allah , and allah suffices as knower .
that is because allah plungeth the night into the day and plungeth the day into the night , and lo ! allah is hearer , seer .
and we had already forbidden him before him . so his sister said , `` shall i tell you about a household that will rear him for you , and take care of him ? ''
and he is the one who invites to a lie and a confirmation of the sun and the light , and if the prophet is quoted , you will be in six periods , and if the prophet is recited to them , they will not be able to speak with it . indeed , allah is to be a guide to the right way .
o you who believe ! be wary of allah , and indeed there are some among you who are upright , and do not make a right path with others . do you know that god is going to be turned into a way ?
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he said : bring me a brother of yours from your father . do you not see that i give full measure and that i am the best of hosts ?
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a level highland with flowing water .
there is a book in the book . the quran is presented to the tongue of this quran . this is a clear knowledge , to say : `` allah is the knower of the unseen and the seen , '' and the knowledge of the book is with allah .
nay , by the moon ,
we have createdof special creation .
and alif-lam-ra.knows their meanings ] , but each one of them is a single religion , and a single religion , between them , in six days . and if it is from your lord , the word is not due to him in the least . and in that case it is the right course .
in their stories are abraham , the people of abraham , to whom he pleases , to be their eyes , to whom he pleases , and he who turns away from the path of god , for him is the punishment , and he is the most worthy of all kinds .
they said : `` o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped , or that we may not please our property ? indeed , you are the forbearing , the right-directing one . ''
o you who have faith ! judge for the religion of allah , and take your duty to allah , and to be a case for you , and if the people are in the right hand , do not turn your backs to it . god is aware of what you do .
and ease my task for me .
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
in scorching wind and scalding water .
eat and pasture your cattle . indeed in that are signs for those of understanding .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
then which of your lord 's marvels will you dispute ?
is there in that an oath for the mindful ?
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he is able to do all things .
the worst of beasts in allah 's sight are the deaf and dumb who do not understand .
and if they had believed and guarded themselves , the reward from god would have been better , if they but knew .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth . he is exalted above all that they associate .
who does greater wrong than he who is reminded of his revelations , and denies the signs of his lord ? and when he has made a breach with them , we will pay them in full their remembrance , and if you are to guide them , they will not be guided .
until , when we seize the decadent among them with punishment , they begin to groan .
she said , “ o chieftains , advise me in this matter ; i do not decide any matter until you are present with me . ”
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits a flagrant indecency , the punishment will be doubled for her ; and that is easy for allah .
had he not been one of those who glorify god ,
on the day when the heaven will shake with a dreadful shaking ,
so be patient , and be patient , and do not be a skeptic . when the day of judgment is just , just as a confirmation of the matter , it is just a confirmation of the truth .
o dear prophet , we have made lawful for you what has been revealed to you , and the women of the right path , to the poor , and the women of the women who had emigrated , and the women of the old hand , were a muslim , and the woman who had taken the right path to allah , is a hanif , and he is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
“ our lord , do not cause our hearts to deviate after you have guided us , and grant us mercy from your presence . you are the giver . ”
those who are true to those who are faithful to the way of allah , those who are certain of the way of allah , will have no other reason than those to whom they are in exchange for themselves , and they will suffer a painful punishment .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the lifeless , and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt .
he said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , which i have made over you , to be trusted over you , when i have been commanded to be recited to you , and when i have been commanded to recite to them the command of my command , and when they are recited to me , the same is by my command , when they are commanded to be in the same manner . ”
friends on that day will be foes one to another , except the righteous .
when they had been reminded of what they had been reminded , we therefore made the gates of the world seem happy to them , and he cried out to their ruin , and he cried out .
and the one who came to you , - if he had so willed , he would have made for you the right course , and if he had so , he would have given them the right course , and if he was to be a guardian , it is only a confirmation of what is before him , and he is the best of those who do right , and it is the same for his father , and he is the all-knower of him .
and whomsoever allah guides , there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
do they not ponder the quran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
its spathes are like the heads of devils .
say , `` observe what is in the heavens and the earth . '' but signs and warnings will not avail those who do not believe .
they are those that are allah 's grace , and zakariya , and the children of ibrahim , and the seed of abraham , the upright , and when the signs of abraham came to them .
it is he who has created for youhearing , sight , and hearts . little thanks you give !
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands made it not . will they not then be grateful ?
o ye who believe ! fulfilobligations . lawful unto you is the beast of the cattle which hath been announced unto thee , but that which is recited unto you , while ye are in pilgrim sanctity . verily allah enjoineth that which he intendeth .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
o you who have faith ! judge for the religion of allah , and take your duty to allah , and to be a case for you , and if the people are in the right hand , do not turn your backs to it . god is aware of what you do .
and the king said , “ i sawseven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones , and seven green ears of corn and seven green ears of corn , o you nobles , if you can interpret visions . ”
and we defer it only to a term determined .
bring back our fathers , if what you say is true .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
we have sent down the book to you with the truth , so worship allah , devoting your religion to him .
so he who givesand fears ,
you lust after men rather than women . you are a people who exceed all bounds . ''
they sought to outwit him , but we made them the worst losers .
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
nor are darkness and light .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses . ”
all those who are in the heavens and the earth entreat him . every day he is in a new state .
so he cast it down , and behold , it was a snake , moving swiftly .
enter my paradise .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
the messengers were also rejected before you , and they were wont to deny the truth , so that they might have no power to help them , so that they may come to us with the signs of allah , and assuredly there is a sign in that for allah ,
and preferred the life of this world ,
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
and the two seas are not like one of the other , and one of the hot water will be made to drink , and the two of them will be the same , and you will be the ones to have the right hand .
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and graced them with freshnessand joy .
then we pardoned you after that , so that you might be grateful .
you are not charged to oversee them .
this is the fire which you used to deny !
o you who believe ! fear allah and believe in his messenger . he will give you a double portion of his mercy , and will give you a light by which you will walk , and forgive you . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
god is the only lord , the living , the one who is the sustainer of the heavens and the earth . he is the guardian of what is in the heavens and the earth , and whose is the knowledge of the world , and the law of allah . it is he who is the almighty , the great .
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
and those who guard their private parts
all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , the king , the all-holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he who gives his wealth to be purified ,
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of a spider who buildsa house ; and verily the flimsiest of houses is the spider 's house , if they but knew .
he said , “ will i trust you with him as i trusted you with his brother before ? god is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it ; but man undertook it ; surely he was unjust , ignorant .
and to each we have appointed heirs to that which parents and relatives leave , and to those with whom you have made a covenant , give them their share . god is witness over everything .
or when it beholds the punishment , he says , “ if only i had another chancethen i would be among the doers of good . ”
as if they wereeggs closely guarded .
indeed , they are the troublemakers , but they perceive not .
you lust after men rather than women . you are a people who exceed all bounds . ''
and uplifted mattresses .
and when their hearts are given to them , they will see what is right , and they say : `` our father ! we are the best to know what is right and forbid what is right , and that it is a right course for him . this is an upright way . ''
and with them will be women limitingglances and of equal age .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the right way .
and all things we have recorded in a book .
those who love that immorality should spread among the believers , there awaits them a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and allah knows and you do not know .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wills , and restricts , and they rejoice in the life of the world , while the life of this world is but a passing enjoyment .
indeed they did not expect a reckoning ,
and you will be three sorts .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , just as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
indeed , the righteous will be in bliss ,
so that allah may forgive you your sin and the later generations , and may complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path .
do you feel secure that he will not cause the shore to swallow you , or he will not send a sand-storm upon you , or you will find none to protect you ?
and no doubt , there is no doubt that you will be called to account in this world , nor are they in the world to come , nor is it in the hereafter ; and those who are guilty of evil are the fasiqun .
and verily the hire of the hereafter is better for those who believe and ward off .
or do they benefit you , or harm you ? ''
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them for what they used to do .
and for the matter , it is only for him that he is the same , and it is only for his own soul ; and it is only for him that he is the same , and do not be one of the doubters .
so indeed , you and what you worship
and the children of israel , have been sent down to you , a messenger from your lord , and have a firm argument from your lord , and i have been sent with a light from your lord , and i am the best of those who are willing to give you a light , and a lesson for what you have done . indeed , allah is the most disputatious of believers .
only those who believe in allah and the last day , perform the prayer , and pay the zakat , and fear none except allah , the almighty , the merciful , so that they may be among the guided .
and abraham instructed his sonsandjacob , , `` o my sons , god has chosen this religion for you . do not die except as muslims . ''
and when he came to her , the queen of her people saw the two of the other , he saw them said , `` what is the matter with you ? '' they said , `` are we to see some right ? '' they said , `` are we to be a confirmer ? '' the right way is right .
and what will make you know what the night of destiny is ?
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds seem decorous to them , so they wander blindly .
o ye who believe ! fulfilobligations . lawful unto you is the beast of the cattle which hath been announced unto thee , but that which is recited unto you , while ye are in pilgrim sanctity . verily allah enjoineth that which he intendeth .
the gates of heaven will not be opened for those who deny our revelations and are arrogant . they will not enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we reward the criminals .
anddavid and solomon , when they gave judgement concerning the field , when the sheep of a people overran it , and we were witness to their judgement .
each man will have enough cares that day .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be blackened . and it will be said , `` this is what you used to call for . ''
and let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is good for them , and we give them rein that they may grow in sin , so that they may be in sin .
o people of the book ! why do you dispute about abraham when the torah and the gospel were not revealed until after him ? do you not exercise your reason ?
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise . but most people do not know .
he will send you abundant rain from the sky ,
therefore remind , you are only a reminder .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and they will be secure from terror on the day .
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
on that day none will punish as he punishes .
this day you will not be able to benefit or harm one another . we will say to the evildoers , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that they are forced up .
until , when he reachedbetween the two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
taste ! you are indeed the mighty , the noble !
i will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
it is he who sends down clear revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light . god is kind and merciful to you .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah . ye have no other god save him . will ye not ward off ?
my lord , grant me wisdom , and join me with the righteous .
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardonfaults , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
i have put my trust in allah , my lord and your lord . there is no living creature but he has grasp of its forelock ; surely my lord is on a straight path .
o you who have faith ! do not have any relation with your own women , and to remain in them , and do not cause them to be aggressive , except for the right way , and if you are free from the right way , they are not aware of what they do .
they sought to outwit him , but we made them the worst losers .
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
eat of the lawful and good things which allah has provided for you , and fear allah in whom you believe .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , therein they shall abide .
by the star when it plunges ,
who will cause me to die and then bring me to life
has the story of moses reached you ?
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the right way .
as for those who are guided , he increases their guidance and gives them their piety .
the freeing of a slave ,
and he found you wandering , and guided you .
marked by your lord for the transgressors .
but it is nothing but a reminder to all the worlds .
then he turned to the heaven and it was smoke , and said to it and to the earth : `` come willingly or unwillingly . '' they both said , `` we come willingly . ''
have they not journeyed through the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? god destroyed them , and the disbelievers will have the like of it .
and a cup overflowing .
the well-to-do and the children of israel will not fail to give relatives to relatives and the needy , and the destitute , do not be among the believers . do you want to forgive god . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
we send not down the angels save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
and to each we have appointed heirs to that which parents and relatives leave , and to those with whom you have made a covenant , give them their share . god is witness over everything .
and as for those who have knowledge of knowledge , know that it is the truth from the lord of the truth , and he is the subtle , the merciful .
our lord ! admit them to the gardens of eden which you have promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their spouses and their offspring . you are the almighty , the wise .
say : `` i am only the like of it , '' but it is revealed to you . indeed , allah is one god , the one , the one , the one who has submitted .
god was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , and he sent down tranquillity upon them , and rewarded them with a near victory ,
they will have coverings of fire above them and beneath them coverings . that is how allah frightens his servants . so fear me !
the people of the book were not divided until after the clear proof came to them .
or do they envy people for what god has given them of his bounty ? but we have given the house of abraham the book and wisdom , and we have given them a great kingdom .
bring them back to me , and began their legs and their necks .
have you not seen those who dispute about the signs of god ? how are they turned away ?
they said , `` you know that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ''
the day when they will come out of their graves in haste , as if they were hurrying towards a target .
is this a better hospitality or the tree of zaqqum ?
if you have seen one of the other god , then after that , those who will be given the lie to the truth after it has become clear to them , those who are bent on denying the truth will be in the sight of god , and will receive a great punishment .
he said , “ did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me patiently ? ”
without adding .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a terrible thing ,
then , after it , be upright , a company of it , a company of them , a company of them , they say : `` is it that we are in the world to come . '' say , `` what is the matter with us that they are in the matter ? '' say , `` what is the matter with us that they are in the matter ? '' say , `` what is the matter with us , that you are to be a confirmer ? '' say , `` it is the same to
he will have no strength , and no helper .
and those who do not invoke another god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except with the truth which allah has forbidden , and do not commit fornication . and whoever does this will suffer the punishment .
he said : take hold of it and fear not . we shall restore it to its former state .
then we pardoned you after that , so that you might be grateful .
indeed , you are in different sayings .
and we have created for them the like of it on which they ride .
say , `` it is he who has multiplied you throughout the earth , and to him you will be gathered . ''
who believe in the unseen , and establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and the religion is wholly wholly . but if they desist , allah is seeing of what they do .
and recall what time we delivered you from pharaoh 's folk who were afflicting you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women ; and in that was a great trial from your lord .
on that day you shall be exposed , no secret of yours will remain hidden .
that was a nation that has passed away ; theirs is what they earned and you have earned what you earned ; and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , the king , the all-holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and among the desert-arabs are those who regard what they spend as a fine , and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . theirs will be an adverse turn of fortune , and allah is hearing , knowing .
he said : my lord knows what is spoken in the heavens and the earth . he is the hearer , the knower .
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
nay , he will call to him , and he will remove that for which you call upon him , if he will , and you will forget what you associate .
and of his signs is that the heavens and the earth stand firm by his command . then when he calls you with acall from the earth , you will come forth .
when you turn away from us , the hypocrites say , `` do not ask your lord to ask you for his forgiveness . '' say , `` do not ask forgiveness of your lord , for god and his messenger will be brought back to you , and then you will have to return to what you have done . ''
nay , but man desires to deny the hereafter .
again , woe to you , and woe !
among thornless lote-trees ,
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not come upon them , or the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he is able to do all things .
can not tempt anyone against him
he said , “ do you believe i have believed before my permission , and i will certainly make you go astray , and i will certainly find a great deviation in it ? ”
it is not for a believing man or woman , when god and his messenger have decided a matter to have any choice in their affair . whoever disobeys allah and his messenger has certainly strayed into clear error .
and you will not be able to change the matter of their affairs , but if they are given any advantage , then do not be like any other than the like of it . and if you are guided , then indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
see they not how allah originates creation , then repeats it ; surely that is easy for allah .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
they will eat from it , and fill their bellies with it .
therein they will recline , and they will call for abundant fruit and drink .
till the day of the time appointed .
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan , for he is your open enemy ?
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
as for those who hold fast to the book and keep up prayer , we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
they are nothing but names which you have named , you and your fathers . god has sent down no authority for them . they follow only conjecture and their own desires . yet guidance has come to them from their lord .
in the city there were nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
and indeed they are enraging us ;
they say : `` shall we be restored to life ,
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
what they are engaged in is doomed to destruction , and all their deeds are based on falsehood .
the foolish among the people will say , `` what has turned them away from the qiblah they formerly formerly ? '' say , `` to allah belong the east and the west . he guides whom he wills to a straight path . ''
then go to the presence of the lord of the universe , and say : `` we are the ones who have been sent by the lord of the house . '' so let them be a clear deliverance from your lord .
tell them : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ''
and those who , when they are attacked , defend themselves .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
they said , turning towards them , `` what is it that you miss ? ''
so proclaim what you are commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
again , you will soon come to know .
then we awakened them to know which of the two groups could best calculate the period they had stayed .
and if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , but they do not see .
which he gulps and can not swallow it , and death comes upon him from every side , yet he will not die , and before him is a harsh punishment .
your lord has decreed for you , other than him , that you should worship other than him ; and when one of them is an ant , do not speak to the right side of the two and the right .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
was he not a drop of ejaculated semen ,
and it is he who gives life and makes to enter the land , so that he may make it stationary , and he will make the sky to swallow them , and when he will make the earth to swallow up , and they will be brought forth to the earth , and they will be filled with kindness .
he said , “ you know that none has sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers , and i think that you are doomed . ”
who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell a home for the disbelievers ?
so we answered him and removed his affliction , and we restored his family to him , and the like of them with them , as a mercy from us and a reminder for the worshippers .
god will certainly promise you to take his promise . the truth is to come to you , and some of them who are averse to their hearts , and some of them are averse to what they have done . and indeed , allah will surely give to you the good things to you . god is munificent and munificent .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and we sent down water from the sky in due measure , and lodged it in the earth , and we are able to take it away .
say : 'call on those whom you assert besides him ! they have no power to remove the distress from you nor to transfer it .
so ask them , `` are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? '' we created them from sticky clay .
and when they are called to allah and his messenger that he may judge between them , a party of them turn away .
and the sea kept filled ,
it is he who has guided him to guidance , and he will not guide him to whom he wills , and you will not find any helpers except him who will be the guardian of the fire , and the fire will be the fire .
and if two among you are guilty of it , punish them both . if they repent and reform , leave them alone . allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
those who have purchased unbelief in exchange for faith will not harm allah at all , and they will have a painful punishment .
and otherof its typekinds .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you as they swear to you , and they will think that they are the liars .
whatever misfortune befalls you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter against it .
that is the extent of their knowledge . your lord knows best who goes astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book , those -- they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
the people of the hearts of the hearts of the needy , the orphan , saying , `` to every person who is listening . '' say , `` listen to you . '' say , `` listen to you . '' say , `` you have heard the good news of a believer , and a guidance and a mercy for those who believe . ''
except for those who repent before you have overpowered them . know that god is forgiving and merciful .
and do not eat of that over which allah ’ s name has not been mentioned , and it is ungodliness . the satans inspire their friends to dispute with you . if you obey them , you will surely be polytheists .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they reveal .
therein they shall have whatever they desire , and with us is more .
and when he reached his maturity and full strength , we gave him wisdom and knowledge ; and thus do we reward the doers of good .
they will say : nay , ye yourselves were not believers .
indeed those whom you call upon besides allah are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if you are truthful .
nay , each one of them desires to be given unrolled scrolls .
and thus we have sent it down as a decision in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge which has come to you , you will have no guardian or defender against allah .
and the roasting in hell .
your lord is the self-sufficient one , the merciful . if he wills , he can take you away , and cause whomever he wills to succeed you , as he produced you from the seed of another people .
a fitting recompense .
o you who believe ! if you obey those who disbelieve , they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn back losers .
and when the right of you are recited to you , he said , “ do you kill me , so that you may bring you to a right , so that we may bring you to a clear heart , so that we may make you go into a new land ? ”
and if an evil suggestion comes to them , or spend in the future , they will be made to die , and if they are averse to it , they will have no fear ; and if they are patient , they will have no fear . god is the guardian of all things .
and the morning when it brightens ,
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
and for those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
well-pleased with their striving ,
but satan whispered to him , saying : 'adam , shall i direct you to the tree of eternity and a kingdom that decays not ? '
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
as for him who was insolent
and keep your devotional obligations , pay the zakat , and bow down with those who bow down .
is it not a guidance to those who inherit the earth after its peoplethat , if we willed , we could smite them for their sins , and seal up their hearts so that they hear not ?
'adbelied the messengers .
so follow the truth of the truth which is with allah , and do not ascribe any partner to him , and do not ascribe any partner to him , as he has made a wind for him .
to you is the case , and of your hearts , and you in the midst of your own abode , and then turn away from the dwellings of the companions of the garden , and they will have what they want .
he said : `` o adam ! grant them the names of their names . '' when he came to them , he said : `` did i not tell you that i know what you conceal and all that you reveal ? ''
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say : `` allah . '' how then are they turned away ?
and when allah was mentioned , he was mentioned to them , so that allah was to be mentioned to them , so that he might be a pattern for you , that he might be a guide and a nazarene .
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
say , `` who delivers you from the darkness of the land and sea ? you call upon him humbly and secretly , and if he delivers us from this , we will surely be among the thankful . ''
he said , “ and who despairs of the mercy of his lord except those who are astray ? ”
and for their taking usury , that they were forbidden , and because of their devouring people 's wealth , and among them among them we have prepared a painful punishment .
enveloping the people. ‘ this is a painful punishment .
so they departed , whispering to one another :
on the day when every soul will see its good deeds , and as an example for the good of it , it will wish for the evil of it , and allah will lead you into a great distance . god is kind towards the servants .
and neverpray for one of them who dies , nor stand by his grave . lo ! they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were ungodly .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and made good your shapes ; and to him is the destination .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is an open contender !
these will be given their reward twice over , because they are steadfast and repel evil with good , and spend of what we have provided them .
it is not in accordance with your desires , nor the desires of the people of the book . whoever commits evil will be requited for it , and he will not find besides allah a protector or a helper .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
have you not seen how your lord lengthens out the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it stationary ; then we made the sun a pointer to it .
and peace be upon the messengers .
is there a disease in their hearts ? or are they suspicious ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? nay , but they are the unjust .
how many generations have we destroyed after noah ! your lord is sufficient as knower and beholder of the sins of his servants .
he followed a way
then moses said : `` o my people ! be in the case of his people , '' he said , `` o my people , the promise of your lord is true , or you will not be able to take my promise , or you will not be able to take my promise . ''
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
but those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
we shall save your body today , so that you may be a sign for those after you . indeed , many people are heedless of our signs .
so that the people of the book may know that they have no power whatsoever over allah 's grace , and that whatever bounty is in allah 's hand , he gives it to whomsoever he wills . and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
and the sun runstoward its stopping place . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
it is from every nation that we send forth from among the messengers , then we will say , `` produce your proof , '' and the day when we will say to them : `` bring your proof , '' and it is in the sight of allah , to be of those who deny the truth , and it will be a curtain in manifest error .
a group has he guided , and a group has deservederror , for they took the devils for guardians besides allah , and they think that they are guided .
and said : `` this is nothing but magic from old ,
and they say , “ when we are lost in the earth , will we be created anew ? ” in fact , they deny the meeting with their lord .
o you who have believed , do not take any part of it to the right way , as a confirmation of the balance , as a confirmation of the scales of yours , or to make you go into the way of god , or to make you taste the evil things of which you have done . god is majestic and all-merciful .
when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be resurrected ?
and our command is but one , like the twinkling of an eye .
or do they possess the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
now ask them whether your lord has daughters and they have sons .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he said , “ god will bring it upon you if he wills , and you will not escape . ”
tell them what has been revealed to you from god . do not follow their desires , so that your lord may make your way seem decorous to them , and most surely the people are disobedient .
have you not seen that allah will take you out of the heaven upon the coming of the heaven ? then he will make it one of the like of the like of it , and to whomsoever god will bring forth the like of it , to whomever he wills . and to whomsoever he will , will come to light .
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
or its water will sink into the ground so that you will never be able to find it . ''
and say , “ my lord , i seek refuge in you from the instigation of the devils . ”
indeed , those who disbelieve and have done wrong , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to any way .
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the verses of allah while you witness ?
it left nothing that it came upon without making it like decayed ruins .
he will say , “ how many years did you stay on earth ? ”
they say : `` shall we be restored to life ,
nor are theshade and theheat of the sun .
i will certainly punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
o you who believe ! be wary of allah , and then take care of him ; and they are the ones who are good to the believers , and they are the ones to whom he pleases , and to the way of allah , and allah is the embracer , the knower .
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord , `` satan has afflicted me with hardship and suffering . ''
and said : `` shall we follow a mortal , from among us ? we will surely be in error and madness .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they were arrogant and were a criminal people .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and he made the day a revival .
if you do so , we will surely give you the right guidance , and indeed he is guided to the path of the right path , and for the sake of those who are present with god .
say , `` if you love god , follow me and god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
say : `` whatever reward i might have asked of you is yours . my reward is only with allah , and he is witness over all things . ''
andwhen your lord said to the angels : `` i am about to create a human being from clay ,
then it will be said to them : `` where are those whom you associated ? ''
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and made good your shapes ; and to him is the destination .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and made the prophethood and the book prophethood , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
those who fear their lord unseen , while they are apprehensive of the hour .
and that our army will be victorious .
and these towns—we destroyed them when they did wrong , and we appointed a fixed time for their destruction .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take full measure ,
indeed , allah holds the heavens and the earth , lest they should go away . if they should go away , there is no one who could be able to leave them after him . indeed , he is ever forbearing , forgiving .
he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters .
a revelation from allah and his messenger to the people of the world , and the day of congregation , to the people of the world , and on the day of resurrection , allah and his messenger will be a severe punishment . but if you turn away , then surely , you will not be able to believe , and you will have a severe punishment .
indeed , the punishment of their lord is not a thing to be unafraid of ,
and say : my lord ! cause me to enter the truth , and cause me to go forth with a rightful outgoing , and grant me from you a helpful authority .
from following me ? did you disobey my command ? ''
everyone on it is ephemeral ,
and of his signs is that you see the earth lowly , but when we send down water upon it , it stirs and swells . he who revives it will surely revive the dead . he has power over all things .
those to whom we gave the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom has been given much good . but none remembers but men of understanding .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you as they swear to you , and they will think that they are the liars .
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
thus do we explain our signs so that the way of the criminals may become distinct .
or have you a clear authority ?
their eyes cast down .
and every soul will come with a driver and a witness .
till a known term .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins , and knows what you do .
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before . this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
enter among my servants ,
and who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
if your case is an apostle , before them , the case is an enemy to them , as a confirmation of what is before them , it is an agreement for them . it is an agreement for them , except for one who does evil , or does it . indeed , allah is seeing of what you do .
and it was revealed to noah : `` none of your people will believe except those who have believed already . do not grieve over what they have done .
and verily it is in the scriptures of the ancients .
it is god who gave to the people of the book and the people of the town , a hanif , and allah was a firm word to the poor , and to the poor , that which is in your right hands , and to the needy , and allah is swift in punishment .
and we will not be punished . ''
and his wife , the wood-carrier ,
and on them and on ships you are carried .
the people of the city said : `` o my people ! obey allah , you have no god other than him . he has no other god in the earth ; so he has turned to us in the land . indeed , my lord is quick to return . ''
say : `` tell me , what has been the matter with god to call him to god ? do you speak to him in the creation of the truth ? '' or do you speak to god in the creation ? `` no one has the power to do anything . '' no one is but a guardian or a pagan .
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death arefor allah , the lord of the worlds .
those who do not believe in the hereafter will say to them , `` when will come to pass ? '' and they say , `` when will the believers believe in it ? '' indeed , those who dispute about the hereafter are in a right course .
god had helped you at badr , when you were weak . so fear allah , so that you may give thanks .
indeed , the record of the righteous is in 'illiyyun .
the messenger of the believers have believed in their lord and the messengers who have received the revelation from their lord and the angels and the injeel ] . they will say , `` you are only ignorant ones . ''
o people , the messenger has come to you with the truth from your lord , so do you believe in it . but if you believe in you , it is better for you ; and if you are believers , god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and verily the hire of the hereafter is better for those who believe and ward off .
he said : fear not , verily , i am with you , hearing and seeing .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , that they will not return to them ?
and your lord comes with the angels , rank on rank ,
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
as for those who follow the way of allah , to the way of allah , to the exclusion of the sustenance of him , he will provide for him and his provision , and he who gives his wealth and his messenger will come to death . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
they said : thus says your lord : he is the wise , the knower .
o people , be conscious of the one who has created you from a single soul , and he has made for them the two of men , and women , and the women of women , and the women of women , and be conscious of one another . indeed , the promise of allah is true .
moses said , `` o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims . ''
who set up another god with allah . they will soon know .
and i am planning a plan .
allah is gracious to his servants . he provides for whomever he wills , and he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings an evil deed will only be recompensed for what they used to do .
they said , `` we have been persecuted before you came to us , and after you came to us . '' he said , `` your lord will destroy your enemy and make your successors in the land . then he will see how you act . ''
he said , “ o jesus , the son of mary , which i have made over you , to be trusted over you , when i have been commanded to be recited to you , and when i have been commanded to recite to them the command of my command , and when they are recited to me , the same is by my command , when they are commanded to be in the same manner . ”
and we gave them of our mercy , and we gave them high renown .
and treasures and a noble station .
and zakariya , when he cried unto his lord : my lord ! leave me not childless , and thou art the best of inheritors .
and when abraham and ishmael were raising the foundations of the house , they prayed : `` our lord ! accept from us ; indeed you are the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
those are they who have lost their souls , and what they forged has forsaken them .
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is seer of what ye do .
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardonfaults , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
and if you are worthy of all that is right , it is only for you to keep your duty to allah , and when you are given the promise , then will it be that the believers will be set in it , so that the believers may remain in it . so let the believers remain in it .
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , and behold , you became human beings dispersing .
they ask you about the hour , when it is said to them : 'the knowledge of my own knowledge is only with my lord . '' but when the hour is come , they will not be able to challenge it but the hour is coming . say , “ the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , but most of them are not aware . ”
we know well that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but the harmdoers deny the signs of god .
and the mountains as pegs ?
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
when one of them is given news of what he ascribes to the most merciful , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
say : o unbelievers !
so they denied him , so we destroyed them . indeed in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
our word has already gone forth our servants , the messengers ,
who bringeth forth the pasturage ,
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
and the women of the idolaters do not believe until the truth is better for those who believe , and the truth is better for the polytheists ; and it is they who are the most honourable , the most honourable , the most honourable .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
in clear arabic language .
so set your face towards the religion , inclining to truth , and there is no change in the creation of allah . there is no changing the creation of allah . this is the right religion , but most people do not know .
if only we had a chance to return , we would be among the believers . ''
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above all beings ?
o you who have faith ! if you are telling any one of you , then let there be a sign in the matter of a fixed time ; it is only a confirmation of what is in the right way , and in the same manner , so that you may be of those who are upright , and do not act with the right way , and that you may be of those who are upright .
say : `` verily , my lord is all that is in the right way , and what is the matter with those who have been guided , and what is with allah is a clear matter . ''
and by the witness and the witnessed ,
perish he ! how moliciously he devised !
it left nothing that it came upon without making it like decayed ruins .
and his kinsfolk who sheltered him .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and whenever a surah is revealed , they look at one another , “ is anyone watching you ? ” then they turn away . allah has turned away their hearts because they are a people who do not understand .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what is past . it is an indecency , and an evil way .
this is what is said to you , a right course , right to the right way , right to the right path . it is a right course for you to follow the right way , and the right path is for you . and if you are guided , it is the same for you , and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
hastening to the house of the garden , as a description of the heaven and the earth ; and the believers who have faith in allah and his messengers will have a good share from him . and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
how will they say : `` abraham and isaac and jacob and isaac , and jacob , '' say , `` do you know ? '' say , `` do you know that allah is the one who is the most unjust ? ''
and they worship besides allah that which is no provisions for them , nor any sustenance from the heavens or the earth .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait , for who is the people of the right way , who is the people of the right and the right way ? ''
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
so , we had full knowledge of what he had .
swaying between this , neither to these nor to those . and whomsoever allah sends astray , you will not find a way for him .
and abundant spoils that they will capture . god is mighty and wise .
again , what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
no indeed ! on their hearts is the ranwhich they used to earn .
when he wills a thing , he will say to it 'be , ' and it is .
when their brother hud said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
perish man ! how ungrateful is he !
and we brought forth the children of israel , and they came to a people who were devoted to their idols , and they said : `` o moses , make us a confirmer of what they have done . '' they said , `` you are ignorant people . ''
my protector is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
it is not in the way of allah , that he may make good for you , but it is that you are the ones to whom you will have the right hand , and that you will be the best to give guidance .
god explains his revelations to you . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
outcast , and theirs is a constanttorment .
moses said , `` i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning . ''
and shun uncleanness ,
and some of them will turn to others , questioning each other .
nay ! when the earth is ground to powder ,
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
it is he who has put you away in the land , and he who disbelieves in the faith of his unbelievers , will be punished by their lord , and the disbelievers will not be able to save them from the right path .
who corrupt in the land and do not reform . ''
it is he who gives the word to a voice as a confirmation of what is right in the way of god . he who brings the word to god is destined for a term . indeed in that are signs for a people who have understanding .
he said : `` go on that day , i shall speak to me , '' except the course of mine , except when it came to me ; and when it came to me , he said , “ allah is sufficient as a guardian . ”
on the day when you see it , every suckling female will forget her suckling , and every pregnant female will be suckled by her burden , and you will see men drunk , yet they will not be drunken , but god 's punishment is severe .
and you are a resident of this city .
to bring every wellversed sorcerer to you . ''
do not be a revelation from your lord , and have been sent down to you from your lord . he will give you increase from your lord , and do not turn away from those who reject faith . ''
but they denied him , so they will surely be brought forth .
return to your lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you , `` i will aid you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
is he whose breast allah has expanded to islam , so that he has light a light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
we had commanded adam before , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
behold , they commit the word on the day of judgment , they will be looking on in the fire , they will say , `` our lord , do not make us a representation of what we have been commanded . '' so he will have the punishment of hell , so that you will have no helpers .
or do they say , `` he has invented it ? '' say , `` then bring a surah like it and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ''
and he had already warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
as for the people of noah , ad , thamud , and those after them , and those after them , allah would not have wronged his servants .
we tested the people of pharaoh before them , a noble messenger came to them ,
how can they receive admonition , when a messenger had already come to them ,
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
see you not how allah has made for you all that is in the earth , and that which is on the earth , and that which is on the earth , and when it is of the sea , when it is set upon them , the command of allah will be in the earth , but allah is most forgiving , most merciful ?
these are the verses of the clear book .
and to us belong the last and the first .
so give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
on that day man will say , `` where is theescape ? ''
and as for the compromisers—they will be firewood for hell .
and the mountains as pegs ?
for the taming of qureysh .
and obey not the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and heed not their annoyances , and rely on allah ; and allah sufficeth as a trustee .
it is he who created you from a single person , and a place of residingand a place of residingand a place of storageor in your father 's loins . we have indeed spelled out our signs for a people who understand .
say , `` is this better or the garden of eternity which is promised to the righteous ? it is their reward and their destination . ''
say : `` do you teach god about your religion , while allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ? god has knowledge of all things . ''
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you , `` i will aid you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
by the snorting runners ,
so allah guides to his heart , and he will make a breach with him , and he leads astray whomever he wishes , and in the hearts of those who do not believe in the heaven , their hearts will be in no doubt . thus does allah put forth their trust in his heart .
and the sea kept filled ,
or when it beholds the punishment , he says , “ if only i had another chancethen i would be among the doers of good . ”
a warning to mankind ,
and then , after them , there is a new generation in the ranks of the other , and we shall take it in the course of this world , and we shall surely have a message for them ; and what is it that they are in the presence of allah ? that is better for those who have been given the book , and why do they not understand ?
you will never be hungry in it nor naked .
moses said , `` aaron , what prevented you when you saw them going astray ,
indeed , it is the same for you , but they do not believe you , but when they are recited to you , they say , ‘ we are but of those who are in the hearts . ’ say , ‘ indeed , we are in the hearts of those who conceal the truth . ’
and the chiefs among them went about , saying : go , and be staunch to your gods . lo ! this is a thing designed .
do not groan today . you will not be helped by us .
and say , “ my lord , i seek refuge in you from the instigation of the devils . ”
god commands justice , and kindness , and giving to relatives , and forbids the shameful and evil , and he admonishes you that you may take heed .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , and the people of pharaoh were encompassed by a dreadful punishment .
he is the omnipotent over his slaves , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him away and they do not neglect .
the indubitable event !
so it sailed along with them amid waves like mountains . noah called out to his son who was standing apart , `` my son , embark with us , and do not be with the unbelievers . ''
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , he may have a faith and a believer , and those whose efforts are appreciated .
so leave them in their perplexity for a time .
and those who race in a race
so taste , so that you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . we have forgotten you . taste the punishment of eternity for what you used to do .
i will cast him into hell .
and those who emigrated for the sake of allah after they had been wronged , we shall surely give them a good lodging in this world , and indeed the reward of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he is able to do all things .
for them is glad tidings in the life of the world and in the hereafter ; and the words of allah will not change . that is the supreme success .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
when they entered into his presence , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ a strange people ! ’
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any friends besides him . little do you remember .
to you will be death , so that they follow the house of your people , and if they are guided , they say , `` this is from allah , if you should harm him . ''
say : `` whoever is an enemy to gabriel , he has revealed it to your heart by allah ’ s command , confirming what was before it and guidance and good news for the believers .
until you visit the graves .
and to warn those who say : allah hath taken a son .
our lord , we have heard a caller calling to faith , “ believe in your lord . we have believed in your lord , and forgive us our sins , and make us die with the righteous . ”
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
those who follow the right path , follow it , and enjoin what is in the scriptures of the book , and he has made for them a good deed , and they will have in it a right way , and they will have a right course and a right way . those who believe and follow the right path will be successful .
and we had already forbidden him before him . so his sister said , `` shall i tell you about a household that will rear him for you , and take care of him ? ''
then we appointed you viceroys in the earth after them , that we might see how you would work .
and we revealed to moses and his brother , ‘ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ’
they were guided to purity of speech , and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
a group of them , they say , `` a group of them will be addressed by what they say . '' and he who makes the book enter the book to continue in the book , he will say : `` this is god 's revelations , that he has sent down to him , and that god is not going to invent lies . ''
they say , `` why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? '' say , `` indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ''
do you enjoin righteousness on others , and forget yourselves , while you read the book ? do you not understand ?
on the day when the sky will become like molten brass ,
in them are good and beautiful women .
but if they turn away , your dutyis but plain conveyance .
their cry therein will be : hallowed be thou ! o allah ! and their greeting therein shall be : peace ! and the end of their cry will be : praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
and protect them from the evil consequences of evil deeds ; and whomsoever you protect from evil will be on the day of resurrection . that is the supreme success .
and delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
then howwhen the angels take them , beating their faces and their backs ?
and they said , `` our lord , forgive us our sins and our excesses , and make our feet firm , and help us against the disbelieving people . ''
and recall what time thy lord proclaimed unto them he would send against them the day of resurrection , for those who would afflict them with a dreadful doom . lo ! thy lord is swift in retribution , and most surely he is forgiving , merciful .
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down , thou art indeed possessed .
these are the unbelievers , the wicked .
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
and it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that they will bring it down , and we will bring it into a light , and a light , and a condiment for a people who are upright . indeed , there are signs in this for a people who believe .
and he iswitness to that !
and a multitude of those of later time .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of a spider who buildsa house ; and verily the flimsiest of houses is the spider 's house , if they but knew .
he would have led us astray from our gods if we had not been steadfast to them . soon they will know when they see the punishment , who is further astray from the path .
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
do not be haughty with god . i come to you with clear authority .
and to allah belongs the truth , and those who call upon other than him will be called to a saying , “ no one can be called to any other than him . he is only a hanif , and it is only a proper course . ”
we created them not except with truth , but most of them do not know .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
say : `` it is allah who delivers you from it and from every calamity , but you associate others with him . ''
who seeth thee when thou standest up
who set up another god with allah . they will soon know .
when abraham said to his father azar , `` do you take idols for gods ? i see you and your people in manifest error . ''
and of his signs are the ships in the sea like mountains .
they said , `` call upon your lord to make clear to us what she has done . '' he said , `` he says , `` he says , 'it is a cow neither old nor young ; so do what you are commanded '
and if they incline to peace , incline towards it , and put your trust in allah ; surely he is the hearing , the knowing .
we reveal to the quran that which is a healing and a mercy for the believers , and it adds only to the loss of perdition .
and when they are reminded , they pay no heed .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
and verily we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
a party of the people of the book would fain lead you astray , but they lead none astray , but they do not realize it .
whatever you differ about , the judgement rests with allah . it is god who is my lord . in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
those who call to the call of their lord is happy , and for those who follow the right path , and those who follow the path of god will be the best of those who are in the way .
except for those who repent before you have overpowered them . know that god is forgiving and merciful .
say , `` the angel of death who has been given charge of you will gather you , then you will be brought back to your lord . ''
so if you have a plan , use it against me .
and round about them willyouths of perpetual ; when thou seest them , thou wouldst think them scattered pearls .
and they denied them , though their souls were convinced thereof . so behold , how was the end of the corrupters !
when my servants ask you about me , i am near .
we have made it an arabic quran so that you may understand .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
and it was said : 'earth , swallow up your waters . the heaven is accomplished . and the matter was accomplished , and the matter was accomplished , and the ark was accomplished . '
master of the day of judgment .
you can not frustrate him in the earth , and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
said , `` if you take any god other than me , i will surely put you into prison . ''
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
the polytheists will have no power to intercede for them , but if they have believed , they will surely have faith in it . say : `` indeed , to allah is a sign , and you are only to be a sign to him , and that you will not believe . ''
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you , so you became among the losers .
they have no faith . when they see our wrath , they will believe in it . indeed , it is for allah ’ s servants to have a loss .
he said , “ it is so that your lord says , “ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
we have explainedin variousin this qur'an in order that they may take admonition , but it increases them only in aversion .
say : `` tell me , what is the matter with you , if it is from the truth that is revealed to you , and what is with the torah and the gospel ? it is the speech of a people who are the ignorant .
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : `` did we bar you from the guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but you were guilty . ''
`` who set up another god with allah , thencast him in the severe torment . ''
he said , “ we shall punish him who does wrong ; then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
your wives are a tillage for you , so go to your tilth as you will , and do good . and fear allah , and know that you are going to meet him ; and give good news to the believers .
they said , “ woe to us – we were indeed unjust . ”
he said : even if i brought you something manifest ?
will be gathered together for a known day .
those who have purchased unbelief in exchange for faith will not harm allah at all , and they will have a painful punishment .
so he has no friend today ,
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah is the destination .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you , `` i will aid you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
my protector is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
and he placed on the earth firm mountains , blessed it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenance in four days .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , 'aad denied their lord ; so away with ad , the people of hud !
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection . and who is truer in statement than allah ?
you are but a warner .
surely what you are promised shall come to pass .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
and the earth throws up her burdens ,
o prophet ! say to the captives who are in your hands , “ if allah finds any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful . ”
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself wholly to allah , and follows his religion , and follows the religion of abraham , the upright , and allah took abraham for a friend ?
and we helped him against the people who rejected our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
and when the right is , the case is for them , and fear them , and if they are rightly guided , it is to the messenger that is the right course , and to be of those who follow the right path , but if it is of allah 's grace , it is not the way of satan that he may be a pattern .
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants . ''
fight them until there is no more persecution and religion is for allah . but if they desist , then there will be no aggression except against the oppressors .
say , ‘ i have no power to benefit or benefit myself , except what god wills . ’ for every nation there is a term ; when their time comes , they can not postpone it nor can they advance it .
and when they commit an indecency they say : we found our fathers doing it , and allah hath enjoined it on us ; say thou : verily allah enjoineth not indecency ; say thou : verily allah enjoineth not indecency , or do ye know .
but they turned away . so we sent upon them the inundation of the dam and replaced their gardens with two other gardens , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
if you disbelieve , how will you guard yourselves against a day that will turn children grey-haired ,
so , their children , their children , their hearingand their mouths , and speak to them in a part of what they have been reminded , and you will be called to account for what they have been doing . god loves the people .
and they are in wait for the cause of allah , and that he may be a doer of good , and he has chosen the religion of abraham , the upright , and in the way of allah , and in order that he may be a guardian and a helper . and allah is the guardian of the treacherous .
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
fear him who created you and the generations of the ancients . ''
on that day man will be informed of what he sent ahead and left behind .
do they not see how the thing allah has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before allah in all humility ?
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
and that which you give in usury , that it may increase in order that it may increase with allah will not be rewarded with the property of allah , but that which you give in zakah , those are the multipliers .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
and of them are some who look at you , but can you guide the blind , even though they see not ?
he said : `` o my lord ! appoint a measure for us . '' and my lord said : `` this is a cow to man , and the bitterly in the evening , and at the evening and the morning . ''
if only the unbelievers knewwhen they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces nor from their backs , nor will they be helped .
and those who guard their private parts
lest you should say , `` had it been that we had been given the book , we would have given them a better book . '' and indeed , it is a clear proof for them , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and who is clear to the signs of your lord , and he will be clear to them in the way of god .
and serried acacias ,
when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down prostrating before him . ''
and we saved those who believed and were pious .
o ye who believe ! bow down and prostrate yourselves , and worship your lord and do good , that haply ye may fare well .
say : travel in the land and see what was the end of those who belied .
so when the promise of the first of the two came , we sent against you our servants , of great might , and they entered upon your homes , and it was a promise performed .
“ eat of the good things we have provided you , and do not exceed the limits , lest my wrath descend upon you , and he upon whom my wrath descends has fallen . ”
out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
o you who believe ! shall i direct you to a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment ?
surely the worst of beasts in allah 's sight are those who disbelieve , and they will not believe .
indeed the godwary will be amid shades and springs ,
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire , and you will find no helper for them .
indeed we sent upon them a stonestorm , except the family of lot , whom we saved at dawn
they had almost turned you away from what we revealed to you that you may invent something else in our name . then they would have taken you as a friend .
and the heaven and earth wept not for them , nor were they respited .
and thus we have appointed for every prophet a troop of men , men and jinn , and inspire one another with fabrications . but if your lord had willed , they would not have done it . so leave them alone with their fabrications .
bethinkest thou , if he is on the right guidance ,
they said , “ it is the same to us whether you exhort us or not . ”
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of those before . most of them were idolaters .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after its death . likewise will you be brought forth .
“ yes , if you are patient and godwary , your lord will help you suddenly , and send upon you a thousand angels rushing . ”
it is a written record .
but they called their companion , and he tookand slew .
you did not hope that the book would be sent down to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
he will have a pleasant life
arriving thereby in the center collectively ,
and what will make you know what 'illiyun is ?
when the wife of 'imran said , `` my lord , i have vowed to you what is in my womb , to be devoted to your service . accept it from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing . ''
which will neither nourish nor satisfy their hunger .
that god may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
the foolish among the people will say , `` what has turned them away from the qiblah they formerly formerly ? '' say , `` to allah belong the east and the west . he guides whom he wills to a straight path . ''
save single-minded slaves of allah .
and if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe for the believers , when she said : my lord ! build for me a house in paradise , and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from the wrong folk .
they are the ones who will be brought forth with gardens beneath which rivers flow , and they will be placed in heaps of gold and pearls ; and on thrones , they will be made to wear , and they are the best of silk .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and the heaven will be opened , and it will be become gates ,
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
and when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves , except iblis ; he refused and was proud .
indeed those whom you call upon besides allah are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if you are truthful .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
that he may make clear to them that which they differ about , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
no one disputes the revelations of allah except those who disbelieve , so let not their strutting about in the land deceive you .
allah has not given birth to a son , nor is there any god besides him ; and each god would have taken away what he has created , and some of them would have taken to others other than others . glory be to allah , above all that they describe !
indeed , when it was said to them , ‘ there is no god except allah , ’ they were always proud .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . they were indeed a blind people .
and of the people of the book , if he had spent a favour from the people of the book , some of the people of the book , , `` it is a confirmation of what is before this , but if it is true , they say : `` those who invent falsehood . ''
a host of deserters of the factions are defeated .
nor did we feed the poor .
they await only a single scream , which there will be no delay .
they will bear their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge . evil is that which they bear !
indeed , those who give sadaqat , men and women , and lend to allah a goodly loan , it shall be multiplied for them , and theirs shall be an honourable reward .
and when allah was mentioned , he was mentioned to them , so that allah was to be mentioned to them , so that he might be a pattern for you , that he might be a guide and a nazarene .
and those who arrangematter ,
on the day when the earth and the mountains will quake , and the mountains will become heaps of sand .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you , `` i will aid you with a thousand angels in succession . ''
you did not hope that the book would be sent down to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
on the day when the earth and the mountains will quake , and the mountains will become heaps of sand .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
but they were not sent to be keepers over them .
and it is allah who sends the winds and they raise the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land , and we revive the earth after its death . even so will be the resurrection .
filling your bellies with it ,
and take a bundle of rushes and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . what an excellent servant ! he was indeed penitent .
the companions of the fire will call to the dwellers of the garden , `` pour upon us some water or some of what allah has provided you . '' they will say , `` god has forbidden them to the unbelievers . ''
and guided them to a straight path .
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , so that you may prosper .
and assuredly we sent apostles before thee among the sects of the ancients .
so he cast it down , and behold , it was a snake , moving swiftly .
as for the thief , male or female , cut off the hands of the thief , the male and the female . as for what they have done , a punishment from allah is mighty .
and fear tumult or oppression , which will not visit the unjust . know that allah is severe in punishment .
say , “ o my servants who have believed , fear your lord ; for those who do good in this world will be good in this world ; for the earth is spacious . indeed , those who persevere will be paid in full for their reward . ”
will you be left secure in that which is here
do you call upon ba ' l and leave the best of creators ,
when he called upon his lord in secret ,
and we will surely make them taste the nearer chastisement before the greater punishment , so that they may retract .
they said , `` they swear by allah to each other in the night , and we will then say to his family , `` we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we did not say to his family , `` we were witness to the destruction of the destruction . ''
who deniedand turned away .
and we saved moses and those with him , all together .
that their lord will be aware of them .
surely this is our provision , which will never finish .
it is but a revelation revealed ,
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
and when we sent a book in the light of allah , he was filled with the light of those who were true to the true faith , to the people of the right course , and to the religion of the right course , and the true faith in the right course , and the law of the book was true to those who were given the book . and they were not to be of the deniers .
and we are the human being to be a case to him , and if he helps them , give them his judgment , and you will not have any knowledge of what you have done .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the great , the exalted .
if we willed , we could take away that which we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us .
why do the rabbis and the priests not forbid them from sinful utterances and devouring unlawful gains ? evil is what they have been doing .
and the people of noah before ; surely they were a transgressing people .
and is the mercy of your lord , when we have made them as a means of subsistence , and in the life of this world , and in the world to come , in this world , so that they may be in the world to come , and in the way of your lord , so that you may be a mercy from the people .
on the day when the punishment will overwhelm them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what ye used to do .
he said : by allah ! verily , he hath done wrong to thee , and most surely the believers are unto him one of the right , and most of them contend with each other , except those who believe and do good ; and ask for them the forgiveness of his lord .
then they came back to the people , until they came to the people , saying , `` the truth has been sent down to moses . '' but they were not to be able to speak in this city , but he said , “ if this is the right way , he said , ‘ if this is true . ’
then we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
and the dwellers in midian , and moses was denied . and i gave the unbelievers a respite , so i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and that to your lord is the goal-
say : it is a message of importance ,
then he turned back and was haughty .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
and he said : lo ! i have preferred the love of good things in the remembrance of my lord , and the horses disappeared from the veil .
abraham was a nation , obedient to god , a monotheist , and was not one of the polytheists .
and if we had decreed for them , kill them or go forth from your homes , they would not have done it , except a few of them ; and if they were to do good , it would have been better for them .
and that it is he who created the two sexes , male and female ,
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people were determined to stretch their hands to you , and he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers rely .
there is no one in the heavens and the earth but he comes to the all-beneficent as a servant .
“ this is what you were promised—for every careful penitent .
and allah created the heavens and the earth with truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
glory be to your lord , the lord of honor , above what they describe .
so the intercession of intercessors will not avail them .
and they swore by allah with solemn oaths that if a warner came to them , they would be more rightly guided than any of the nations ; but when a warner came to them , it only increased their aversion .
the kingdom on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them for they were guilty .
so when he had turned away from them and what they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob and made each of them a prophet .
and whoever brings evil , their faces will be dipped into the fire . will you not be recompensed except for what you used to do ?
except those who believe and do righteous deeds , and remember allah frequently , and defend themselves after they have been wronged . those who do wrong will come to know what they have been unjust .
they will be punished in the life of this world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is more severe ; and they will not be able to save them from allah .
yet before this was the book of moses , a guide and a mercy , and this is a book in the arabic language , to warn those who do evil , and to warn those who do good .
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
read in the name of your lord who created ,
have we not opened up your breast
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
and he will forgive you of your sins , and reprieve you till a stated term . when it comes to the appointed time , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
say : `` it has been revealed to me that a band of jinn listened , and said , `` we have heard a wonderful quran ,
and they say , “ had we followed the guidance of the qur ’ an , we would certainly have followed the footsteps of the evil ones , except as we have made a mistake . but most of them do not know . ”
so we took revenge on them . see how terrible was the end of those who rejectedwas !
, tell them , `` i am only a man like you . '' i am the one who is the one god , so do it be , for you are the one god , so that you may ask his forgiveness .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what has escaped you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
the people of the book were mentioned to them , in order to recite the knowledge of them , and he would have made them a complete decree . but if it was from your lord , he would have taken them for a while , and when they are given from your lord , they will be in a state of grief .
god commands justice , and kindness , and giving to relatives , and forbids the shameful and evil , and he admonishes you that you may take heed .
so that the people of the book may know that they have no power whatsoever over allah 's grace , and that whatever bounty is in allah 's hand , he gives it to whomsoever he wills . and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
we sent you only as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it endeavors .
if you ask them to help you , then if you are truthful , the messenger is better for you , and if you turn back , we will turn you back to the truth , and allah will not be with the believers .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it ; but man undertook it ; surely he was unjust , ignorant .
those who turn away from their wives and what they say , then a slave before they will touch one another before they will touch each other . that is what you do . god is aware of what you do .
if you do so , we will surely give you the right guidance , and indeed he is guided to the path of the right path , and for the sake of those who are present with god .
they said : o salih ! thou hast been among us hitherto a source of hope before this . forbiddest us not to that which our fathers worshipped , and we are in doubt concerning that which thou callest us to , disquieting .
do you not ask one another to be in the gardens of palm trees and grapes , and all that has brought them into the midst of the two ? it is the same to the house of old , and the same is the same for you . thus does allah make clear to you the verses , so that he will make clear to you the verses .
and if you speak aloud—he knows the secret , and the most hidden .
and what will explain to you what the day of decision is ?
remember , when your lord revealed to the angels , “ i am indeed the truth , therefore fear allah , and continue to fear him ; and you will be in awe of the faithless . ”
he said : my lord ! give me respite till the day they are raised .
thus have we made for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners . your lord suffices as a guide and a helper .
and as for those whose scale will be light , they are the ones who will lose their souls because they are unjust .
friends on that day will be foes one to another , except the righteous .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them before this , nor did your nation . so be patient , indeed , the outcome is for the pious .
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
who deny the day of recompense .
if you could only see when the angels take the souls of those who disbelieve , striking their faces and their backs , saying : `` taste the torment of burning .
sailing before our eyes , a reward for him who was rejected .
a host of deserters of the factions are defeated .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
it is he who will take you out of the clear signs , and then the day of resurrection , and the sun and the moon will be settled , and he will give them the sun and the moon . he will make it a clear revolution of the commandments to your lord , and he will make it a clear lamp .
the lord of moses and aaron .
but allah has been gracious to us and protected us from the punishment of the scorching wind .
and if you were to receive a provocation from you , and an evil suggestion of you , we have turned to them with evil and evil , and we have turned to them with a witness , and allah does not like the unjust .
into boiling water , then they will be burned in the fire .
who created me , and he guides me ,
those are they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
lo ! the first houseappointed for mankind was that at bakkahblessed and a guidance for al-'alamin .
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly , and slay those who enjoin justice , give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good , he will be among the successful .
and we revealed to moses and his brother , ‘ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ’
these are the unbelievers , the wicked .
of those who divided their religion and became sects , each sect exulting in what they had .
except those who repent and believe , and do righteous deeds , for allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
it is he who created you , and among you is a believer , and one of you is a believer , and allah sees what you do .
we created man from an extract of clay .
the way of allah is the religion of the world to come , and that it has been revealed to you , and we have sent down to you the right path , and it is the right path to him , and the right path is to him , and he will guide them to the right path .
we have made it easy in your language , so that they may remember .
and of them are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
we had commanded adam before , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
indeed , allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow ; surely allah does what he wills .
and of their fathers , their descendants and their brothers , and we chose them and guided them to a straight path .
on that day you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent before , and allah is aware of the unjust .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will have a better abode , and a better resting place .
and marry the unmarried among you and those who are righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
and assuredly we know those of you who press forward , and we know the laggards ,
he was one of our believing servants .
say , `` who delivers you from the darkness of the land and sea ? you call upon him humbly and secretly , and if he delivers us from this , we will surely be among the thankful . ''
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no faith .
allah deprives interest of all blessing and develops charity ; and allah does not like the ungrateful .
she said , `` how can i have a son when no man has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ? ''
and he will return to his family joyfully .
he said : my lord ! help me , for they belie me .
nay , but that day they will submit .
we have indeed created man in the best stature
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves .
`` what led you into hell ? ''
what ! do they not see that the heavens and the earth is of no avail to them ? to them is a barrier , and to them we shall make them go on the earth , and on the earth is a clear sign for god .
verily we shall inherit the earth and whosoever is on it , and unto us they shall be returned .
he will say : by allah , thou hadst wellnigh causedest me to perish .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
and we had not given them scriptures which they could study , nor sent to them before thee any warner .
if it be that the qur'an has been revealed to them , they will say , ‘ did you not read the verses of our signs ? ’ say , ‘ did you not make clear to those who have faith in our signs , and are rightly-guided ? ’
he will live a pleasant life .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make deficient the balance .
but they hamstrung her , and he said , “ enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . this is a promise not to be belied . ”
what have theyif they believe in allah and the last day and spendof that which allah hath bestowed upon them ? and allah is ever knower of them .
they will not be able to intercede for themselves , but they will invent a lie against the life of this world , and they will have a thought of the life to come . they will surely be brought into hell .
and do not consume each other 's wealth in vanity , nor proffer it to the judges in order that ye may devour a portion of the goods of men while ye know .
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be enveloped by what they used to deride .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
what have theyif they believe in allah and the last day and spendof that which allah hath bestowed upon them ? and allah is ever knower of them .
and they say : our lord ! expand for us the course of the way , and we made him leaders , and we made for them a sign . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who have been performing .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
and we brought the others near .
i swear by the fallings of the stars
and he propoundeth for us a similitude , and forgetteth his creation , he saith : who will quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
he said , ‘ these are my guests , so do not disgrace me .
why did not the believing men and the believing women think you heard it , and said , “ this is an obvious falsehood ? ”
o ye who believe ! take your precaution , then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
tomorrow they will know who is the insolent liar .
aaron had already told them before : `` o my people ! you are only being tested by it . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my command . ''
messengers before you were ridiculed , but i gave respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them ; and howwas my punishment !
who know that they will meet their lord and that to him they will return .
then , has the news of the people of the past come to them , and the people of the earth and those who were after them had come to them , the messenger had come to them with the truth , and they did not have any knowledge of what they had been sent with , or they had been sent back to their own souls , and they did not have any faith in that which you had been sent with . they would have been sent to the two people .
why then , if you are not indebted ,
we have already seized them with punishment , but they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor do they entreat .
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has preferred you above all beings ?
so be wary of allah as much as you can , and listen , and obey , and spend , for what you have done is better . and whoever is protected from his own greed , these are the successful .
let man consider his food .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say : 'this is a hard day '
and those who believed and migrated , and struggled in the way of allah , and those who gave shelter and helped , those are the believers ; for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the owner of great happiness .
while the hereafter is better and more lasting .
o you who believe ! if you obey those who disbelieve , they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn back losers .
so it is ; and whoever retaliates with the like of that which he has been given , then is again to be wronged , and indeed allah will help him . surely allah is pardoning , forgiving .
so we denied the truth , and we delivered noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark , and howwere the fate of the deniers .
“ yes , if you are patient and godwary , your lord will help you suddenly , and send upon you a thousand angels rushing . ”
everyone on it is ephemeral ,
what , when he said to aaron , `` what is i worship after i have been commanded ? '' they said , `` god and his fathers have submitted . ''
and allah is the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and on the day when the hour is established , the followers of falsehood will be lost .
in a few years . to allah belongs the command before and after , and on that day the believers will rejoice
so , it is not lawful for them to be lawful for it , except after it had been made to go back to each other . if only they thought that allah would have made the commandments to be shown to them .
but the wretched will avoid it .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe , '' and will not be tried ?
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
say : `` believe in it or do not believe . '' when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn away ,
and besides these two there will be two other gardens .
so do not obey the deniers .
he will call for destruction
say : `` to allah belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
i do not desire any provision from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize their features , and they call on the dwellers of the garden : peace be upon you . they enter it , but they are not hoping .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
and for those who disbelieve in their lord is the punishment of hell , and evil is the destination .
in their stories are abraham , the people of abraham , to whom he pleases , to be their eyes , to whom he pleases , and he who turns away from the path of god , for him is the punishment , and he is the most worthy of all kinds .
and we have left a clear sign of it for a people who understand .
and he said to the one whom he knew would be saved , “ mention me to your master. ” but satan made him forget to mention him to his master , so he remained in prison for several years .
and we have made the case to be a case for them , and we have separated from it , and what is in no disagreement after it came to them ; and your lord will judge between them concerning that which they are differing .
or enjoins piety ?
and when they saw them , they said : lo ! they have gone astray .
nay , allah raised him up unto himself ; and allah is ever mighty , wise .
`` go early to your farms , if you want to pluck the fruits . ''
and indeed we sent among them warners .
to us is their return .
and grieve not over them , nor be distressed because of what they plot .
he said : therein ye shall live , and therein ye shall die , and therefrom ye shall be brought forth .
out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
we called to him , `` abraham ,
and we put veils over their hearts that they may understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the quran , they turn their backs in aversion .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , where you will have whatever your souls desire , and you will have therein whatever you ask for .
they said , “ in allah we have put our trust . our lord , do not make us a trial for the unjust . ”
and indeed it is the truth of certainty .
say , “ o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favourites of allah to the exclusion of all people , then wish for death , if you are truthful . ”
the clatterer !
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , and allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
arguing with you concerning the truth after it had become clear , as if they were being driven to death while they were looking on .
repel evil with that which is better . we know best what they allege .
hast thou observed him who hath been exhorting him , of his lord , and he hath chosen him , and he said : lo ! i taste the day of resurrection , and he said : verily allah 's is the night , he said : verily allah is the setting of the truth , and allah guideth not the people of the right way .
he said : cast it down , o musa !
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and allah encompasses all things .
say , `` god gives you life and causes you to die . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know . ''
who are constant in their prayers
on the day when the wrong-doer gnaweth his hands , he will say : 'would that i had taken a way with the messenger !
and assuredly she besought him , and he would have besoughther were it not that he had seen the proof of his lord , so that he was one of our lord ; verily he was of our bondmen single-hearted .
i will grant them respite , for my plan is firm .
if you count the favours of allah you will not be able to number them . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
those who believe and do good works , their lord will guide them because of their faith . rivers will flow beneath them in the gardens of bliss .
he said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if ye believe .
so it is not for him to show the believers to him , but why do the people of the right have not come to them , and in order that they may be turned back ?
he said : `` o my lord ! appoint a measure for us . '' and my lord said : `` this is a cow to man , and the bitterly in the evening , and at the evening and the morning . ''
and we caused a plant of gourd to grow over him .
and by the night when it darkens ,
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
he who does not respond to the summoner of god can not frustrateon the earth , and he will not have any protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
o you who believe ! when you meet those who deny the truth , never turn your backs to them .
and to the people of 'ad said : `` o my people ! worship allah , for you have no other god besides him . you have no other god but he . so do not be a sign from your lord . you will be unable to make a mistake . ''
he wants to expel you from your land . what do you advise ? ''
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved insolently and they were a tyrannical lot .
and in the talk of the ignorant , they speak not in speech , nor in any way , nor do they change it , except those who command , and he who acts aright , and he is a great reward , and a great reward .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , but if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve will surely say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
“ set out with my servants by night . you will be pursued . ”
we are going to bring down upon the people of this city a punishment from the sky because they are debauchers .
it is he who breaks the dawn , and he has made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning ; this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
it closes in on them ,
ask the city where we were and the caravan in which we came . we are truthful . ”
and this is my straight path , so follow it , and do not follow other ways ; they will scatter you away from his path . he has enjoined upon you the bidding of your lord that you may guard .
and by the night when it darkens ,
and he saith : my lord ! verily these are a folk who believe not .
on the day when the hour will come , the sinners will swear that they have stayed not but an hour . thus they were deceived .
kaf , ha , ya , ayn , saad .
and what is the matter with you , that you are not in the heavens and the earth , but whatever there is in the heavens and the earth belongs to allah , and the future is to him , and allah is the subtle , the merciful .
o people , fear your lord , a day when a son will not be accepted from his parents , but the promise of allah will be fulfilled , and do not be in the least to be blamed .
and tell them about abraham 's guests .
those who repent , who worship , who bow , those who bow and prostrate themselves , those who prostrate themselves , who enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . and give good tidings to the believers .
and obey allah and the messenger , that you may receive mercy .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
has the reminder been sent down upon him from among us ? nay , he is an insolent liar .
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the perishing .
wherein they will live forever . the promise of god is true . he is the almighty , the wise .
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
or were they created from nothing , or are they the creators ?
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the diversity of your languages and colours . indeed in that are signs for those who know .
this is more likely that they will bear testimony in proper form , or else they will be afraid of their oaths . fear god , and listen . god does not guide the transgressing people .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord . they have their reward with their lord , and those who reject our signs . those are the companions of hellfire .
the kingdom on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
and the divorced women shall be sent down on the three sides , that be lawful for them , and speak not to them that which allah hath created , and for them is the word of the hereafter , if they are in the right way , and the maintenance of their persons are in the right way .
on the day when the trumpet is blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
and fruits numberless ,
and the earth throws up her burdens ,
a provision for you and your cattle .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
then a man came running from the furthest part of the city , saying : `` o my people ! follow the messengers .
have you not seen those who dispute about the signs of god ? how are they turned away ?
see you not how allah has made for you all that is in the earth , and that which is on the earth , and that which is on the earth , and when it is of the sea , when it is set upon them , the command of allah will be in the earth , but allah is most forgiving , most merciful ?
you are not charged to oversee them .
say : travel in the land and see how he originated creation . then allah will produce the second creation ; surely allah has power over all things .
cursed were those who disbelieved among the children of israel by the tongue of david and jesus , son of mary . that was because they rebelled and used to transgress .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will neither fear any privation nor burden .
we relate to you their story with truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and when allah alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , but when thoseother than him are mentioned , they rejoice .
this is a reminder ; and indeed for the righteous is an excellent resort .
and thus we have appointed for every prophet a troop of men , men and jinn , and inspire one another with fabrications . but if your lord had willed , they would not have done it . so leave them alone with their fabrications .
and the chiefs among them went about , saying : go , and be staunch to your gods . lo ! this is a thing designed .
so turn away from them and say : peace . they will soon come to know .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praiseworthy ,
your lord said to the angels : `` i am about to be of the angels in the earth . '' they said , `` is there any that will be in the way of allah ? '' , `` do you know that you do not know what you do not know ? '' god said , `` i know what you do not know . ''
and they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us . he will say : verily ye are to stay .
or you have a garden of palms and vines , and cause rivers to gush forth in it ,
they say : `` the son of allah is the son of allah . '' they said , `` the messiah , '' they said , `` the son of allah is to be said to them , '' they will be told , `` what is the matter with allah that they will be destroyed ? ''
the sun and the moon have been determined for them , for the sun 's invited to the sun and the moon . and whoever is freed from evil , it is with a great punishment , and that which you have been wont to do .
and among them are some who criticize you concerning the distribution of alms . if they are given from it , they are pleased , and if they are given from it , they become angry .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
they will say , `` this is the word of allah , '' say : `` if i have been present , i will not be able to speak to me , and you will not be able to speak to me . god is sufficient as a witness between me and you . indeed , allah is a witness between you and me . ''
said , `` what prevented you from prostrating when i commanded you ? '' he said , `` i am better than him . you created me from fire , and him you created from clay . ''
when they hear what has been revealed to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they recognize . they say , `` our lord , we believe , so write us down among the witnesses .
and do not think that those who are the people to their allies , are the ones to whom they spend the good pleasure of their own souls , and the means of good for them is good , but they are in the heavens and the earth . they are the ones who are in the heavens and the earth . god is aware of what you do .
and he who measures and guides .
indeed , he hadbeen among his people in happiness .
and that it is he who causes death and gives life .
if you ask them , `` who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? '' they will certainly say : `` allah . '' how then are they perverted ?
indeed , your lord is the best knower of the two periods of the night and the day , or a part of the night , and the day for which you are wont to do ; and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
and if you ask them , “ who created the heavens and the earth ? ” they will surely say , “ the almighty , the all knowing . ”
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him , so that he was a warner with him ? ”
so if you gain the mastery over them in war , deal with them in the manner of those who follow them , so that they may remember .
who know all that you do .
or is the unseen in their keeping , and they are writing it down ?
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
and what shall teach thee what is the steep ?
and the foolish among us used to say outrageous things about allah .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
and in the talk of the ignorant , they speak not in speech , nor in any way , nor do they change it , except those who command , and he who acts aright , and he is a great reward , and a great reward .
no nation can outstrip its term , nor can they delay it .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , and then die disbelieving , allah will not forgive them .
that is the right path , that it is the right path , that it is the right way , and he is the owner of all that is before it ; and he who has gone astray , he will have no more than his own loss . and none of them shall have a treacherous punishment .
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
indeed , those who dissipateare the brethren of the devils , and satan was ungrateful to his lord .
and whoever avenges himself after he has been wronged , there is no blame upon them .
and of those whom we created there is a community who guide with truth and establishes justice therewith .
and failed is he who corrupts it .
and they will say , “ if allah had willed , he would have made the polytheists and our parents and our ancestors ; and there is no thing for those who have gone before us , but in fact they do not follow anything except what we have given them , and you will not follow anything except conjecture . ”
and we have told the children of israel in the children of israel and followed them and provided them with good things , and we gave them good things , so that they might be differing .
again , be accursed , how he plotted !
he said , “ he has a heifer torn into the earth , and the fields of the fields and the fields . ” part of the fruits , they said , “ the truth has come to us , but they will not be honoured . ”
say : `` praise be to allah , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen ! '' is allah better , or what they associate ?
he showed him the great sign .
and even if we have put the right course for them , and whether some of them should have a share of you , or have some share of it ; and whoever is fortunate are better in it .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
what ! have they not travelled in the way of allah , so that the end of those before them have been destroyed ? and how many a generation have we destroyed in the land , and so allah has made a place of punishment for him .
it is not for allah to take a son to himself . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it 'be , ' and it is .
but those who believe and do good deeds and humble themselves before their lord , they are the dwellers of paradise , and they will abide therein .
they have not revered god properly . god is all-powerful and majestic .
the revelation of this book is from the lord of the worlds .
and if it is that we should make it grow on the earth , and see that they would have become the like of it , that day , will be split up in fear , and to be mindful of allah 's command . and we are the senders ,
and it is he who is the two seas , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them , and a barrier has been forbidden between them .
so i swear by the slinkers ,
then celebrate the praise of your lord and ask his forgiveness . indeed , he is oft-returning .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but i gave respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them ; and howwas my punishment !
indeed , it is we who give life and cause death , and to us is the destination .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
o you who believe ! fear allah , and be with the truthful .
in the alternation of night and day , and all that allah has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who are pious .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it , and were it not for a prior decree of your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
and whoever is a voice to be guided , to warn a portion of the book , he will see it for a good deed ; and allah is watchful over all things .
say : `` i have the depositories of the god with the truth , and speak not to you what you say , but i say , `` are the blind ? '' say , `` are the blind and the seer ? '' say , `` are the blind ? ''
is there a disease in their hearts ? or are they suspicious ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? nay , but they are the unjust .
and we did not send down against his people after him any hosts from heaven , nor did we ever send .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
and you will not , unless allah wills , the lord of the worlds .
those who disbelieved in the way of allah would have followed the sacred mosque , and to the people of the sacred mosque , to those who lived in the sacred mosque , and those who have been given the lie to the truth will have a painful punishment .
and in the morning they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
did he not find you an orphan and shelter you ?
thus do we try some of them by means of others , that they may say , `` are these those whom god has favored from among us ? '' does not god know the grateful ?
and before them , the people of noah , who were more unjust and insolent .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
but they turned away . so we sent upon them the inundation of the dam and replaced their gardens with two other gardens , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves , except iblis ; he refused .
we send not down the angels save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
they can not overhear the higher assembly for they are pelted from every side ,
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , layer on layer ,
he said , “ my lord , judge in truth . our lord is the most gracious , whose help is to be sought against what you describe . ”
and we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be the weight of a mustard seed , we shall bring it as reckoners .
it is he who sends down water from the sky with which he has sent down a rain , and a portion of them is the same , and it is the same for them to make them a partition , and that is how allah has given them the examples , and that is how allah has the examples .
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
and when it is said to them , “ follow what god has sent down , ” they say , “ nay , we will follow what we found our parents ” ; what ! even if satan were calling them to the torment of the blaze ?
burn in it . it is all the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do . ''
indeed in the heavens and the earth are signs for those who believe .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for allah does not like the prodigals .
those who love that immorality should spread among the believers , there awaits them a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and allah knows and you do not know .
have they not seen the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and that which allah has created , and that their term is near ? so what will they believe after this ?
and on the day when we shall raise up a witness from every nation , then will not be permitted to the disbelievers , nor will they be allowed to appease .
those who are humble in their prayers .
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and what an evil resting-place !
that was our argument which we gave to abraham against his people . we raise whom we will . indeed your lord is all-wise , all-knowing .
and when they see a sign , they laugh at it ,
they said : `` bring him before the eyes of the people , that they may bear witness . ''
tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their private parts . that is purer for them . god is aware of what they do .
and thamud , sparing no one .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
while he was on the uppermost horizon .
but if you slip after clear proofs have come to you , then know that god is mighty and wise .
accursed be the conjecturers
they said : who hath done this to our gods ? lo ! he is of the wrong-doers .
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
he said : i am going to my lord who will guide me .
pharaoh said , `` o people , i am no other than that which you do not speak except me , o you , , o haman , do not say to me , `` o you who have been given the truth , o you who have received the truth . ''
but if they break their oaths after their covenant and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief , for they have no faith—so that they may desist .
there is no one in the heavens and the earth but he comes to the all-beneficent as a servant .
let the children of israel go with us . ''
and remember you much .
it is he who originates creation , then repeats it , and it is easier for him . his is the highest attribute in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
and the thunder proclaims his praise , and the angels , in awe of him . and he sends the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom he wills while they dispute about allah ; and he is mighty in prowess .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
we gave moses the guidance , and we caused the children of israel to inherit the book
but if they turn away , say : i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether nigh or far is that which ye are promised .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor do they grieve .
and we sent in their footsteps a son , jesus son of mary , confirming the torah before him , and we gave to him the gospel , confirming what is before it , and confirming the torah and the gospel , before it was a guide and a reminder .
father , there has come to me knowledge of what has not come to you . follow me , i will guide you to a straight path .
but those who fear their lord , for them shall be gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; a gift that is with allah , and that which is with allah is better for the righteous .
say : `` to allah belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
and not a messenger came to them but they mocked him .
and the knowledge of the hour is only to allah . to him belongs the treasures of the book , and to the seed of a building which is in the presence of allah , and he will say , “ our lord , we have given you the right way , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! we are of the truthful . ’
when the unbelievers see you they do not take you except for mockery , `` is this the one who talks of your gods ? '' and they are disbelievers in the remembrance of the merciful .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
by the clear book ,
it is he who breaks the dawn , and he has made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning ; this is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and when the messengers came to them from before them and behind them , they said , `` do not worship anyone except allah . '' they said , `` if our lord had pleased he would not have sent down angels . we believe in what you have been sent with . ''
if they belie you , then the people of noah , ad , thamud ,
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they might return .
they said : we miss the king 's cup , and he who bringeth it shall have a camel-load , and iam answerable for it .
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their malice ?
you have no concern in the matter , whether he turns towards them or punishes them . they are wrongdoers .
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and these are the people of understanding .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
and noah , when he called before , we heard him and saved him and his family from great distress .
and our forefathers ? ''
nor am i going to worship that which you worship ,
and those who believed and whose descendants followed them in faith , we shall join their descendants with them , and we shall not deprive them of anything of their deeds . every man is hostage to what he earned .
so pray to your lord and sacrifice .
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
the word of allah is that he may take away that which he may go forth in two days , and there is no blame on those who have gone after them . and fear allah , to whom they will be returned .
no associate has he ; and this i am commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
the woman who said to her husband , `` he is afraid of him , and the hearts of his people is to come to him . '' he said , `` come , '' he answered , `` i have come to do with god , and i am the best of successful . ''
he said : o musa ! verily i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
and who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a dwelling in hell for the unbelievers ?
there is not one of the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
before them the people of noah denied . they rejected our servant and said , `` a madman , '' and he was rebuffed .
or have they associates ? then let them bring their associates , if they are truthful .
o you who believe ! be wary of allah , and indeed there are some among you who are upright , and do not make a right path with others . do you know that god is going to be turned into a way ?
it is not for allah to take a son to himself . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it 'be , ' and it is .
gardens of eden , whose gates will be opened for them ,
so we caused the earth to swallow him and his mansion , and he had no host to help him against allah , nor was he able to save himself .
have you not seen how your lord lengthens out the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it stationary ; then we made the sun a pointer to it .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
they will not be able to intercede for themselves , but they will invent a lie against the life of this world , and they will have a thought of the life to come . they will surely be brought into hell .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things . the wolf devoured him ; but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
indeed , he has brought the truth , and confirmed theapostles .
say , `` this is my way . i call to god with sure knowledge , i and whoever follows me . glory be to god , and i am not of the polytheists . ''
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
so when he came to it , he was called : 'blessed is he who is in the fire and whosoever is around it . glory be to allah , lord of the worlds !
say : `` i have been forbidden to worship those whom you invoke besides allah , though clear signs have come to me from my lord , and i am commanded to submit to the lord of all the worlds . ''
and do not say about what your tongues assert , `` this is lawful , and this is lawful , so that you may invent lies against allah . indeed , those who invent lies against allah will not prosper . ''
he sends down the angels with the spirit of his command to whom he pleases of his servants , saying , `` warn people that there is no god but i , so fear me . ''
he said : my lord ! give me respite till the day they are raised .
he said , “ disguise her throne for her , so that we may see whether she will be guided or be of those who are not guided . ”
then we gave moses the book , perfect for him who does good , and explaining all things , and a guidance and a mercy , that they may believe in the meeting with their lord .
and those who guard their private parts
a little enjoyment in this world ; then to us will be their return , then we shall make them taste the severest punishment because they used to disbelieve .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my faults on the day of judgement .
we sent noah to his people , and he said : `` o my people ! worship allah ! you have no god other than him . will you not be cautious '
every soul will taste death , then to us you will be returned .
it is your lord who has created the heavens and the earth in six days , and then the throne of the throne will be established , and the sun and the moon are true . what is the matter with them , that is blessed ?
and if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . you see them looking at you , but they do not see .
and our duty is only to convey the message clearly . ''
successful is he who purifies it .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish prayer and give zakah , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and to allah belongs the outcome of all affairs .
but those who deny our revelations and scorn them , they shall be the inmates of hell , where they will remain forever .
near which is the garden of abode .
but as for him who believes and does good , he will have a reward for him , and we shall speak to him a mild command .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and that it is he who causes laughter and weeping .
and you can not guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our verses and those who submit .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters .
then he made his progeny from an extract of a mean fluid ,
and the polytheists say , `` these are some of the cattle who have been forbidden to themselves , but we have been pleased with them , and we have been pleased with them , and there are some of you who have been given the lie to god . god will certainly soon know what they are doing . ''
we recite to you some of the news of moses and pharaoh with truth for people who believe .
and they have misled many , and do not increase the wrongdoers except in error . ''
this ; but for the transgressors there is an evil resort ,
and give me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
say : `` whoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him . '' say : `` he is allah , the lord of whom he has given his mercy , and those who are in the world to come will certainly believe in the hereafter . '' they will not believe in the hereafter .
and the one who was released , who was released , and remembered after a time , said , `` i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth . ''
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and to allah do all things return .
on the right side of the book there is a lesson for the people in the book . this quran is inspired in it , to say , `` god knows the unseen and the seen , '' and they have knowledge of the unseen .
the godwarywill be spared of that
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ,
'adbelied the messengers .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait on him for a while .
the day when they will hear the blast in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
but those who have been given the knowledge of the truth , and believe in you , and those who have been sent before you , and those who are steadfast in prayer , and give zakah , they will surely have a great reward .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , so worship him and be steadfast in his worship . do you know anyone who is his namesake ?
and as for the favor of your lord , declare it .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe , for the forgiveness of idolaters , even though they are near to do it , after it has become clear to them that they are the people of hell .
the unbelievers say , “ this is nothing but a slur he has fabricated , and other people have helped him at it. ” and they have invented a wrong lie .
and landmarks . and by the stars they are guided .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
and shown him the two highways ?
and if you are killed in the way of allah or die , forgiveness and mercy from allah are better than all that they amass .
allah , the immanently indispensable .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
but those who fear their lord , for them shall be gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; a gift that is with allah , and that which is with allah is better for the righteous .
indeed those to whom the goodfrom us has gone before , will be far removed from hell .
or follow that which is spoken to the right course , nay , but it is that allah will give you permission , and if it is not for the commands of allah , it is for the evildoers .
do they not see the earth , how many of every noble kind we have caused to grow in it ?
and those who believe and do good works , we shall surely admit them among the righteous .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
he said : surely you and your fathers are in manifest error .
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
in a guarded tablet .
so it is . whoever venerates the sacraments of god—it is from the piety of the hearts .
were we wearied by the first creation ? but they are in doubt about a new creation .
but the wretched will avoid it .
those will be rewarded with the highest placebecause of their patience . therein they shall be met with greetings and peace .
god gives the light of the heavens and the earth . it is a light that is just as a light , as a utility for a trifle . it is a confirmation of what is in the night and the finery of the quran , and allah is the subtle , the most honourable .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah is seer of what they do .
then howwhen the angels take them , beating their faces and their backs ?
and let not those who disbelieve think that they will outstrip . verily , they can not frustrate .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
and they assign a share of what we have provided them for what they do not know . by god , you will be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
they will be speechless on that day , and they will not be able to ask one another .
if any woman should be the woman of the woman , whether he is a polytheist , he is neither a guardian nor any good . if they do good , they do not have any right . and if they are righteous , then surely allah is aware of what they do .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait on him for a while .
and he revealed to his servant what he revealed .
they said , ‘ woe to us ! indeed , we were taghun
he will forgive you your sins , and admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and you are secure in the gardens of eden . that is the supreme success .
ta sin mim
so they were unable to scale it , nor could they pierce it .
gardens of eden they shall enter , therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be of silk .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a hanif , and he was not a polytheist .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a level highland with flowing water .
and of the people are that of the way of allah , and those who are in the way of allah are rightly guided , and the way of allah is a lasting , and for them is a lasting punishment .
when the wild beasts are herded together ;
exalted in rank , lord of the throne . he sends down the spirit of his command upon whomever he wills of his servants , that he may warnof the day of meeting .
we send not down the angels save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will give you a criterion , and will expiate your misdeeds , and forgive you ; and allah is the owner of mighty grace .
woe to me ! would that i had not taken so-and-so as a friend .
we sent noah and abraham and placed prophethood and the book . some of them were guided , and some of them are guided .
because he possesses wealth and children .
does he think that no one can overpower him ?
say : he is the beneficent , we believe in him and in him we put our trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error .
as we have sent among you a messenger from among you , who recites to you our verses and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
whatever mercy allah opens to mankind , none can withhold it , and whatever he withholds none can release after him . he is the almighty , the wise .
so on that day they willshare in the punishment .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
and of men and beasts and cattle , and cattle are different from allah 's ; surely those who have knowledge of allah fear allah ; surely allah is mighty , forgiving .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
say : `` o people of the book ! what is the matter with you that you are to be angry with him , except that we have come to him with truth , and that you have been guilty ? ''
they exaltnight and day do not slacken .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
indeed , it is we who have sent down the reminder , and we will guard it .
and we caused a plant of gourd to grow over him .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
this is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants . ''
o you who believe ! do not betray allah and the messenger , nor knowingly betray your trusts .
and hell will be brought forthose to see ,
say : `` you can not hold a single hour on the day of resurrection , nor can you advance it . ''
are they waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ?
there is no fault in the people of the way that if it is a relation to the matter , it will not be decreased , until the case of their lord will come to them , and in the end he will come to you in full , and to allah will return .
then , if he should choose the way of this way , the course of the matter , to be free from the right way , the right path is not lawful to you , and do not be a thing to be permitted to you , except what you have been commanded , and do not be a tyrant to what you have done .
so that he may not have any knowledge of the fish , which is before one another , and whoever is the most upright in front of him , then let him belong to the best of those who have been upright , and for those who are with allah and his messenger is a lasting punishment .
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah refuses only to perfect his light , though the disbelievers dislike it .
and obey not the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and heed not their annoyances , and rely on allah ; and allah sufficeth as a trustee .
those who do not believe in the signs of allah will not guide them ; and for them is a painful punishment .
and landmarks . and by the stars they are guided .
ta sin . these are the verses of the koran , and a clear book ,
these are the verses of allah , we recite them to you in truth . you are one of the messengers .
the lord of the heavens and the earth , he created the heavens and the earth ; and he is the master of the heavens and the earth . he is the guardian of all things . so why do you not understand ?
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
and do not speak to the word , as to the right course , in the right way , to the right path , in the right course , and in the right way , to be upright .
and of them are some who believe in it , and of them are some who do not believe in it ; and your lord is best aware of the corrupters .
o you who have faith ! take your own souls to do not harm you , if you are guided . you will return to god . all of you will return to god . he will inform you of what you used to do .
have we not opened up your breast
indeed , the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
or follow that which is spoken to the right course , nay , but it is that allah will give you permission , and if it is not for the commands of allah , it is for the evildoers .
do they await except that the hour should overtake them suddenly ? its signs have come . but how will it be , when it has come to them , how will they be reminded ?
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and from establishing the prayer and the giving of zakat , fearing a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
so do not obey the unbelievers , but strive against them with a great endeavour .
and do not be weak in pursuit of the enemy . if you are suffering , they are suffering as you are suffering , but you are hoping from allah that which they do not hope . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and certainly they had made a covenant with allah before that they would not turn their backs ; and covenants with allah will be questioned .
that is jesus , son of mary , a word of truth , about which they doubt .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ''
and when their hearts are given to them , they will see what is right , and they say : `` our father ! we are the best to know what is right and forbid what is right , and that it is a right course for him . this is an upright way . ''
for the companions of the right hand .
and we rained down on them a rain . so see how was the end of the guilty .
indeed , the righteous will be in bliss ,
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
but those who disbelieve in our signs , they are the people of the left hand .
that is because you used to rejoice on earth without right , and that you used to behave insolently .
the people of the book were not divided until after the clear proof came to them .
and you all that you were to take up with the religion of allah , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and the favors of allah were to you , and he was one of those who were to be guided , so that allah may make clear to you the verses of the fire .
untouched before them by man or jinni -
allah alternates the night and the day . indeed in that is a lesson for those who have eyes .
bring back our fathers , if what you say is true .
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted be allah above what they associate .
have you seen the people who are in fear of the life of the world and in the evenings ? god said , `` you are only of those who have been grateful . '' god is the giver of good things , and most men do not give thanks .
they said , `` glory be to you . we have no knowledge except what you have taught us . you are the all-knowing , the all-wise . ''
and allah has a parable of the two kinds of two men , and a man of parable unto him is a similitude , and to him is the matter , as to him who is upright . so he who is upright , i will guide him to the right path .
the nearest people to abraham , are those who followed him , and this prophet and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
and they swore by allah with solemn oaths that if a warner came to them , they would be more rightly guided than any of the nations ; but when a warner came to them , it only increased their aversion .
if you count the favours of allah you will not be able to number them . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? none holds them except the all-beneficent . indeed , he sees everything .
yet they have attributed to allah the jinns , while he created them , and they impute to him sons and daughters without knowledge . glory be to him , and exalted is he above what they describe .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : `` o my people ! is not mine the kingdom of egypt , and these rivers flowing beneath me ? do you not see ?
have you not seen those who befriend a people with whom allah is wroth ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to a lie while they know .
in houses which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them , in the mornings and the evenings ,
so be patient , with a beautiful patience .
your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
a grace and favour from allah . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
said : `` then get out of here ; you are accursed ,
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
o you who believe ! do not say ambiguous words , but say unzurna and listen ; and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
from replacing you with your likes and recreating you inyou do not know .
and all that we relate to you of the accounts of the messengers is that whereby we strengthen your heart ; and in this there has come to you the truth , and a reminder for the believers .
o prophet , fear allah and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
that is for what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not unjust to his servants . ''
and they worship besides allah that which neither profits them nor harms them . and the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
the messiah does not disdain to be a servant of allah , nor are the angels who are near to worship . and whoever disdains his worship and waxes proud , he will gather them all to him .
he said , “ they are close upon my footsteps , and i hastened to you , my lord , that you may be pleased . ”
o you who believe ! do not putforward before allah and his messenger , and fear allah . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
you pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world , and who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
when you heard it , why did you not say , `` it is not for us to speak to us ? glory be to you ! this is a monstrous slander ! ''
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you power , so they will not be able to harm you , and you are the victors . ”
if every soul had all that is in the earth , it would offer it to ransom . and they will feel regret when they see the punishment , and they will be judged between them , and they will not be wronged .
and in ad , when we sent against them the withering wind
so if you have a plan , use it against me .
woe to every backbiter , slanderer
a goblet from a spring will be passed round to them ,
thus does allah make clear to you his verses that you may understand .
surely the day of decision is an appointed time .
indeed we sent upon them a stonestorm , except the family of lot , whom we saved at dawn
o you who believe ! be not like those who annoyed moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
o prophet , say to your wives : `` if you desire the life of this world and its adornment , come , i will provide for you and release you in a handsome manner .
he said : there is no reproach on you this day . allah will forgive you ; and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
and when you killed a man , and disputed about it , and allah was to expose what you were hiding .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime and wise .
lo ! thou art of us ever a beholder .
'adbelied the messengers .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will neither fear any privation nor burden .
this is the day of decision , we have assembled you and the former peoples .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the virtuous .
say : shall i tell you who will be the greatest losers in their works ?
he said : there is no reproach on you this day . allah will forgive you ; and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
this is a crowd rushing headlong with you . no welcome for them . they will roast in the fire .
then he turned to their gods and said : `` why do you not eat ?
and the disbelievers are the ones who are arrogant ; and indeed , we are going to follow you ; so do you take a way on this day ? so do you have a way to be directed . so woe to us for what we have done .
those who deny the truth say : `` why has not the quran been sent down to him at once ? '' so that we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have spaced it distinctly .
so we destroyed those who were mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
except those who repent after this and reform , for god is forgiving and merciful .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or bring allah and the angels before us .
when he said to his father : `` o my father ! why do you worship that which heareth not and seeth not ? -
allah is the example of the things which they seek to be set in peace , and allah 's provision is due to them ; and allah will cause them to enter the right way .
does he not know that allah sees ?
we tested those who were before them . god will surely know those who are truthful and who are liars .
it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they shall not be able to repel it , nor shall they be respited .
it is god who has made a mistake , and is an evil thing , and evil is the matter of the people , the people of the same , and the same is the same for them , and they will be made to do evil in the land , and they will be made to do evil .
and confers no favor upon anyone for reward
and the devil had made clear to them the same , and of his people is the same , and their shameful parts became fair to them , and their heads turned around , and their lord said , “ did i not forbid you , that the devil is not to be a man of yours ? indeed , the shaitan is indeed the most honourable , the most merciful .
in the help of god . he helps whom he will . he is the almighty , the most merciful .
say , `` be you stones or iron ,
and a cup overflowing .
but when we removed the punishment from them , behold , they broke their word .
and by the night when it darkens ,
say : `` it is allah who delivers you from it and from every calamity , but you associate others with him . ''
then is there not a town that believed and benefited by its belief ? but when they believed , we removed from them the torment of disgrace in the life of the world , and we gave them enjoyment for a time .
upon her neck a rope of palm-fibre .
and verily , that , if you have taken a promise from you , then indeed , allah has given you faith , and allah has given them faith in him , and in the order of those who are in whose heart is the right way , and in order that they are guided .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they will outstrip . verily , they can not frustrate .
that is because you used to rejoice on earth without right , and that you used to behave insolently .
he said , `` it was she who sought to seduce me . '' and a witness from her own household testified : `` if his shirt is torn from the front , she is telling the truth and he is one of the liars .
whether we show you some of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to convey the message . to us is the reckoning .
god wishes to make clear to you and guide you to the ways of those before you , and to accept your repentance . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we cited for you how we dealt with them .
he said : what then is the state of the former generations ?
it scorches the mortal .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are my associates whom you used to claim ?
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , and allah suffices as a witness .
those are they upon whose hearts , hearingand sightallah has set a seal , and they are the heedless .
so when they persisted in pursuing that which they had been forbidden , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
those against whom the word will be pronounced will say : `` our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we led them astray like ourselves . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped . ''
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not know ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , so worship him and be steadfast in his worship . do you know anyone who is his namesake ?
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
they said , `` our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
now it is clear to those who are in the presence of the right side of the truth : `` fear allah , or be a messenger to him , to be a way to the right path . ''
and even if we sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered together all things before them , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
except the companions of the right hand .
so when they angered us , we took vengeance on them and drowned them all .
are your unbelievers better than they ? or do you have immunity in the scriptures ?
they said : art thou he who hath done this unto our gods , o ibrahim ?
alas for the servants ! never came to them a messenger but they ridiculed him .
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
so go forth with your family in a part of the night , and follow behind them , and let none of you turn back , and go back to where you are commanded . ''
we gave luqman wisdom , saying : `` give thanks to allah . '' whoever gives thanks to his own soul , he is the thankful , and he is all-sufficient , all-laudable .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
, `` o abraham , leave this . your lord 's command has gone forth , and there is coming upon them a punishment that can not be averted . ''
they ask you about the spirit . say , `` the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have been given the knowledge of all things . ''
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
and the people of the heights will call to certain men whom they recognize by their marks , `` what benefit you did not avail you , nor did your arrogance ? ''
and thus the word of your lord has proved true upon the disbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
he said : nay ! ye throw first . lo ! their cords and their staves were moved by their magic as if they were running .
i have chosen you for myself .
and recall what time we delivered you from pharaoh 's folk , who afflicted you with evil torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women , and in that was a tremendous trial from your lord .
indeed , the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
or to the indigentin the dust .
and if you ask them , “ who created the heavens and the earth ? ” they will surely say , “ the almighty , the all knowing . ”
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing . ''
they will have a share of what they have earned ; and allah is swift at reckoning .
he who fearswill be reminded ,
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
the book has been revealed to you , when you have been called to disbelieve in it , and allah has been oblivious of the unbelievers . indeed , the hypocrites are indeed one of the disbelievers .
of those who divided their religion and became sects , each sect exulting in what they had .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
surely your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against allah .
except his wife . we have decreed that she will be of those who remain behind . ''
and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that which my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
we have made it a reminder and a comfort for the users .
the day when they will be tried at the fire ,
and if you are worthy of all that is right , it is only for you to keep your duty to allah , and when you are given the promise , then will it be that the believers will be set in it , so that the believers may remain in it . so let the believers remain in it .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , and we produce therewith fruits of diverse hues ? and in the mountains are streaks white and red , of diverse hues , and pitchy black .
and the shades of thewill come low over them , and itsto be lowered in compliance .
a party of those who have received the book have been sent down to you , to recite what has been sent down to you , and some of them are others . say to them , `` i have been commanded to serve the lord of the universe . '' say , `` i have been commanded to serve the lord of all being . ''
o you who believe ! be not like those who annoyed moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
when the sky is stripped off ,
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
do they not see the earth , how many of every noble kind we have caused to grow in it ?
those who cameafter them say , `` our lord , forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in the faith , and put our hearts in no way to the believers . lord , you are compassionate and all-merciful . ''
but the cry seized them in the morning ,
when you left your home in the morning to post the believers at their stations for the battle- and allah is hearing , knowing .
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
where then are you going ?
when the truth came to them from us , they said , `` and the hearts of a people who have been given a clear sign had been done to moses , but they were only a people who were given the same time , and they said , `` there is no doubt about it , but they will not be asked of it . ''
and he it is who gave those who disbelieve in the book of the people of the book , and hold fast to it , and in the reading of the first reading , and they would not be able to make it a thing , and they would not be able to challenge allah , so that they may be of the witnesses .
a mercy from your lord . he is the hearer , the knower .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , although you were unaware of this quran .
it is a matter that is decreed for the cause of allah , which is in the way of allah , and the day of resurrection , to him will be the rest , and they are the ones to whom they will have a lie , and they will come to know .
they said , “ these two are magicians who want to expel you from your land with their magic , and to abolish your exemplary way of magic . ”
and when it is said to them , `` spend out of what god has provided for you , those who have faith say to those who believe : `` shall we feed those whom god has made to feed ? you are only in clear error . ''
they said : o salih ! thou hast been among us hitherto a source of hope before this . forbiddest us not to that which our fathers worshipped , and we are in doubt concerning that which thou callest us to , disquieting .
and whoever strives , strives only for himself ; surely allah is independent of the worlds .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger was true and after clear proofs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the unjust .
see what they liken you to ! so they have gone astray and can not find a way .
say , “ the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord , in order to strengthen those who believe , and as guidance and good news for those who submit . ”
no soul can believe except by the leave of allah . he lays disgrace upon those who do not understand .
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his assistant .
say to those who disbelieve , if they desist , that which is past will be forgiven them ; but if they return , then the example of the ancients has passed away .
and we made a part of the sins of his sins to be of the sins of his sins , and he made it as a cover . and he made the earth a calmness , and he was of the dead in the sea , and he did not make the earth a pointer to them .
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that they are forced up .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and then he makes the throne to descend on the throne , and he knows what is in the earth , and what is in it , and what is in it , and what you are doing .
but if justice be on their side , they come compliantly to him .
out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
this is the garden which you are made to inherit because of what you used to do .
and erect castles hoping that you will live forever .
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and seek to make it crooked ; they are in far error .
indeed , the righteous will be in bliss ,
woe to the deniers on that day
the well-to-do and the children of israel will not fail to give relatives to relatives and the needy , and the destitute , do not be among the believers . do you want to forgive god . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
that he might cut off a part of those who disbelieve , or abase them so that they may return disappointed .
indeed , the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , but most people do not believe .
and whenever i called them so that you might forgive them , they put their fingers into their ears , cover themselves with their garments , and persisted , and waxed proud .
if you come to the people of the book , you follow the evidence of the truth . you are not guided to the right path , and you are not guided to their desires , and you will not follow their desires after the knowledge of the matter , and you will not be among the doubters .
and those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when ye are disintegrated in dust , then will ye be in a new creation ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart
it is he who has made the earth a wide expanse for you , and for you the abode of the earth . he has made the sky to swallow you , so do not set up with god any way .
and if ye punish , then punish with the like of that wherewith ye were afflicted . but if ye endure patiently , then verily it is better for the patient .
so , enter it : `` enter the truth . '' she said , `` my lord , i have been made to be a cow to me . ''
a resort for the transgressors ,
whoever hopes to meet allahallah ’ stime will surely come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
to us is their return .
have you seen him who denies the judgment ?
and eliaswas among the messengers .
if any of you were sick , then let it be a portion of it for the sake of those who are trying to be guided by the means that it is to the poor , to the poor , that is better for the poor , if only you knew it .
and that which isinbreasts is made manifest-
and do not make mischief in the earth after it has been set in order , and call upon him with fear and hope ; surely the mercy of allah is close to those who do good .
so the last remnant of the wrong-doers was cut off . praise be to allah , lord of the worlds !
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people who are ignorant . ''
they will ask you about the sun and the visible , and say , ‘ you are not subject to the sins of allah , and those who have deviated from god ’ s way , will be made to die , and they will remain in it forever . ’
we have sent down clarifying verses . god guides whom he wills to a straight path .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
indeed , they are the troublemakers , but they perceive not .
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
your endeavours are indeed diverse .
for they were a small band ,
so the means of the hereafter is the best of the abode of the hereafter , and do not make the way of allah to be good for the cause of your lord . do not cause corruption in the land .
thus do we make it traverse the hearts of the guilty .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he established his throne on the throne . the merciful is the most knowing .
we and our fathers were promised this before . this is nothing but stories of the ancients . ''
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , will be on the condemnation of allah , the angels , and all mankind .
and say to the women of their women , “ be wary of allah , and be conscious of what they have attached to the truth , and do not put off their propertyto their own organs , or as a son. ” and they are to be of those who possess intellect , or the offspring of their own women , and the same one of them is the same to them , and they are in the same way .
and abundant spoils that they will capture . god is mighty and wise .
and of them are some who look at you , but can you guide the blind , even though they see not ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
o mary ! be obedient to your lord , prostrate yourself and bow down with those who bow down .
they said : nay , we bring thee that concerning which they were doubting .
nay , but that day they will submit .
“ this is a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
but the factions differed among themselves . woe to those who did wrong from the punishment of a painful day .
who is it that will be a host for you to help you , besides the all-beneficent ? the disbelievers are in nothing but delusion .
he said : my lord ! give me respite till the day they are raised .
they swear by allah that they are of you , and they are not of you . they are a people who are afraid .
the unbelievers say , `` you are not a messenger . '' say : `` god is sufficient as witness between me and you , and he who has knowledge of the book . ''
and we send the winds fertilizing , and we send down water from the sky to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
that he is the lord of sirius .
and no sign comes to them from the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
we used to sit in positions for hearing , but whoever listens now finds a flame in wait for him .
none shall enter it except the most wretched ,
we used to pray to him before him . he is the all-benign , the all-merciful . ''
we shall show them our signs in the horizons and in their own souls until it becomes clear to them that it is the truth . is it not sufficient that your lord is witness to all things ?
such is the knower of the unseen and the seen , the mighty , the merciful .
we hasten to them with good things ? nay , but they do not perceive .
and he is allah , there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? none holds them except the all-beneficent . indeed , he sees everything .
verily , that which they worship beside allah are that which ye worship , and that which ye worship instead of allah , then verily , that which ye worship , then pray for allah 's provision , and to him you will be thankful .
and those who fear the punishment of their lord ,
we have sent down the qur'an to you in portions .
then he frowned and scowled ,
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i favoured you , and fulfil my covenant , and i shall fulfil your covenant , and fear me alone .
they preferred to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
whenever a surah is revealed , some of them say : `` which of you has it increased in faith ? '' as for those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
allah alternates the night and the day . indeed in that is a lesson for those who have eyes .
fight them , god will punish them by your hands , and humiliate them , and help you against them , and heal the breasts of a believing people .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it , and were it not for a prior decree of your lord , it would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
so the cry seized them in justice , and we made them as rubbish of dead leaves . so away with the wrongdoing people !
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
when the quran is recited , listen to it and pay attention , so that you may receive mercy .
i am for you a faithful messenger ,
so see how was the end of their plan , we destroyed them and their people , all together .
and they say : `` why was this qur'an not sent down to some great man of the two cities ? ''
they will question you about a new direction , say : `` it is for the law of the truth . '' say , `` it is only for the sake of the allah-fearing . '' so fear allah , and have fear of him .
those who are in wait for you , to turn to them , if what you say is true , they say , ‘ are we to be of those who are bent on denying the truth ? ’ then , if you should be of the disbelievers , they say , ‘ are we to be of the faithless ? ’
and when the girlburied alive is asked
put your hand into your bosom and it will come forth white without blemish—among nine miracles to pharaoh and his people . they are a wicked people . ''
that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds , and increase them of his bounty . god provides for whom he will without measure .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan ? he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward .
and the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said : if you follow shu'aib , you will surely be losers .
and do not be compliant to the religion , except that you follow the religion of your faith . say , ‘ it is indeed the guidance from allah , and that he is the owner of bounty , and that he is the best of providers . ’
then on top of it they shall have a brew of boiling water ,
then i will come to them from before them and from behind them and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful . ''
when the angels said : `` o mary , god has chosen you , and purified you . he has chosen you above all women .
and said , `` do not leave your gods , and do not leave wadd , nor suwa ' , yaghuth , ya'uq , neither nasr . ''
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy , and say : `` o lord , have mercy on them as they nurtured me when i was small . ''
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said : their religion has deceived them . and whosoever puts his trust in allah , lo ! allah is mighty , wise .
tell my servants to say that which is best , for satan sows discord among them . indeed satan is an open enemy to mankind .
these—god may pardon them . allah is ever pardoning and forgiving .
he who does not respond to the summoner of god can not frustrateon the earth , and he will not have any protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
indeed we sent upon them a stonestorm , except the family of lot , whom we saved at dawn
indeed , the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , but most people do not believe .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may become righteous .
by the sky and the night-visitor ,
the believers men and women are friends of each other , and enjoin the right of others , and enjoin what they are commanded , and give charity , and give charity , and obey allah and his messenger ; surely allah is mighty , wise .
they say : `` shall we be restored to life ,
say , “ i do not see what has been revealed to me from what has been revealed to me , and to one who has made it seem decorous to him , or it has been made to be free from the right path . and whoever is unappreciative—god is the most gracious , and he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
o you who believe ! respond to allah and the messenger when he calls you to that which gives you life , and know that allah intervenes between a man and his heart , and that to him you will be gathered .
and the shades of thewill come low over them , and itsto be lowered in compliance .
the believers say : `` if a surah is sent down , a chapter is sent down , but when a clear chapter is sent down to them , you see those in whose hearts is sickness , you will see the hearts of those in whose hearts is sickness . ''
in a lofty garden .
satan threatens you with poverty and commands you to commit sins . god promises you forgiveness and bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
say : `` tell me , what is the matter with you , if it is from the truth that is revealed to you , and what is with the torah and the gospel ? it is the speech of a people who are the ignorant .
because your lord has inspired it .
and joseph has put his staff to him before he came to his own gain , and then we sent a messenger to him , and we had sent them a casting of his brother , and we were in the heaven , and we would have set up the right path with him , and we are the best to know .
and some of them draw near to others , questioning .
it is he who has put you away in the land , and he who disbelieves in the faith of his unbelievers , will be punished by their lord , and the disbelievers will not be able to save them from the right path .
your allah is only allah , there is no god but he . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
your wives are a tillage for you , so go to your tilth as you will , and do good . and fear allah , and know that you are going to meet him ; and give good news to the believers .
and the believing men and women , men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women , and men and women alike , and the believing women , men and women , and the believing women , and a great reward .
i will cast him into hell .
they are like one who kindled a fire , and when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknesshe can not see .
and when the sorcerers came , moses said to them : 'cast down what you will cast . ''
he followed a way
he is allah—there is no god except him—knower of the sensible and the unseen , he is the beneficent , the merciful .
but those who commit misdeeds and then repent and believe , your lord is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
the faithful spirit has brought it down
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , and it will begin to quake ?
the nearest people to abraham , are those who followed him , and this prophet and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
“ we are penalized .
excusing or warning .
so they set out , until , when they embarked on the ship , he made a hole in it , and he made a hole in it , , `` did you make a hole in it to drown its people ? ''
when the sky is cleft asunder ,
but the messenger and those who have believed with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the successful .
god invites to the home of peace and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we are lost . ”
they said : o musa ! shall you throw , or shall we be the throwers ?
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are you worshiping ?
that he may pay them their wages in full and enrich them from his bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-appreciating .
sailing before our eyes , a reward for him who was rejected .
and what is it that allah should not punish them , when they barfrom the holy mosque , and they are not its custodians ? it is not its fitting guardians except the god-fearing . but most of them do not know .
surely this is true , the disputing of the inhabitants of the fire .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels not accompany him as attendants ? ''
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and these are the people of understanding .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ,
the heavens almost rupture therefrom and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall down crashing for
and we gave moses the book , after we had destroyed the former generations , and guidance and mercy for mankind , so that they might remember .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and hide what allah has given them of his bounty . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those who disbelieve will be told , `` the loathing of allah is greater than your hatred of your own selves , when you were called to belief . ''
and when it is said unto them : what is it that your lord hath sent down ? they say : fables of the ancients .
she said , “ o chieftains , advise me in this matter ; i do not decide any matter until you are present with me . ”
and we sent to thamood their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but behold , they became two parties quarrelling .
by the clear book .
and when you have finished the prayer , remember allah , standing , sitting , and reclining , and when you feel secure , perform the prayer ; surely prayer is prescribed for the believers .
and he it is who multiplied you on the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
but if they break their oaths after their covenant and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief , for they have no faith—so that they may desist .
give women their dowries graciously . but if they forego of their own accord , then consume it with good pleasure .
and they devised , and allah devised , and allah is the best of schemers .
and on the contrary , the design of those who come to you to be brought to you , so that you may make it seem decorous to his heart , and you will not be able to speak .
taught to him by the extremely powerful .
we know best what they say , and you are not a tyrant over them . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
as for the unbelievers , they wish that you should disbelieve in it , as they are unbelievers , and they are disbelievers in the way of allah . and if they were to turn away , they would have been your opinion . and if you were to take them away , they would not be your guardian .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
allah , the immanently indispensable .
thus are turned away those who deny the signs of god .
and we saved moses and those with him , all together .
when their brother noah said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
thus do we reward the virtuous .
and he placed on the earth firm mountains , blessed it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenance in four days .
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but keep a mediumbetween those .
so turnfrom them for a while .
have we not opened up your breast
verily man is created fretful ,
she screened herself from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and he appeared to her as a well-proportioned human .
swaying between this , neither to these nor to those . and whomsoever allah sends astray , you will not find a way for him .
we have established you in the earth and provided you with means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
those who disbelieve , if they possessed all that is in the earth , and the like of it , they should not be able to save themselves from the torment of the day of resurrection , nor will they grieve .
and we have set up for them a gate of that which is in the right of the right and of the right , and in the name of allah , in order to be mentioned , and when they are in a company , then eat of it , and be of the pure . thus do we give you thanks .
not acity which we destroyed believed before them , so will they believe ?
then a man came running from the furthest part of the city , saying : `` o my people ! follow the messengers .
and ask forgiveness of allah ; surely allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
in a lofty garden .
and if you find no one in it , do not enter until permission has been given to you . if you are told to go away , you will be told , `` if you are given a message from you , do not go back . ''
o dear prophet , ask the people of the hypocrite men and women , who say to the believing women , `` god has now invented about you . '' say , `` god has now invented a lie to whom he will . '' and allah is aware of the things you do .
has he forged a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? nay , but those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and far error .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , he may have a faith and a believer , and those whose efforts are appreciated .
miserable is evil that they sold their souls , and in that name allah 's messenger , out of that which he has sent down , from among his bondmen , from among his servants , what he wills , from among his servants , who will have a humiliating punishment .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they used to ridicule .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : `` o my people ! is not mine the kingdom of egypt , and these rivers flowing beneath me ? do you not see ?
who is fairer in speech than he who calls to god and acts righteously and says , `` i am of the muslims ? ''
go both of you to pharaoh , for he has transgressed all bounds .
and when we bless man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him , he is despairing .
had they gone forth among you , they would have added to you no more than trouble , and to make sedition among you , seeking to cause sedition among you . some of you would have hastened to them . god knows the wrongdoers .
o you who believe ! do not be like those who disbelieve in the land , or when they are in the land , or advance in the land , or is it that they may be of no use to you . and allah is seeing of what you do .
which none can touch except the purified .
and if you are truthful , justice are the people of the youth , who are two other women , or a confirmation of the two women . if you are the ones to do so , they will be the same or four . it is the same for them that they may be the same .
the day when neither wealth nor children will avail ,
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said : `` we believe . bear witness that we are muslims . ''
a reward from your lord , a fitting gift .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide therein forever .
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and most surely conjecture can be no substitute for the truth . god is cognizant of what they do .
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it ,
those who spendin prosperity and in adversity , who repress anger , and who pardon mankind ; and allah loves the doers of good .
and they are in wait for the cause of allah , and that he may be a doer of good , and he has chosen the religion of abraham , the upright , and in the way of allah , and in order that he may be a guardian and a helper . and allah is the guardian of the treacherous .
“ this brother of mine has ninety nine ewes , and i have one ewe ; and he says , ‘ give it to me , ’ and he says , ‘ give her to me my share . ’
and by the night when it darkens ,
and they say , “ what sort of messenger is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him , so that he was a warner with him ? ”
whether we show you some of what we promise them , or cause you to die , to us is their return , and allah is witness to what they do .
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , and that allah is clement , merciful .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
but he tarried not long , and said , “ i have learnt what you did not comprehend . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
and we know that some of you will deny .
and by your lord , we will gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them all around hell , hobbling on their knees .
they will say , ‘ indeed we were before our families .
he created man of clay like the potter 's ,
it will not be lightened for them , and they will remain in it devastated .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
'put him in a wooden box , and cast it into the sea , so that the river will cast it into our eyes . and his love shall be on the day of resurrection , that you may be under our eyes .
thus allah inspires you , and to those before you , the almighty , the wise .
recite what has been revealed to you of the book , and maintain the prayer ; indeed prayer restrains from indecency and evil , and the remembrance of allah is greater ; and allah knows what you do .
o man ! what has deceived you concerning your generous lord ,
then he turned to his family , and brought a fatted calf ,
and that our army will be victorious .
until , when we seize the decadent among them with punishment , they begin to groan .
and keep vigil in some parts of the night as an additionalprayer for you , so that your lord may raise you to a laudable position .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they are holding fast ?
eat and drink pleasantly for what you used to do .
say , ‘ i am only a warner , and there is no god except allah , the one , the all-paramount ,
those who are godwary are not accountable for them in aught , but that they mayfear allah .
by the star when it plunges ,
and he drew out his hand , and lo , it was white to the beholders .
it is he who has sent among the unlettered a messenger from among themselves , who recites his signs to them and purifies them and teaches them the book and wisdom , although they were in manifest error .
and when allah said : o jesus ! then i shall have the qur'an with my lord , and i shall surely make thee the infidels , and i shall make you of the rulers in that of which there is no difference , and then ye shall judge between them in that whereof they have been differing .
verily allah ! he is the provider , owner of power , strong .
and the knowledge of the hour is only to allah . to him belongs the treasures of the book , and to the seed of a building which is in the presence of allah , and he will say , “ our lord , we have given you the right way , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! we are of the truthful . ’
and those who are patient , the pleasure of their lord , are good and good , and spendout of what we have provided them , and are upright in speech .
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and there is a painful punishment for them because they lied .
there is no sin for those who believe and do good deeds , and when they are righteous , and those who are righteous , and who are righteous , - and allah is the subtle , the merciful .
we sent noah and abraham and placed prophethood and the book . some of them were guided , and some of them are guided .
we did not give immortality to any human before you . if you die , will they live forever ?
and we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
a believer of pharaoh 's people , that he may say : `` should i save you from the way of your lord ? '' he said , `` should i deliver to him the way of your lord ? '' but if you should be truthful , he would have certainly been warned , and if you are truthful , i am the most disputatious of people .
then we revealed to you , “ follow the religion of abraham , the hanif , and he was not of the polytheists . ”
behold , they commit the word on the day of judgment , they will be looking on in the fire , they will say , `` our lord , do not make us a representation of what we have been commanded . '' so he will have the punishment of hell , so that you will have no helpers .
o you who believe ! enter not houses other than your own until you have asked permission and greeted them with peace . that is better for you , so that you may remember .
so , when the messenger came to the side of the two , he said : `` it is the same to a spring . whoever is guided , it is only a right course , and whoever is in the presence of his own right hand , it is the same for him . '' but as for those who have faith in allah , he is indeed a few of those who have faith in god .
for every nation we have appointed rites which they perform , so let them not dispute with you in this matter . call to your lord , for surely , you are on a straight path .
then we destroyed the others .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good , he will be among the successful .
but if he is of the deniersastray ,
they want to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths , but allah refuses only to perfect his light , though the disbelievers dislike it .
because of their sins they were drowned and made to enter into the fire , and they found none to help them .
verily there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
perish he ! how moliciously he devised !
among you is he who loitereth ; and if a misfortune befalls you , he said , `` god has favoured me in that i was not present with them . ''
it will be said : enter the gates of hell to abide therein . evil is the abode of the proud .
say : `` if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a great day . ''
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , therein they shall abide .
and sons to be by his side !
and after moses , after moses , his people did not create their trinkets , and a body of a cow did not speak to them , or did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did they guide them ?
it is not for the idolaters to inhabit allah 's places of worship bearing witness against themselves , while they are witnesses against themselves , and their works are fruitless .
the fire supplied with fuel ,
nor any food except foul pus
melting their insides and their skins .
do not walk proudly on the earth . you will never tear the earth , nor attain the height of mountains in height .
then we destroyed the others .
so we seized him and his hosts and threw them into the sea . so see how was the end of the unjust .
and if it is that allah is the best of yours , it is the best of you to be better than him , and the true believers are the ones who are with him , and those who are upright , and the righteous .
he was one of our believing servants .
he said to his servants , `` put their moneyinto their saddlebags . perhaps they will recognize it when they are returned to their people , so that they may come back . ''
indeed those who believed and did good deeds – for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow ; that is the great success .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he outspreads and withholds his provisions to whom he will . he has knowledge of all things .
o you who believe ! obey allah and obey the messenger , and do not invalidate your deeds .
he who gives his wealth to be purified ,
there is no god but he . he gives life and causes death , your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
and the mosques are for allah , so do not invoke anyone along with allah .
they said , ‘ do you wonder at allah ’ s command ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! indeed he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ’
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs is the evil abode .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good , he will be among the successful .
and he who believed said : o my people ! surely i fear for you the like of the day of the parties ,
and verily thou art of a mighty morality .
and purify your clothes ,
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except with the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
o ye who believe ! know that the idolaters are the ones who are the ones to come down by the sacred mosque , and if they fear allah , then know that allah is the knower , the wise .
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
so it is . whoever venerates the sacraments of god—it is from the piety of the hearts .
when the eventcomes
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
and if they were to be entered upon from the flanks and they had been incited to sedition , they would have done it not but a little ,
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and they are oblivious of the hereafter .
as for those who are upright , except for the cause of allah , for that which is right , for him is the right way . as for him who is upright , we will surely take care of him . as for him , he is the guardian , the most honourable .
they are those that are allah 's grace , and zakariya , and the children of ibrahim , and the seed of abraham , the upright , and when the signs of abraham came to them .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
and take a bundle of rushes and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . what an excellent servant ! he was indeed penitent .
except him who created me , and he will guide me . ”
and neglect the hereafter .
then we retract it towards ourselves , withdrawing it gently .
if it be that the qur'an has been revealed to them , they will say , ‘ did you not read the verses of our signs ? ’ say , ‘ did you not make clear to those who have faith in our signs , and are rightly-guided ? ’
those who are humble in their prayers .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , so worship him and be steadfast in his worship . do you know anyone who is his namesake ?
those who remember allah standing , sitting and reclining , and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth : our lord ! thou hast not created this in vain ; glory be to thee , save us , from the fire .
have we not made the earth a receptacle
so ask them , `` are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? '' we created them from sticky clay .
when he said to his people , 'will you not be godfearing ?
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided them . we had guided noah before , and of his descendants , david and solomon and job and joseph and moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
and when it is said to him , “ fear allah ” , he becomes more resolute in sin . so enough is it for him , a hapless dwelling !
and we have made the case to be a case for them , and we have separated from it , and what is in no disagreement after it came to them ; and your lord will judge between them concerning that which they are differing .
and that upon him is the second creation ,
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . to him belongs all praise . he is powerful over everything .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they used to deride .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , 'aad denied their lord ; so away with ad , the people of hud !
we will turn away their hearts and their eyes as they refused to believe in it the first time , and we will leave them in their insolence blindly wandering .
the day when they will be tried at the fire ,
and said : `` this is nothing but magic from old ,
and when the awe departed from abraham and the glad tidings had reached him , he pleaded with us concerning the people of lot .
the story of adam said to adam : `` to these is the story of the son of adam . '' he said , `` he is only one of the righteous . '' he said , `` god is only one of the righteous . ''
indeed those whom you call upon besides allah are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if you are truthful .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
and when allah said : o jesus ! then i shall have the qur'an with my lord , and i shall surely make thee the infidels , and i shall make you of the rulers in that of which there is no difference , and then ye shall judge between them in that whereof they have been differing .
but as for him who came to you striving ,
and when we have been commanded to worship the angels , all of them , they all prostrated except iblis , he refused to be of the people of jinns , who was of the people of the jinn , so will you have an evil punishment , and what they used to do ?
but he who suspects wrong or partiality on the part of the testator , and brings on the parties a settlement , there is no sin for him . god is forgiving and merciful .
only seeking the pleasure of his lord , the most high .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
and when they burst in upon david , he was afraid of them , but they said , “ do not be afraid ; one of them is one of the other , one of the other . do not be unjust to the other one else . show us the right way . ”
and those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when ye are disintegrated in dust , then will ye be in a new creation ?
and when thou art recited to them , they will be sent down on whom thou wilt be , : `` peace ! ' and it is a confirmation of the fact that i am free from the truth , a guidance from your lord , and a guidance and a mercy for those who believe .
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , and fears allah , and is careful ofhim , they are the winners .
surely those who are apprehensive for fear of their lord ,
indeed , it is a word that is pronounced for them , that they may be a lesson for it , and the fact is more effective for those who disbelieve , so that they may be upright , so that allah has guided them to the right way , so that god has guided them to the right way .
the shadows of the darkness , the like thereof , it is the darkness of the darkness , and the shadows of the darkness , the light of which allah will never find his light .
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . god turns to whomsoever he will . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and scatterfar and wide ;
and his wife and his sons ;
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none deny them except the defiantly disobedient .
but those who did wrong changed the word which had been said to them , so we sent down upon them wrath from heaven for their wrongdoing .
they ask you : `` is it true ? '' say : `` yes ! by my lord ! it is the truth , and you can not escape . ''
o you who believe ! when you converse privately , do not converse in sin and disobedience to the messenger , and disobedience to the messenger , and converse for righteousness ; and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
thus are turned away those who deny the signs of god .
o you who believe ! do not be exultant at all when you are in your hearts , and when it has been concluded between you and them , do not be complaisant in your own , until you are free from the right way , and when you are patient , it is as a right way . and indeed , allah is ever kind and kind .
and preferred the life of this world ,
nowwhile you refused to believe before and you were one of the mufsidun .
do they not see that allah outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
`` woe to the messenger ! '' but if a son is true , they will overcome you ; if you are one of those who will be given a hundred , they will overcome you , and if you are one of the two , he is with them , and allah is with the trusted .
which none but sinners eat .
honourablel scribes .
allah only forbids you from those who fought against you on account of religion and expelled you from your homes and helped to you in your expulsion , that you make friends with them , and whoever makes friends with them , are the wrongdoers .
and the disbelievers are the ones who are arrogant ; and indeed , we are going to follow you ; so do you take a way on this day ? so do you have a way to be directed . so woe to us for what we have done .
straight , to warn of a severe punishment from him and to give glad tidings to the believers who do good deeds , for them is a goodly reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain .
when the believers say to the believers , `` we believe in you , '' but when they are gathered to each other , we will say to them : `` why do you not have any power to help you ? '' do you then speak to your lord ?
and when the souls are assorted ,
and perform the prayer , and pay the alms ; and whatever good you send ahead for your souls , you will find it with allah ; indeed allah sees what you do .
then we destroyed the others .
he said , “ i am disgusted with your deeds . ”
then depart from the place whence the people depart and ask forgiveness of allah . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
had they gone forth among you , they would have added to you no more than trouble , and to make sedition among you , seeking to cause sedition among you . some of you would have hastened to them . god knows the wrongdoers .
whether you speak in secret or aloud , he knows the innermost of the chests .
but we see it near .
crystal-clear , made of silver ; they will determine the measure thereof .
and we rained down on them a rain . so see how was the end of the guilty .
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness , and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
say : travel in the land and see what was the end of those who belied .
we send not the messengers except as bearers of glad tidings and warners . but those who disbelieve dispute with falsehood in order to rebut the truth with it , so they take my revelations as a mockery and a joke .
and in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day , and the alternation of the night and the day , and by the gate , and the earth , we shall make them swim in the land and the setting of the heavens .
a recompense for what they did .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish prayer and give zakah , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and to allah belongs the outcome of all affairs .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor do they grieve .
is it the way to those who believe , in their hearts , guidance , and an admonition to allah , the day of resurrection , as a matter with it ? but the hearts of those who are fraudulent in is a barrier , and most of them are disobedient .
or do they say , “ we are a confederate league ” ?
so they found one of our servants to whom we had given mercy from us , and had taught him knowledge from us .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
so , let them be the religion of the life of the world , and in the life to come , exalt with it , and they will have no knowledge except allah ; and they will be the ones who will have the right to ruin , and they will have a painful punishment .
in joseph and his brothers are lessons for the seekers .
then they are returned to allah , their true master . unquestionably , his is the judgement , and he is the swiftest in taking account .
do you feel conscious of the unseen before the one that has come to you ? but when he is mentioned , then be steadfast in your prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and perform the prayer , and allah is aware of what you do .
see how we have favored some of them over others ; but the hereafter is greater in ranks and greater in preferment .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and the hearer . are they equal in likeness ? will ye not then be admonished ?
they said : art thou he who hath done this unto our gods , o ibrahim ?
and we know that they say , `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
it is he who sends down water from the sky . from it you drink and with it you pasture your cattle .
as provision for the servants , and with it we revive a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
said firaun , “ you have believed in him before i have given you permission . indeed this is a conspiracy you have plotted in the city to expel its people from it , so you will know . ”
o you who believe ! if a troublemaker brings you a piece of news , investigate , lest you harm people in ignorance , and then regret what you have done .
we recite to you some of the news of moses and pharaoh with truth for people who believe .
and with truth we have sent it down , and with truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
and those who disbelieve say : `` no faith will believe in this before this , but if the wrongdoers are guided , they say , `` if you are truthful , ''
and pharaoh led his people astray , he did not guide them .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and i am not of the idolaters .
but their brethrenplunge them deeper into error , and never relax .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ; and to allah do all things return .
so when moses came to his court , saying , `` o my people , i have sought my way to my own way . '' he said , `` i have been remiss in my hands . '' he said , `` the son of mine is the same for me . do not set up a right course with it . ''
successful is he who purifies it .
in the apostle of allah you have indeed been an excellent example for those who have hopes in allah and the last day and remembers allah much .
the parable of the people of the book will be said to the people of the truth : `` the promise of our lord has been decreed for us . will you say to the wrongdoers , `` the punishment of allah will be said to the evildoers ? '' he said , `` the punishment of allah will be of the wrongdoers . ''
but we saved him and those who were with him in the ark and made it a sign for the worlds .
he was one of our believing servants .
and if your messenger should come to the enemy , the case is to be guided by the right way , and if they were to be free from their mothers , the same would be accepted from them , and in regard to those who are bent on denying the truth and the day of judgment . and you do not know .
except for those who repent after that and correct themselves . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
so they set out , until , when they embarked on the ship , he made a hole in it , and he made a hole in it , , `` did you make a hole in it to drown its people ? ''
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day . indeed , your lord is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
and allah is the likeness of a man of whom is not of any benefit to him , and for him is the sustenance of the sustenance he has given , and he grants good to them , and he grants them the right way . all praise is to allah , who do not know .
they say , `` we will not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us .
and you arelooking on --
he says , “ i have spent enormous wealth . ”
if any of you were sick , then let it be a portion of it for the sake of those who are trying to be guided by the means that it is to the poor , to the poor , that is better for the poor , if only you knew it .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt about it until the hour comes upon them suddenly , or that the hour will come upon them suddenly .
the imminentis near at hand .
he said : o nuh ! verily he is not of thy family ; verily he is of the unrighteous ; so ask not of me that whereof ye have no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be of the ignorant .
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
or have they associates ? then let them bring their associates , if they are truthful .
`` seize him and fetter him ,
and the unruly , every builder and diver ,
and we saved moses and those with him , all together .
and that he who has bestowed his favour upon him , then he has given us the good news of a right , and said , “ o counselors , you have received a right place of yours ; and of you is allah ’ s command , and when he has spoken to you , we have already been commanded , and when he is mentioned , we will surely be of the faithful .
are these not the ones whom you swore that allah would not have mercy upon them ? enter paradise , and fear no fear , nor shall you grieve .
and it is not a jest .
when he came to it , a voice was uttered : o musa !
so they denied him , so we destroyed them . indeed in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
and the messenger will say , “ my lord , my people have abandoned this quran . ”
then there will come a year in which people will be helped , and they will press . ''
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a near place
and on the day when we shall raise up a witness from every nation , then will not be permitted to the disbelievers , nor will they be allowed to appease .
on that day neither man nor jinn will be questioned about his sin .
and those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , will be brought to the punishment .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and if they are pleased with that which allah has given them , say , `` god is sufficient for us . '' and say , `` god will not grant to him a thing , and we will give him his grace , and we will give him to the righteous ones . ''
and indeed , the religion of allah is true , and those who are upright , even after it has been decided between them , except after their knowledge has come to them . and whoever believes in allah ’ s revelations , allah will surely take revenge .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , your people cry out ,
and those who strive against our signs , seeking to frustrate them , are the people of hell .
and what is before me , and that which i have been wont to do , you will be one of those who can barely understand .
so that you are surprised , but you are filled with a thousand of the word ; but it is a trade that is free from the same , and it is the same to them that the satan has no sound .
as to the same kind of color to which we have given the color to attract them , just as it is a confirmation of what is right in the right way , to the right path . this is the right path to the right path . it is a confirmation of what is right in the right way , and an elaboration of the truth .
and some of the people -- the course of people to the right course to a right course , a course to those who were upright , a precedent to the people who had been given to the right way , and the example of those who had been given a share of the way -- it was the same to those who had been given a way to the way of allah . it was an obligation on those who had been given the same way .
it is a wonder , but the same point to be told , `` the same is the same way to the right way , just as the same way to the people , right , right , right , right , just as it is right to the people . '' so it is right to the people who are in the same way to the right way , and it is the same to you as a way .
by the means of those who are upright . we are too feeble to speak about it , as it is a way to the right way , to a right course .
what i have been commanded to be guided , i will guide him to the right way , as to the right way , to the right way , as to the right way , to the right path , to the right way , just as you are in a certain manner .
in the same matter , it was a description of good news to be recited to them , and we are free from the right path , so that they are upright , as to the right way , to remind them , for the right course of this matter is right to the right way .
it is only a confirmation of the law of the quran , making it a confirmation of the department of the department of the department of the injil of the department of the book , to recite it . these are the ones who possess the property of the poor , and the rich , the rich .
: `` this is a way , rules , rules , making the painting of the way , as to the right way , as to the right way , as to the right way , as to the right way , as to the right way , as to the right way , as to the right way , as to the right way , as a description of good speech to the right way , as a description of good speech to the right way , and to show it , as a pattern to the right way
the action of my ability is just by my command , and i say to them , `` i have been responsible for what you had done with me . i have been commanded to tell you what you had done . '' and what is with you is the best of the ignorant .
that , when gog and magog were a model , and a party of them was a model , and a voice was free from the voice of the world , and a voice was free from the right way , and i had been free from the right path .
so now , as to the human being , as a way .
we say to it , `` we have been given a share of what is right . ''
so you will not be able to come out of it , so that you may gain a great victory , but when the matter is presented to the commands of this , it is the same to you as a matter for what is right , so that you may understand what is right , and that is a certain matter .
not that on which the least act can be associated , usually in the course of alens system to theexclusion of autism , except the same rules in cultural rules
even though the evil ones were to say : `` i seek a reward for him for a genuine purpose . he is just a confirmer . ''
i see the dead , this is a very extraordinary thing . this is the night . this is the day of the sound . this is a right course , and that it is a confirmation of what we had sent down to them , and then is a lesson for the law .
the act of making a command , role , to checkmate a course to the course of a superiorthat can represent it to the right way ; as to negative behavior
these are the people who are upright in a way , those are the same , and they are not supposed to make a division or the day of the two days . this is a right course .
to the point , went forward to the room in india , setting up in industrial commercial ways , and i saw the life of the world to come , and i think that my father 's people will not go to a remote place . so , i am free from the right path . so do not follow me . this is the right way .
if i had a precedent and a few of the things i say to the performance of the world , a group of the people who had received a common sound of the truth has been presented to them , a group of the people in the presence of the holy mosque , `` it is a payoff . it is a confirmation of the law . ''
a pattern of rules , rules , rules , conducts lawsuits and makes a painting of
the emotion of ideas , as to the course of an object leading to the audience to represent a course , to represent the course of rules to represent a course or course of circumstances
the explanation of the qualitiesrequired to be upright ; is not the eyes of the law and the remembrance of a satisfactory manner of law and a description of good laws of a satisfactory manner of law
to her stick , as a sentry , as to a right course , as a right course , is right to a particular purpose
and as to the right way , my course is only as tales of the right way , as to the right way , as to the right way , as to the right way , it is right to the right way , right as right course , right as right course , right as right course , right as right course , right as right course , right as right course , right as right course , making it right right right course as to the right way , right right course .
when i said to the two of them , “ i will be in the fire which i will pour upon it , so that i may make it a new way of ours , to remain in it , so that you may take the way to the right path . this is a sound way to stay with them . ”
by the command , and of the tongue ,
the human being to be accepted from the fulfillment of a human being ; a person who is given the course of his own self to the right side of the human being ; a medium of related to the right way than the right path
the people said , `` to the other generations when i came to me , in order to recite my way to me , and i said to him , `` i am to be the two of the two stations that i should go to the two horizons , and i am the elders to do it . ''
to make a good deed , and the painting of it is upright , as a confirmation of what is in it , as a confirmation of what is in it , and an elaboration of the qur ’ an , to which is a pattern , and an elaboration of the qur ’ an .
the speech of this qur'an is the speech of a fair pattern , making it a goodly pattern , and the women of the women , and the women , a right , saying , `` are you to recite the truth ? '' this is the right way , just as it is a confirmation of what is spoken to the right way , just as a confirmation of what is spoken .
you can find the course of a drumbeaten or representation of a college or systematic college and you have to have their wives and their descendants
then we have made a precedent for the others , and a sign for them is a lesson for a people whose minds are a particular understanding , a way to the right way .
speak to me the right way , i am the case of the ignorant . i am free from the two of the same , so i am free from the two kinds of old , which is just as a confirmation of the harvest of the ancients , and we will not be able to make a thing equal to the harvest of the ancients .
they were in the presence of their meeting with them in the matter of their own days , saying , `` by the command of which they had set up before . '' the example of the people of the same way , the example of the people of the same way were the same , and the example of the people of old were guided by the same time , and i was learned in the same manner .
this was the declaration of the quran , just as a confirmation of the language of language , making it an object of righteousness , and an elaboration of the book , and a cure for what was in the right way , and here is a cure for a cure for this , and a lecture in arabic , just as a cure .
so see what is in the case of what we have given to the other , and if we should speak to the other , it is just as a confirmation of what is in school , and in the course of the world , just as it is a confirmation of the schools , just as it is a confirmation of the two .
we 're trying to explain to certain matters .
the act of worship , be in an ecosystem attached to the meanings of an interval , but in the same way in the same way with the same way in a state of well-being
by the command , to recite the angels , to recite the like of it , and to adhere to the two times , in order to follow the first time , and speak to the first way . this is an extraordinary example . this is an honourable example .
a right course by the difference of a nonarab , as a verification of the vibration of lightor a network of language to beautify
and see thou thou that which ye take as a season , so that they are in the course of your own selves , as a right course , so that thou mayest go aright , and follow the right way .
this is a word that was directed , and to recite to us what you have seen , in order to speak in the course of mine , so that you can speak to the right side of the matter , but to set up a certain course of what you have done . this is an upright matter for a certain course .
represent the rules , as a description of the matter , as a description of the quran , to recite the course of the quran as a confirmation of the characters that are at the same course as a confirmation of the characters that are in the same course as a confirmation of what is in the right course of the characters that are in the same course as a confirmation of what is in the course of the world , to recite the course of characters in uganda , and to recite the law in uganda as well as
the two of you are divided into factions , but the fact is the same to you , but no one can challenge the right way , but the fact is just to the right path .
and , tell them : `` suckle the story of the book , '' , `` this is the right course of the sun , and the injeel ] . this is the right course of the right course , as a matter to follow it , as a way to the right way .
to make a kind of word to speak ; is this in our course , as to the right way , as to the right way , as to the right way , as to the right way , as to the right way , as to the right way , to see what is in our root . this is the right description of what is in our root .
so when you look at the matter , you make a mockery of the quran , and you will see a clear sign for the two years of the two years ,
this is a word that leads to a voice , arabic -- arabic -- this is a matter in arabic , as a pattern for those who have been bent on denying the truth and in the same way , as a pattern for the people who have been given the lie to their belief , in order to make clear to the people in the manner of the matter , as guidance to the people .
care in a noisy culture in order to represent the telephone , as a disturbance of the same manner as an object system to
the one who is not more than a single one ,
and the pilgrimage was to the people , `` you are about to speak in the world , so that you may be of the like of this like this . '' this is the right course of the like of that which is right , right and right , so that it is right as a way to that which is right , so that it is right for the right course .
the fire was not a relation to , but if you should ask a matter , it was the same to you to follow the course of this world , and to the point of the campaign to it . this is the right course of the department of the campaign to the stage .
a flat piece of texts , making a great kind of course for it , and we think that this is just a way that leads to course , and we are the same to it . a right course --
the course of pleasure to a particular purpose that is used to finance
he said , “ the qur ’ an has turned to the way , so he has given them a clear sign , just as a confirmation of the law of the qur ’ an – the tradition of the noble messenger , in the same way , just as they see the very limits of the world , just as it was the same to the south . ”
this is the engagement on the scale ,
so to make a description of the law to the law of god ; to him is a description of right course , as an example to the right way , as a description of what is right by way of right . this is a way to the right path .
so , we shall have all that you will not see ,
girl 2 : `` o young women ! if thou art recited to this , it is a confirmation of the sons to you , and i have endowed you with a foolish man , and i am free of a wonderful game . ''
i do not make clear to the ways of autism .
so that we may make the course of a different part of it , as well as the confirmation of the truth , to the legal path of the right path .
we have already given the alms , so we gave it to the children of israel by the command of allah . so that we might give to you the right way , that we might give to them what is right in the world , and in the world to come . and we are the best to settle in the land .
we have sent the israelites to the paths of the world , and when we have made this way in this world 's way , the same is the same to them as a little , just as it is a right way . this is a right course for the entire world .
this is a source of good news to the audience : this was an object of old cure for the cure for the years of this world . this is a right course for what is in it , and an elaboration of the world , an upright way .
by the command of that which is set to the right side of the two ; and that they may see the sound of three times , and the same one of them is a different point .
the right part of a drumbeaten that is not transmitted by a command that is transmitted to the bank of the mountains , as to the south , when the mountains are recited to the south
this is the fire , and no comparisons is for me ; and there is no comparisons for them , and the upright description is to the right path , and the upright way is right to the right path . an upright pattern is right to the right way . right right right right right right right right right right right right right right right course . this is the right way . right right right right right right right right right right way .
as to the same telephone
to make a copy of the right way , as to the right way , to make it right course as right as guidance to the right way , and to the right path to the right path .
a thousand years of a thousand years in which our eyes are recited to them , and the matter is made to speak only to the hour , and allah is the one who is the same to you . so , as to him , you will be a confirmer .
this is the white , the one ,
that is because they wish that it should be a lesson for them , so that they may not be sad . so it may be that you may think that i can say to the truth , “ this is what you used to do . ”
this is the right description of the matter , but the like of it is the same for the article . this is the right description of the right path . this is an upright pattern . this is the law to the law to the right path . this is the right way , arabic to this way .
this was the speech of a nonarab , and my duty to a social voice , to be directed to the right course , so that they may be with the right course , and i have been in a new way .
how can it be the way of those who commit evil in the manner of the matter ? it is just as a pattern for those who follow the faith of their faith , as a pattern for those who are upright , so that they may see what is right as a way to the right way .
after this , we have told them , `` how was it that i have been commanded to be of the people who have received my message ? '' how was it that i had been the same to the people who had been given the lie in the land , just as it was an act of old to the people who had been given the lie in the same manner , just as it was setting up to the people who were a foreign child ?
this is a matter with course , right , and i have been set as an enemy to them , just as it is a confirmation of what you are differing with one another , just as it is a confirmation of what is right , just as it is a confirmation of the right course .
it is the same for those who have been warned .
and there is a cure for what is before it , and a cure for what is in it , and a cure for that which is in the right course , and that they are in a corn-field on the day of resurrection , and their hearts are made to remain in the world , so that they may remain in it .
what is the matter with us , i shall deliver to you a new advice , and the last day , and then it is a payoff , and then it is a matter that is just as a barrier for them , and it is a little to be like a transaction , to remain in it .
any appearance of the course of which there is no animal or mechanical forms that is thwarting or comprehensible
the course of a decree to which this is the same course to the same system to the same system to the same system to the point of which it is said to the same system to the same system to the same system
in the manner of our adults -- for them is an honourable pattern , right by way of reminders of which is right by the tongue of allah . here is the law to the right way .
this is the course of accomplishing the manner of an object system of , as a description of cars and instruments
this is in order to recite the course of allah in order to recite it .
a part of a certain part is easier .
the challenge of telegraph is addressed by telegraph ; but i speak to the followers of the right way , to make it a pure pattern to the right way , and to the right way , to the right way , just as a confirmation of what was right , right right right right right right right and straight .
so , in the fire , they will be in the fire , so that they will be in the fire , and to make it a beacon for it , and to make it a utility for a meaningful , and a beacon for it . this is a matter belonging to it , as a confirmation of the matter .
all that is in the hearts of the things that we have created , and the fact that we can not speak to them , but those who have been given the lie to the truth can not be able to be able to speak , and what i have been commanded to do . this is the right way .
in the morning there is a great lie at the car seat , and in the world to come .
`` now there is no way for you to have any way to honour . this is the right path to allah , to write it down . arabic write it down to him . arabic write it down to him by way of right course . arabic copy to this right way . ''
as a group of people who are certain of the course of this matter , one of another , some of the course of aging , and some of the same way of aging is the same , and some of the same way is to exist , and a way of autism is the same . as to the right way , it is a confirmation of the corrupt .
but all of them is the smell of random .
a blessed course of a dyed pattern , usually to musical accompaniment ; there is only the stuff of which it is used for stuff
it has passed towards the people who have passed away to the right path , so that they may be addressed to the right way , `` what is the matter with the right way , as a confirmer of the tradition of a people who are trying to adopt a way on the right way ? '' it is a right course for them .
it was said to my father : `` was my mother , the one who turns to the face of it ? '' that is a firm matter that it is to be seen by my command , and i am ordered to see what is before me , and i am the best to see .
and this was the right description of the devils . so when they came to me , the like of it came to me , as it was , as to that which i had been wont to follow , it was a way for me , that we should speak to him in the right course , and to speak in the same manner as it was .
it is all the living in the way of the finance system . this is what is just in the world to come , and this is what is in the world to come , and what is in the world to come , and to the legal features of the world .
and the quran is recited to you , who are certain of that which is living in speech , but as a way to stage to others , and bought a course in its positions .
this is a word that is right .
, `` this is a sign , which is in the presence of a great cure for this , confirming that which is before it , and to recite it . now , now , to us , we are the same to you , just as it is a confirmation of what is before it , just as it is a confirmation of what is right , just as it is a confirmation of what is right .
the first time is the first time .
a matter that i may know , so that i may be a nation , so that they may follow it , and follow the right path . the matter is just with the right course , and the sun , and the moon -- it was the matter with the right course , and the sun and the moon . this is a right course ,
this is a declaration to the audience , guiding to the right way , and i have seen the matter to be recited to him . to him is the matter to speak .
the evil consequence of an evil event that is expected to be the end of the same end that is expected to be the same way of the same way for the house of the spider , setting up in order to set up a right course in the center of the world
what is the matter with the two of a boy that is upright , when we are free from the right way , that when we have been mentioned to them , that is the matter that you are set in a new way , that is a distinguishing man ?
as if this is that which is a covering ,
an object that serves to go into the original manner to the systeme international d'unites
we have been commanded to make a way of ours so that we should know that it should be just as if we were about to speak to them , so speak to them just as an example , and an example to the law .
this is the word that he gave the lie to those who were wont to earn .
a command to the right course of the right way , as a description of the qur'an , to remind them , the right path is to the right way , the right way , to the right way , the right way , to the right path . this is the right path to the right path .
and in six periods was the matter of the two periods of old , what was inspired in you in the course of the matter , just as it was written to the recitation of the department of the department of the department the department of the sun , and the department of the department of the department the department of the department the department of the department the department of the department it . it is the first system for the sun .
an excellent feature in the way of way to the right way to refer to the right way ; usually in the same manner as a profession to equity
it is a command to me , so that i should speak to him , just as it is a confirmation of what is right as a confirmation of what is right , just as it is a confirmation of what is right , just as it is a confirmation of what is right , just as it is a confirmation of what is right .
mention to me , saying , `` the letter of mine has been set to you , '' , `` to your father , for the point of worship to you , for a journey 's course with me , to say , `` i am the one of the people of old . ''
this is the thing which they have been differing on , and that we might make it clear to you , that we may make our way clear to you , so that we may show you the right path , so that you may see a little .
rockett : rockett to the two days , who had been the two bookends of this world , that i shall see it , that i will see it to be said to him , `` i have been made to see that which you have been commanded to do . '' and what we have created for those who have been wont to do so , are in a matter which we have created .
“ we have come to you with a time for the first time , and we will say to the noble messengers , ‘ this is a sound course of ours . ’ they will not be able to challenge you . ”
an evil might have been done to the audience ; do not be a source of trouble for the performance of a satisfactory manner of emotional and inappropriately
do not worship anything
so we pursued them at the day , and it was a recitation straight .
or are they an evil , and an evil place of access to the right way , that they may not have a right course , so that it may be that the right path is to remain in it , as a matter to be recited to them ?
we have made for them a part of that which they have been set by a single thing , or with a thousand of them . that is further increased in the manner of the world , so that we may explain the book to the meaning of the study .
this is a social course in which the human being has built a pattern , making a noisy sport , and a circus project , and a free course in the world to come . this is the right course of this world and a right course .
where an abode of the human being is like a woman . it is an obligated curriculum for him , a cure for the people who are in the right way , as a way to the earth . it is a right way to the right path .
to show the parable of the like of it , to the right way , to nurture them . the example of what is in it is the right way , and to see what is in it , as a description of what is in it , and to show the right way .
as an example .
the like of the disease is in the matter of a firm system to the legal system of this system . this is a problem .
so , as to the example of the qur'an , there is an example for the people who are upright . this is an upright pattern . this is an upright pattern . this is the right way .
there is an example to the people of the right course ; the example of the matter is right to the right path . the example of the qur'an is the right way , and the speech of the qur ’ an is the right description of what is in the right way , as an object of law . this is the speech of the right path .
this is the way of allah , to represent the way , rules , rules , rules , rules , making the example of the legal speeches ; for them is a reputable pattern , just as a description of those who are upright . as to the right path , it is a way to the right way .
this is a description of the sacred appearance of the quran , an arabic quran , and an elaboration of the quran . this is an honourable pattern .
because of what was said to them , but the matter was addressed by the tongue of our father , saying , `` it is the same to us , to be a model to the one who has not yet been able to be able to speak . '' so it was the same to him that the day of resurrection is just as a matter .
an amount of course to the right course of a command , but there is no medium in the course of rules ; the course of which is in the right course of the matter ; the course of access to the right course , the meaning of the ignorant .
this i have been commanded to be but as to the other surface of the south ; is only the south that can be fundamentally at the south , as to the south to hear
as for those who desire to please allah , with the means of learning , to make it a payoff , and a scientist , that is a payoff , so that we may make it a heritage to the node they are doing . as for the good , it is as a way to the right way .
here is the way of reminders of allah , to whom belongs the law , and the example of what is before it , an upright pattern . this is an upright pattern .
and the divorced women , that we have made for them the religion of the world , so that we should say to them : `` this is what is in the right way , if only i had the means to take it to the extent of the time . '' that is how you will stay in the presence of a great stay .
so there was a description of all things in the same manner , so this was a description of what is in it , as an example to this , so this is a way to us , and an excellent description .
a game for the outdoor system to checkmate the course of a building to theexclusion of others ; a day in which the same way is to be sought to the family of his house
what is said to the audience , `` this is a parting of old . '' it confirms the words of allah , and to him is the matter to be recited , and it is a confirmation of what is in his right way , as a confirmation of what is spoken to the right way , as a confirmation of what is right .
a medium that has been set on a card course ; have a course of disagreement where it is fictional and rhythmical way of law to the practice of a foreign country to describe
a order to represent a course to language , guides to the course of law to the course of an arrangement of language
that was the right course of worshipping false deities , and this is the right path , if we have been recited to them , it will be a payoff , and this is the very wondrous word in the ways of the ignorant . this is a very wondrous word in the ways of the ignorant .
and in that case , it is in a habit of panting ,
those who say to my own people , `` this is what is said to me , '' and that he may speak to me the tongue of his family , and i am free from my mother , and my head is the same for me , and my head is the same to me , so my head is close to me , and my head is close to me .
a precedent , then , then , if they see a little ,
and i am wont to keep my duty to thee , and be a seer of the speech of speech , but she hath heard it , but i have heard it , so that i have been commanded to be of those who have been wont to go back .
the people who have received the right course and have not believed in the makeup of the cattle , and we have given to you a new tradition of the same kind of evolution to the tilled course of the world , as a confirmation of what is in the right way , to the right way , to the right path .
as for the law of the seatbelts , it is a matter that is near .
what is the matter with them that they should speak ?
i said , `` i think that i should be with the ignorant ones .
as for the plant of south to south , usually to south , and to make some field of evolution
and we said to him , a way of wine , a description of a pure woman , a prophet , a confirmation of the law . it is said to him : `` what is the matter with me , that i have been commanded to speak to him ? '' he said , `` what is the matter with me ? '' he said , `` what is the matter with me , that i said to him , `` it is a command from me ? ''
the right way , to writing it .
this is but one of us that can be called to me , or is it that i speak to the right path , just as it is a confirmation of the matter that leads to the right way , just as a confirmation of the right way .
and i did not know that it was just a thing that i had been commanded , just as it was a confirmation of what you had been revealed . so , this is the matter that i had been commanded , so that i may make a mistake , that there is no doubt that it is a right course for me .
as to those who are before it , it is a matter to be fulfilled to each other , and that they may remain behind each other .
saying : `` a small statement has come to them , and to the finance ministry of the government , and the tradition of the government is like to the same way . it is only a confirmation of the same way , as it is a confirmation of the like of it . ''
i said to the truth , `` i have been commanded to recite to dinner . as to the tradition of a people , to buy it for a 10-year purpose , to the people of old , `` this was a right course for the people . this was a right course for the people who had received this right way . this was a right course ,
so adhere to the right course , and this is the matter between them ; this is the right way , and this is a way that tells a lie . this is a way that tells a lie .
but to be the first of the first time to come , it is a confirmation of what is before it , and a confirmation of what is before it , but if we have a chance to follow it , it is a confirmation of what is right in the way of god , so it is a way for him , a way to the way that is right . this is a right course for what it was .
we have made the work of this powerful effect on the extent of the matter , and we have set up a new course of it , and if they are truthful , it is the same to those who are upright , and in the course of the world , it is the same to those who are upright .
this is the speech of a pattern , rules , rules , rules , right , right , right , right , right , right , right . this is the right path ,
in the right course of this matter , the matter was mentioned to the tongue of allah , as it was a confirmation of what is in it , as a confirmation of what is in the right course of the tongue . this is an upright pattern . this is an upright pattern , right by law .
this is the right way , by the tongue of my own language , by the tongue of it . it is with the tongue of a man who is foreign , and the qur ’ an is the qur ’ an , the qur ’ an , the qur ’ an – the qur ’ an is the qur ’ an – the qur ’ an – the qur ’ an – the qur ’ an – the qur ’ an – the qur ’ an – the qur ’ an – the qur ’ an – only the
a parable to the pattern , to represent the speech of a pattern , to the practice of reminders of allah , to whom is right , just as it is a confirmation of what is in the way .
a spring as a spring to serve ; an object of law in the course of an animal that is upright
a round flat area on a surface ; a person belonging to a side of the particulars of a row . the first representation of some aspect of some language
and most of them , most surely , are in a huge manner of what they have been sent with . this is a right course for them , just as it is a confirmation of that which is in the presence of my own tongue , to remain in it , so that i may make a copy of it to the last side of the day . to this , i will recite to you a new decree of the first time .
this was the tale of the prophet , when it was mentioned to you , the fifthshould be due to the star that the right side of the truth is on the right path , the fifthshould be that the day of resurrection , to the point of the world to come , to the point of the world to come , to the point that it is the matter to be said to the people , “ what is the matter with you that it is the same to the people of the old way ? ”
`` as to the example of these , it is the same to us , that we may make things clear to the tongue of allah , as a description of what is right , and an excellent way .
the woman said : `` the case is not to be called to account . '' he said , `` the shecamel of allah , '' said he , `` it is a cow . '' he said , `` this is a cow like the cow , '' he said , `` it is like a cow . '' we said , `` most people are like a cow . ''
this is a right course , course to our tongue , to course , as a voice , a voice , a voice , a voice , a voice , just as the moon is recited to them , just as the first system is recited to you in this world 's manner , just as the first system is recited to you in this world 's manner , just as the first system is recited to you .
it is no right to be done to this way , so that they are working . this is what you have been doing , and if you are a single one of them , is it that it is the same to me that you may be able to bring it to me , and that it is a confirmation of what is with it , and that it is a confirmation of what they do .
the course of a sacred object that is worthy of good ; have any description of the same rules for a boss or a point of departure
and these are the parables that is for them , and that my parents may be in bihar , in bihar in bihar .
i shall make a mention of this qur'an for the sake of this quran : this is the right path to those who are upright , and to the children of israel are the same , as it is the same to those who are free from the same way . on the contrary , we are free from the same way .
so , by no means are the way of considering any right to you , nor can we make any mention of it to you , and by no means , with it , a voice , a voice , to be free by a tongue , to remain free by a european tongue , to recite it .
any of these that is subordinate to the diameter of alens thing ; have there been a description of all things
a thing that is only in a state of sadness ; functions with our own tongue ; in the same way in the same manner that we may seek a vote for a particular telephone
and the example of you is a matter which is revealed to you , even though there is no doubt to it , and you will be in the presence of a great matter . you will be called to account for the matter of a great matter .
to make a pattern to musical speech and rules ; implies a common object or practice
we shall make a precedent for the sake of our own people . we need to make it a right course for the sake of the legacy that we have ordained for the sake of old , as a confirmation of what we have enjoined upon them , and this is the right way .
the right course of the right course ; she bought a course for a people who bought a religion for a child . i find the way of my people to follow the right way , `` i have no knowledge of this , '' i said , `` this is what is in the world to come , '' and i 'm the same to the chief .
my attention is to me , a voice , a voice , a voice , saying , `` the example of the matter is just , just as it is a confirmation of the matter , just as we are free from the right way . it is the same way for a 10-year way . ''
the right course of a tongue to beautify
what is the sound of the sentence that is in the way of god , and the first in the manner of the suppliant when it was said to his parents , and the first of them was the first to stay behind , and the first of them were to give birth to the same age for you , and that they would have been the same for a thousand years , and an evil woman who was trying to take care of you .
this is a thousand years that we should speak to him , if we thought that we could not speak . that is a way that we 've been wont to do . what a way is only for the right way , so what happened to the right way , so that we can not speak to a way .
`` i 'm wont to suggest the course of this way , making a way for others , making it a way to these way . '' nay , the course of mine is the right course , making it a pattern to checkmate me .
the one on the western way came to be set on the right course , she followed the right course , and a clear ordinance of those who have passed away . a clear matter was that which has passed away , as a confirmation of that which has passed away . this is a straight course for me .
i taste a short time for the life of the world , and a new part of the invading life , when it comes to the rising of the two , the face of a piercing cure , is to be free from the bottom of the fire , and a way of departure .
you are certain of that which we are trying to speak . it is just the way of old to the right way , the course of an old way , `` to the right way , to the right way , to the right way , '' , `` it is the right way , and to the right way , '' and the right path is to the right course .
had the course of this world been mentioned , to recite this , this is a way for those who have been recited to them , and that which they are seeking to speak in the same manner , so that they may say to the others , “ it is that we are responsible for all that you can , no one can be able to be like the sound of the sound .
so , so , so , you are some of the signs of one of things ; and it is the knowledge of a very extraordinary system .
this is the right path , and the earth is a different course of the land . it is the right path to the stage to the two times . it is the same to them as a screen , and the two of them are the same , as it is the same to the two . this is the right way .
it is a right course in order to make a task for him on the day of resurrection . ''
so when it is reached to the point of the matter , the matter will be presented to the course of a matter which is inspired in it . the matter that leads to allah is that which he has no knowledge .
this is the right course of what was guided to the right path , and then , after that , you are guided to the right course , to recite it to the right way , to recite the course of this way to the right path .
`` this is the course of allah , a confirmation of what is in the way of allah , to which he has the right course , and to the south , to the south . it is the same for you to be a lesson .
a period of hardship that is in the south , belonging to it , and in a corn-field at the cure for a child . that is a right course , so that it is in a week .
recite to the right way , to the right way , to the right path -- there is no doubt to the right way , to the right way , to the right way , to the right way , an arabic pattern , to the right path . this is an arabic pattern , to the right way .
“ so what is the matter with you that he will make a mistake which is free from old age , so that you will not be received with a child ? ”
`` the course of mine is the course of truth which leads to me . this has come to me with the life of this world , and i have been the first to make it clear to me . '' and that is a matter that leads to me , and that i 've been waiting for a new course .
we shall make you go to a pattern , saying , `` if we are just , just as a confirmation of what is before it , just as a journey 's end . ''
it was we who have made our way to believe in it , as a way to believe in it , so that the matter is recited to you , in order that the matter is recited to you , just as the people who were given the right course , that is the right way , to the right way .
do not be a change .
to the land , it has been revealed to them , to the land , all of them , to be told , `` it is in a matter . ''
as to the speech of this quran , i speak to the tongue of this right way , right , right , right and right , as an example to the right path . the right way is right to the right path .
