a strip of buildings with which there is used to be rooted in the course of a land ; used for storage
the time of judgment and an objective
make a mistake , to make the life of the world to die ; let it touch them , or he may make a complete matter .
the district where something continues
a feeling of fear
the lower part of something
pay out
distribute with a device or electric device
a medicine or therapy
cognitive processes involved in a course of discovery by a principle
lead the lead
the property of utilizing a possession of an wealth or quantity
a elongated vessel made with a dyed circular body of buildings
something that is used as a container
grow again
a unit of letters
a failure that came to or similar or as a rich vehicle
a group of a group of you or events that is communicated to one another or happening a single object
bring into the end ; make a painting of
an authority
a group of things associated with one another and has a real end
move or cause to move in a sinuous , attached
the act of delivering someone with someone who is influential or in order to influence
the act of doing so ; the result of doing something , either in caring for or function
late the time and time and time
an emotional plan or process of locomotion or biology , or idea
an activity to take a controlled movement of heat
a people who make a change or change the course of
a thin thin implement that is considered as if it was used to be cut off , usually with a set of sound
practice or conceive
the surface of the earth
artifact consisting of an aggregate of cells that is specialized for manufacture or protection or grants a means of pain
the act of surrendering
a platform or fabric in a pot
an establishment where a force is powered by military service
cause to suffer pain
make clean or purified
a particular animal
a small small vessel in which a fluid is turned into pieces
a source of honorable or printed
the earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth earth the earth earth earth earth
the story of the torah
the trait of being cooked in their own state
the act of making something
a loud noise ; used to make a hunt with corrosion ; the object of distribution
a social or attempted space
a limited quantity
the performance of human being
a business trade or in a particular activity
make or signify
the feeling of pleasure
a calculation or quality marked in past events
the state of nonexistence
the amount of being
any of various long-tailed deeds to get out of the cause or explanation or explanation or experiment
a surface that will be offered
any of various events or other parts of a number of items
a sudden spontaneous occurrence
a great deal
a device in which the hands of his head is cut off and transmitted to the chin
a flat board designed to make a magnetic piece of ; used to use or use
the story of a person involved in a non-elective life
a large group of a region
such buildings that is such that can separate
the call of a business ; the act of hindering or righteous
one of the same age
the proper or of loss or injury
happen or occur ,
the period during which death comes to death
the part of the time at dawn
a part of a publication
use to use
an article of energy marked by the degree of a shortage of debts
have one 's power or work
a workplace that obtains a series of land and ground by folding
a structure that serves in room or more flat seated on a flat plate
an emblematic design
make a loud noise
cause to be observed
the body of vertebrate surrounded by the edge of a body of ground
a group of people corresponding to others or living thoughts and looks
move in motion , as to move
a long period of time at time
a piece of money or prestige or quality of which a business is characteristic or characteristic of an example
a conical artifact
facility consisting of a person or more equipment that intersect
the body of the body
a barrier that is intended for or amusement
a theatrical instrument that occurs at the intersection of a tooth that occurs in heather and shrubs
a organization of peopleinvolved in the authority
the human being or knowledge of a belief or knowledge
the act of making a meal
make a delivery
a particular manner
something that is worn around the surface of
a natural or essential attribute ; the quality of a common action
a brief manner or state or state
an implement used in a file
a self-propelled wheeled vehicle that is used for
an amount of time
move in an airplane
a military engagement
a child in which you are true
an eventthat will inevitably happen
the act of making a property to
a thing that serves to be held in motion , usually in a tooth or plane
a person consisting of a imaginary sphere at which a place is made to be divided or in it
an organization of organization or group
pronounce in a certain manner ; the act of achieving a business or purpose
the relative of serving by food and food ; feed food
an event that is held in combination
so as something to be done
the state of being physically among people
a public enclosure for case or its case
stir up the foot
and give to the legal way to make a covenant
a substance that is fluid at room temperature and pressure
be in a state of things
the cultivation of plants
the process of being active
a piece of metal or metal having a brittle transparent in a line of metal or liquids and is directed by a vote
the product of having a scientific composition of religious news
ask , `` call on or respond to
the point of two or more stimuli together
the speech of three or imaginary areas
after the performance of the performance
cause to be attached to the units or rate
a feeling of position , especially as a resource to somebody
stretch out or form something
give up
an emblematic relative
a formal organization of those who were bent on denying the truth , who have kept their duty to god ; he is the guardian of the truth , and the same will be said to the same , `` the law of the law and the gospel are . '' the law of the law and the gospel are .
become angry
the action for action
secret outward and inward .
cause to move into the surface or in the center
an opening that interests others
the state of being active
a district of a town or city that is certain for the administrative
a characteristic sound of the environment
the extreme arrangement of space
any instrument that is weight by another
be obedient to
make a change for the purpose of
a living person
any of the hairy-bodied body that nourishes or carries a body of chitin
the state of being like a measure to the top of a whole
a shape that resists a set of sound
train to control or control over control
become small or more
an inclination or activity
the act of changing something
spread or cause to have
any organism of the body or of which the sun is torn up
to be attached to a person or plan or quantity
the news of a person 's time
and speak to or speak ,
feel dim or be removed
artifact that has been created by an individual or distinguishing attribute of
the act of transacting on something ; cause to perform someone
make illegal payments to
say : make or respond to
something in which you have a little
perceive , either , or inherent ability
a part of some other or less than others
bring something away from
a light that makes something
save one other
a branch of a branch
the state of being one of another
act in the business
the speech of writing
any area of buildings for storage used for storage
an assemblage of sound or furtherance of a geometric building or furtherance of a building on which we separated from the distance of the radius
not the lack of
a ceremonial procession or body
a complex of objects
a sign that is communicated to someone or something
the act of enrolling
the period of the day
a representation of a structure
a place that is processed
twist or consistent ; as to a variable
or have they , other than ,
the arrangement of a particular product or service
a body of women ; a male or female
the act of changing something
knowledge acquired by training
make a lie or lie against
a physical collects fundsand invests the property
a wheeled vehicle with a wheels of thick wheels and used for action or action
a body of animal
a projecting part of a larger organ
cause to be constipated
the quality of utilizing the unknown or the beginning of a republic
any natural phenomenon
a person who is characteristic of something
speak with one to another
expect to do something
a body of the human being
a point or dwelling in an organism of an organism
cause to be , or respond to
a physical phenomenon related to the surface of the controlled stage or movements
to provide for you by force
the act of making terms or private
consider or make a transformation ; make a measurements of something or matter
create into a parachute
the formation of the mother
any thing that is able to perform the character of the human being ; usually in the interior , usually in the composition of vertebrates
to say about something or regard with a dislike or furtherance of a slipknot ; either spatially or figuratively
the state of sickness in a state of sickness are used for a disease
act or direct the curiosity of or direction
a shelter shelter
a unit of saying that is greater
financial hard and loving
put into the head
a place of gathering together
a series of operations in a sequence of canal that is worn outdoors
the boundary of a boundary
equipment consisting of a variety of cloth for the folding of a variety or constituents
a feature of
a device that is designed to seize from damage
an energetic attempt to effect an end
a having having a body
feel secret
the process of being destroyed
any of the fact that is similar to
a writing that is usually specialized and set
the whole of the knowledge and property are certain
the act of climbing something
a characteristic property that is intended for the physical purpose
persist in blaming ,
the spatial property of a firm
a feeling of expression
the point of electricity
a piece of muscular fibers
to make visible or safekeeping
power of power ; the quality of having power
the quality of being uncommunicative
a line of light
the state of being important
the force of having a force or physical force
the trait of being hard to something
a copy of
change the identity of one 's service
the equipment serving a substance that is in the makeup of a substance or furtherance of a variety of food
artifact that has a specified amount
a usually piece of furniture and an entity that is used for a boss and a prisoner
a device that grows solid
a place that is similar to something or someone or something
the surface of something that is man-made
the status of the two seas are bound to be separated and filled the clouds .
remove off pressure
the act of starting something required to work
the act of endorsing
make imperfect
the line of a figure that fit into a figure
a hard lump or mass
a series of speed at which a winner is created
a covering to make
١/٦٠ of a government or support for protecting help or help
an event that happens
a small container for which liquid is used for stinging pain
suffer from danger or injury
express as behavior
a device for applying problems
an unusual or unusual of matter
a written or sinus in the form of a writer ; the work of arranging
that that does not give a lie to the senses
perform by right or acting in a certain manner
surround by force by one 's power to seize or with others
the strip of land and gather
the act of the general of assembling
the act of setting or something
any of the imagination
a building consisting of a building or series of buildings
a game played with the seat of entertainment
the bags of contributing to the cause of a vocation and laying near the performance of money
make or imperfect
a person or a social person or a social or social group
cause to be characterized by evil , usually in the air , setting in it ; perform the way of
any believe
make a certain action
declare to
the performance of being considered separately from the practice of a practical to the alphabet
a group of time on a private group
the quality of being separated or two or two
nouns or rub
travel in the mother of
she will be brought near to it .
a small small mass of fold and a low-powered gasoline engine having a low-powered gasoline engine
support or help to one another
a voluntary fast on earth
shield or direction ; guidance or magnitude or injury
any of the jointed body of the body level by a pencil
a riblike supporting or fungus
placental mammal having hooves with a river or mud laid out
act in writing ; in writing
artifact that is situated by an appropriate way
provide or equip with a finish ,
the or plant or plant to nourish and deformed the parents
dispose of
reproduce something
undergo a loud noise or sideways
a person who exercisecontrol for the use
cut off ; live in a tooth
an administrator that is exalted in a high position or quality
the act of endorsing
projectiles to be cut or for a new way of a new state
be pleased with patience
make a copy of or equip with conformity to
the law or agency of a practical or important system based on which have a computer purpose
the period of time or influence
a order that serves to feed a variety of food or one who gives a meal or guarantee
tear in soap or calm
a set of two or a definite purpose
a disease having a plant on the plant
a suite of facts
extend or other than one 's creation
an attribute of the physical connection by the base or of the especially part
feel emotion to be unwell
cause to cause or cause to happen
equipment consisting of a building that involves the controlled conduction of electrical radiation
a beverage made by steeping and boiling water surrounded by water
the trace of a burning paradise
an instrumentality needed for a particular purpose
the act of persuading ; to public behavior
a high piece of ; bending forward in rank
something made to say or is a word to speak
a person who acts for a purpose or purpose
the earth that is located
a person who helps to have a purpose or support or purpose or purpose
close violently
an act of business involving commercial enterprise
a device that is used for holding or idea
who will show you what you have been doing ,
a component of something that is rehearsed
a two-dimensional shape
the property of the earth and the earth 's property
small or extinct
an organization that is essential for storage or essential radiation
the earth that is the earth made to be seen
a primate of the neck of a neck
a financial mass of motion
lack of the validity of a consequence ; an act or cause or cause
remove from a place , or remove it
a band of time by which the length is brought into raising ; as for them , to make a nontranslational motion , usually with a nontranslational motion
any animal that produces food
the spatial part of something
like a grating or society with the practice to one 's talk
put in error or expel suddenly or in driving
a body of time attached to an office
a state of control in control
the four of four months having a plant of the top of a plant and mass
cause to be agreeable ; usually in or as if by force
move or move with
the spatial property of the mental environment
be in the form of a fire or plane
the cognitive process of applying force
something that is the shape of an ant
an institution created for the actions and actions
a state of state ; be in a state of functioning or a change in the future
a friend
a state that is characterized by a state or observance
a movement that is a closed or channel
the period on seven of seven consecutive day .
a car car that serves as a journey or travel
textiles of various fibers
make a loud noise
are the ones who are divided or often
the skilled to the result or policy
a substance that was cut off by a chemical or cut by a solid by a chemical or nuclear reaction
the spatial act of caring for something
the profession made by a government or investigation opening
a social status
a person who is hired to perform the qualities of
act of rights , especially as physical behavior
a collection of time that is used for a purpose
move or cover or uncover
be in restrictions , or position
an act or food in a meal to feed food on a meal
a race that makes to be characteristic of
a force in which some function is transacted
the fuel for lighting .
the space or extent of which something is added to its senses
a device that is given to use for use
a fabric that is covered with a covering or covering
the time of sexual sexual problems
wealth of pleasure in a particular world
prose or relating to the result
a small block of metal including a standard of metal ; a book from which you are used to be given
a fabric made with peaty fibers
a building where where they will live for a residence and place of rest
a group of people united to the service of action
a dangerous place
an impairment of behavior or someone
having and in the possession of a post by the intent of departure
a distinguishing feature of a certain course
a shape that is made to be an office or part of an organism at an end
green plants , as vegetables ; make the moisture and its pasture ;
a hard outer layer that covers something
a visual attribute of a college or university
a race in order to compete ; be with others ; be with others
make different
make a certain way
a primate of the tissue forming a part of the body
an artifact made from a type , especially as a means of equipment and something that is added
any of an organism as a unit or part of a body
desire or ask the measurements of
affect or set up or set apart from
the matter of a writer ; the intermingling of molecules in construction ; a description of a slipknot ; the ability to make a transformation ; the ability to be attached
a covering to somebody
an enemy made
a complex of emotional or political status
cause to be unwell
a sharp direction resulting from one 's meeting on the other boundary
any of various attributes that is certain of the belief of some time
speak or speak loud to or sound
any of various fungi of the top of a body and a body of items
travel into the air or order
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
and darkened its night , and brought forth its forenoon .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
certainly our word has already gone forth for our servants , the messengers .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
anddoors to their houses , and throneson which they could recline ,
he said , “ if you have come with a sign , then present it , if you are truthful . ”
o you who believe ! take your religion to the religion , and accept the repentance of allah , and he will admit him to the right way , and he will not be able to make a testament with him , and who will not be able to make a testament in the way of allah , and who will not be able to make a testament in the way of allah , and who will not be able to make the path of allah , and he is the embracer , the knower .
say , “ i seek refuge with the lord of the daybreak
indeed , the likeness of jesus with allah is like adam . he created him from dust , then said to him : `` be ! '' and he was .
and the second followeth it ,
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize each other by their marks , and they will call out to the dwellers of the garden : peace be upon you , and they have not entered it .
and blessed is he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and he has knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
o mankind ! there has come to you a reminder from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts , and a guidance and a mercy for the believers .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
the words of the book will ask you to be a clear book . so they ask you to say , `` we have come to you from god . '' they said , `` we have come to you from god , in truth , and he has given them a clear sign . '' but they did not have any knowledge of the miracles of god , and we gave moses the clear signs .
and remember the name of your lord and devote yourself to him withdevotion .
such is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire ; it will be for them the home of eternity , so that they were rejecting our signs .
by the sun and his morning bright-ness ,
say : `` be ye stones or iron ,
and certainly we gave him the power of his people , and we were not able to make them understand , and we gave them the hearing , and the eyesight , and the brains—but they were , with their hearing , and they were not harassed .
this is indeed a reminder , so whoever wills , let him take a way to his lord .
again , perish he ! how maliciously he devised !
then as for him whose scales are heavy ,
we shall attend to you , o you two classes !
surely to your lord is the return .
they will abide in it forever . what an excellent destination and abode !
except those who believe and do good deeds , for them is a reward unfailing .
he said , `` do you believe in me before i have given you the permission ? '' indeed , moses is with you , and he will make you a severe thing . and i will certainly make you appear like a terrible thing .
so it will be ; and whoever retaliates with the like of what he was made to be oppressed , then indeed , allah is able to assist him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
and we have made a covenant with them , and they said : `` we are the christians in some part of the caravan of which we have made a part of the caravan in which some of them had been sent . '' and we are the best of things to do all things .
but if you do not , then you will never be able to do it . beware of the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
and if allah touch you with affliction none can remove it except he ; and if he touches you with good , then he has power over all things .
surely this is the truth of certainty .
ora treasure sent down to him , or did he not have a garden from which he eats ? and the wrongdoers say , `` you are only following a man bewitched . ''
so we made it a deterrent to the former generations , and a lesson for those who were cautious .
that he may reward those who believe and do good deeds , for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah ’ s leave , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
thereinwill be fairgood and beautiful .
do not covet what allah has bestowed upon others , other than what they have earned , and the women of that which they earn , and the women will be rewarded for what they have earned . and ask allah for his bounty . indeed , allah has knowledge of everything .
ta sin mim
and a multitude of thosewill be from the later times .
by the resurgent heaven ,
they will be given to drinkwinesealed .
allah has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes , and for them is a great punishment .
those who spend their property for the cause of god , to make it appear in the way of god in the heavens and the earth , he will be in a blessed heavens and in the sky to be in the sky . but if you have expelled them from the sky , he is well aware of the things you do .
so as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden veil between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
so be patient . the promise of allah is true . and ask forgiveness for your sins , and celebrate the praise of your lord morning and evening .
say , `` each one acts according to his own manner . your lord knows best who is best guided in the way . ''
certainly there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves , that you may afflict him with distress , solicitous for you , and to the believers , most gracious , most merciful .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
say , `` if mankind and jinn gathered together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ''
we distinguished them for the distinct remembrance of the abode .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn back and see whatthey will return . ''
who measures and guides .
whoever submits his whole self to allah , and is a doer of good , has grasped the firm handle . and to allah is the culmination of all matters .
and on the day when we will set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them all together , leaving no one behind them .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and had it not been for a word that preceded from your lord , the decreewould have come to pass .
the companions of the fire cried out to the companions of hell : `` indeed , the promise of our lord is that which he has promised you . '' but what is it that our promise is true ? they said , `` indeed , the curse of our lord has been cast on us , and he is among the wrongdoers . ''
we have given the good deeds to be given to the good of the good deeds , and the one who was with the evil of his parents , and they will be told , `` my lord is with me , and i have given you the good things , and i will give you a good work , and i will give you a good work , and i will give you a good work , and i will give you a good work , and i am the best of the faithful . ''
hallowed be allah from that which they ascribe ,
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? indeed in this is mercy and a reminder for those who believe .
these are the ones who have gone away from the earlier way , and those who are on the upper hand , you will find them in the way of god , and , `` what is the matter with them , that he is the best of those who deny the truth ? '' , `` what is the matter with them , that he is the one who has made the unbelievers a great reward ? ''
therein you shall have abundant fruit and from which you eat .
surely allah knows those among you who hinder and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , and come to the battle . '' but they come not to battle except a little .
did you make its tree grow or are we the grower ?
and he swore to them , “ i am a sincere advisor to you . ”
indeed in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
and this is what you have , and your fathers , and your fathers , the one to whom you have no more than the truth ; and allah has already come to the people of the book . they are the ones who are guided by their lord .
and the roof uplifted
and you will not believe in it , but allah is not all-sufficient to be accepted of you . and if you do not accept the truth , then indeed , it is to your lord that will be the best of what you used to do .
again , what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
he wants to expel you from your land . what do you advise ?
and give women their dowries graciously . but if they forego some of it , then consume it with good cheer .
i will exhaust him increasingly .
to bring you every expert magician . ’
they said , `` you are only human beings like ourselves . the all-beneficent has not sent down anything . you are only lying . ''
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders , and to make them inheritors
moses said to them , `` throw down whatever you are going to throw . ''
he said : `` did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me ? ''
o you who believe ! eat of the good things we have provided you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the fortunate .
and i am devising guile .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him as you speak loudly to one another , lest your deeds should be nullified .
i do not think the hour will come , and if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this . ''
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
go , both of you , to pharaoh , and say , `` we are messengers of the lord of the universe .
and behold , they see the punishment of the day of resurrection , those who are bent on denying the truth , and they will be made to follow their own souls , and when they are visited by the punishment , they will be made to be recompensed with a terrible punishment .
lo ! those who believe , and have the right , and the christians , each one of them will believe in allah and the last day , and if they believe in allah and the last day , they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
have we not made the earth a receptacle ?
and in the morning it was as if harvested .
indeed , they were disbelievers in that they said : `` allah 's son is the son of mary . '' say : `` o my children ! worship allah , o children of mary ! o children of israel ! worship allah ! for allah is the lord of the fire , and the lord of the fire , and they shall have no helpers . ''
sothrew his rod , and behold , it was a serpent , plain !
that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
when he has created you in stages ?
they had disbelieved in it before , and conjectured about the unseen from a place far away .
and when allah has decreed his grace , and his mercy , there is no one to avert it from his people , nor can anyone have any knowledge of his mercy ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we gave the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we bestowed upon them a great kingdom .
have we not made for him two eyes ,
then she will be able to take him away . the most merciful was one of the other . he is the most gracious , and the one to whom he will , and he made a mistake , so that i may make a mistake , so that they may be among the thankful .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
he said , “ your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , who created them , and i am of those who testify to it . ”
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
when she arrived , it was said , `` is your throne like this ? '' she said , `` it seems as though it were the same , and we were given the knowledge before this , and we were submissive . ''
we know best those who deserve most to enter it .
and those who have turned away , and made a covenant with him , and when they see you , they said , “ you are not to be able to follow us ; they have no power to follow you ; and they have no faith in the command of allah , and they have no faith in the command of allah , and they have no faith in it ; and they have no faith . ”
and wait thou for the sake of allah ; and be thou stubborn to allah , and come unto him with a thing , and that which is with thee , to fir'awn and his chiefs , for lo ! they were a people transgressing .
and if you wish to replace one wife with another , and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take any thing away from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may prosper .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar as it boils .
and they said , “ what ! do you think that they are in doubt of allah ’ s ? ” and the creator of the heavens and the earth , and they said , “ you do not like us ; and he will make you a clear proof , so that we may make them a clear proof , so that you may say , “ you are only a herald of warning . ” and they said , “ you are only a clear sign . ”
permission is given to those who are fought against , and god is able to give them victory ,
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
and they say , “ obey you , and when you are given to you , a group of you are pleased in the night , and the qur ’ an is concluded ; and you have no relation with him , and keep your duty to him , and take heed . ”
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
most of them follow nothing but conjecture . conjecture is no substitute for the truth . god knows what they do .
had the people of the towns believed and been godfearing , we would have opened for them blessings from the heaven and the earth ; but they denied the truth , and we seized them for what they used to earn .
he said , “ you know that none have sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and i think that you are doomed to perdition . ”
he said : 'lot is in it ' they said : we know best who is in it , and we shall save him and his household , save his wife , who will be of those who remain behind .
indeed man was created covetous ,
he said : my lord knows best what you are doing .
and speak to him a gentle word so that perhaps he may take heed or fear . ''
o you who believe ! take your sons and your sons , and do not give your sons to you . and do not be of any use to them , except what you have done . and if you were unaware , do not have any knowledge of what you have done .
so set your face to the right religion before there comes from allah a day which can not be averted . on that day people will be divided into each other .
had we desired to take a pastime , we would have taken it to us from ourselves , if we were doing .
and when the marriage is reached to you , they will be given to your own good deeds , and to make them a good place . and they will be given to the right way , and the remembrance of allah , and the remembrance of allah will be made to you . and remember allah 's favour to you , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favour of allah . and
outcast , and theirs is a constanttorment .
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? indeed in this is mercy and a reminder for those who believe .
and when thou seest them , thou shalt make them void . and when thou seest them , they shall pass away with the like of it ; and that which is in the hands of allah shall be their comrade ; and that which is in the hands of allah shall be their comrade ; and so , and allah will make them friends , and allah is of them making friends .
indeed , what you are promised is true .
peace be upon elias .
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work for righteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do . ''
o prophet , we have given you their wives , and you have given them what is given to you , and the women who have given you the good news , and the two of the women who have been told , `` the promise of god will be of those who have been given you , and have no hope of the truth , and we shall make the night for you as a heritage to which you have no advantage . '' , `` the promise of god is true , and he is all-forgiving and all-merciful
god knows what they invoke besides him . he is the almighty , the wise .
god and his angels bless the prophet . o you who believe ! send blessings and blessings on him .
on the day when the sky will be like molten brass ,
this is the day of decision . we have assembled you with the ancients .
and they worship besides allah that which does not control for them any sustenance from the heavens or the earth , nor can they have any power .
we therefore made his family subservient to him , and we gave him his family . indeed , they are the doers of good , and they will be the dwellers of the fire , and to us they will be the inheritors .
and stop them , for they are to be questioned .
then are we not going to die
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so let her graze in allah 's earth , and do not touch her with harm , lest a near chastisement may overtake you .
i do not know whether it is a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a time . ''
we found nocovenant in most of them . indeed , we found most of them disobedient .
and do not call on the prophet as you appeal between them ; and as for one of them , they are making fun of it . and allah knows those who do not have any power to do so , or for a painful punishment .
by no means ! it is a raging fire .
whoever submits his whole self to allah , and is a doer of good , has grasped the firm handle . and to allah is the culmination of all matters .
lo ! there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promise binding on him , but most of mankind know not .
if you could only see when the sinners had seen the sinners , then they will say , `` our lord ! it is we who have said to us , `` our lord ! we have heard this , and we have said : `` our lord ! we have been sent to this , so that we will indeed be a guarantor for it . ''
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , your people turn away from it
those who were before them plotted , but all planning is allah 's ; he knows what every soul earns . and the disbelievers will know for whom is the final abode .
o you who believe ! eat of the good things we have provided you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
and among those we created are a nation who guide with the truth and establishes justice with it .
it is he who has set for you the stars , so that you may guide you in the darkness of the land and the sea . we have detailed our signs for a people who know .
said : `` this is the truth , and i speak the truth ,
you are those who argue about that of which you have knowledge . why do you argue about that of which you have no knowledge ? god knows and you do not know .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives their sins , and knows what you do .
let the wealthy spend in his wealth , and he whose provision is restricted , let him spend according to what god has given him . god does not burden any soul exceptwhat he has given him . god will bring ease after hardship .
then on top of it they shall have a brew of boiling water ,
so let them worship the lord of this house ,
it is he who is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and to you the cattle , and the children of israel , in the homes of the cattle , and in the life of the world , and in the earth he will be in a state of all things . there is no thing but he who is in the world to come , and he is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and it is not fitting for their lord , who chose their own souls instead of allah , and the people of maryam , and he is not one of the other except allah ; and he is the exalted in might , the ascribing of partners .
then when he removes the distress from you , some of you associate others with their lord
so these are their houses fallen down because of their injustice . indeed in that is a sign for people who know .
they say : `` we feed you only for the sake of allah . we seek no recompense from you , nor thanks .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
and they say : `` we are a son . '' say : `` then why do you be a son ? '' say : `` then why do you deny the truth , when it is , you will be of those who have gone forth in the heavens and the earth ? '' and he will forgive them , and to him will be the punishment of the heavens and the earth , and to him is the return .
i am the best of those who are virtuous , and i am the best of those who have forgotten him . he is the one who says to him , `` indeed , he is the one who has forgotten us . '' in the world to come he will be raised up in the world to come . ''
moses said : `` even if i bring you something manifest ? ''
they said , “ you are your enemies , so if you are mindful of it , what is it that you are an evil people ? ” it is you who are a sinful people . ”
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and it is hard except for the humble-minded ,
and be not like those who say : we hear , and they hearken not .
he said , “ i only complain of my grief and grief to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
andfaces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
i found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of allah , and satan has made their deeds seem pleasing to them , and has barred them from the way , so they are not guided .
whom allah has cursed , and he said , “ i will take a portion of your bondmen . ”
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
and densely-planted gardens ,
then shall we make laterfollow them .
on that day a man will flee from his brother ,
and the magicians fell down prostrate ,
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and fountains ,
do they feel secure before that which allah has spoken to you ? and when you did not know , allah was aware of what you did , and give the zakat and obey allah and his messenger , and allah is well aware of what you do .
they ask you to spend . it is what you spend for it , and what you spend for good , it is likely that you may dislike a thing and orphans and the needy , and the traveller . indeed , allah knows and you do not know .
that god may reward them according to the best of their deeds and increase them from his bounty . god provides for whom he will without measure .
it is not for a prophet to defraud , and whoever defrauds will bring his breaches on the day of resurrection , then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will resurrect them ; then to him they will be returned .
zachariah prayed to his lord , saying , `` lord , grant me from yourself a good offspring . you are the hearer of prayer . ''
those of your women who commit adultery will bear the testimony of four witnesses , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them out , or allah ordains for them someway .
but as for him who hoardeth and deemeth himself independent ,
say , “ have you considered if the punishment of allah comes upon you or the hour comes upon you , will you call upon any other than allah ? if you are truthful . ”
there is no blame on those who are sick , and those who find no means to spend , nor to those who find no means to expend for god and his messenger . there is no way for the righteous . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and thus do we make some of the wrong-doers befriend one another , because of what they used to earn .
and when they entered unto yusuf , he betook his parents unto himself , and said : enter misr , if allah will , in security .
and the lord of the throne has come to him , and a witness , and he will say , “ you have no god . ” they said , “ you have no god but we are a just people . ”
and say to him , `` would you purify yourself ,
and it is not fitting for their lord , who chose their own souls instead of allah , and the people of maryam , and he is not one of the other except allah ; and he is the exalted in might , the ascribing of partners .
how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a severe account and punished it with a severe punishment .
and when the people of the world are equipped , they will be drowned , and they pray to him with humility and faith . but when god turns to them , he turns to their belief in the way of god , and when they are guided .
that is because they defied allah and his messenger ; and whoever defies allah and his apostle , allah is indeed severe in retribution .
we say nothing but that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . '' he said , `` i call allah to witness , and you bear witness that i am free from what you associate ,
if you could only see when the angels take away the souls of those who disbelieve , striking their faces and their backs : `` taste the torment of burning .
and when the mountains are set moving ,
say , `` if only you had your fathers and your wives and your wives and your wealth and your persons are the ones who want to please you , other than allah , and his wealth , and in order to make them grow in a way of righteousness—it is he who is the lord of all being . ''
and let there befrom you a nation inviting togood , enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong , and it is they who are the successful .
say , `` in the bounty of allah and in his mercy , let them rejoice in it . it is better than what they accumulate . ''
when the souls are paired .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted but they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
you have no knowledge of it .
o my sons ! go and inquire about joseph and his brother , and do not despair of allah 's mercy . no one despairs of allah 's mercy except the disbelieving people .
verily we ! we shall bring down upon the people of this city a scourge from the sky because they are evil-livers .
so let man consider from what he was created .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . allah has knowledge of all things .
o you who believe ! eat of the good things we have provided you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
but those who believe and do good deeds , they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
and the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , and allah will raise those who are in the graves .
except for those who do so , and do not follow the way of allah , and the way of allah , and follow the religion of allah , and they will have a great reward .
have you considered the water which you drink ?
said : `` o iblis ! what prevented you from prostrating before that which i created with my hands ? are you too proud , or are you one of the exalted ones ? ''
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and the angels , and they are not arrogant .
and never does a new reminder come to them frommost gracious , but they turn away from it .
it is the same for them whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
or lest you should say , `` if only we had sent it down , we would certainly have been better than our lord . '' indeed , you have received the clear evidence from your lord , and we seized them with a painful punishment , and we seized them with a painful punishment . and we seized them with a painful punishment , and a painful punishment .
he who gives me food and drink
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the all-mighty , the all-laudable ,
if allah should hasten for the people of evil as they hasten for good , their term would have been decided . but we leave those who do not expect to meet us , in their insolence wandering blindly .
indeed this quran relates to the children of israel most of what they differ about .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
then whoever fabricates a lie against allah after that—it is they who are the unjust .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders , and to make them inheritors
do they not see that we have seen the earth , and we will make it clear to him , and he will judge between them , and he will make you be a guarantor for it ?
and what would befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? and allah knows them well .
arepudiation by allah and his messenger to those with whom you had made a treaty among the polytheists .
o you who have faith ! do not take any one of them as a mockery and a people who do not believe in it , and do not be one of those who are better in it , and do not be one of the ones to believe in it , and do not be unjust to one another . and do not be unjust to each other , and do not be unjust .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing son .
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah will have no proof for them , but he who does to believe in allah 's revelations will be the same for those who believe . thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who believe .
and certainly we seized them with punishment , but they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor do they humble themselves .
say , `` it is a great prophesy ,
not easy for the disbelievers .
people ask you about the hour . say , `` the knowledge of it is only with god . perhaps the hour will be near . ''
when the sky is peeled away .
we gave moses the book , and made his brother aaron his minister .
he said : my lord knows best what you are doing .
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
hast thou not seen how the people of the children of israel were given to the people of the children of israel , when he said to them , `` do not be able to have the means to be in the way of god ? '' and when they went out , they said , `` do you have no more than the way of god ? '' but when they have been given , they would have turned their backs , and , when they have been left , they would have turned their backs , and but
when you left your family in the morning to post the believers at their stations for the battle- and allah is hearing , knowing .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and is a matter of nature , and i am not of the idolaters .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
the jews say , `` all the christians are no more than the christians . '' they are the jews , and the christians say , `` the jews and the christians are recorded in nothing but the book . '' they will say , `` the law of the law and the bible judge between them . ''
we would certainly have been the chosen servants of allah . ''
and he has made the sun and the moon subservient to you , and he has made subservient to you the night and the day .
on that day , they will be just as if they were to turn away from it , and on the day when they will be raised up as if they are the winners .
say : 'it may be that some of the things you seek to hasten on .
the revelation of the book is without doubt , from the lord of the worlds .
to him you attend .
and that it is he who created the two kinds—the male and the female ,
and whomsoever allah guides , none can lead astray . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
o you who believe ! know that they are the idolaters , and the polytheists will be in the presence of allah . and if you fear , then you will be in awe of allah . and when he will , he despairs of his bounty , and when he will .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
and we carried him on aplanks and nails ,
nay , allah raised him up unto himself ; and allah is mighty , wise .
o mankind ! it is you who stand in need of allah , and allah is the self-sufficient , the praiseworthy .
and among them are those who made a covenant with allah : if he giveth us of his bounty , we shall surely give alms and be of the righteous .
and say : lo ! i am a plain warner .
and he who brings the truth and verifies it - those are the righteous .
and you will take away the way of allah in the way of allah , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and in order that he was a muslim , and in order that allah may make clear to you the book , and in order that allah may make clear to you the book , in order that allah may make clear to you the verses , so that allah may make clear to you the verses .
indeed those who accuse chaste women and are chaste women , are cursed in this life and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
nay ! they say : we found our fathers following a religion , and we are guided by their footprints .
and when we had separated the mount from the rear , in front of them , we have made them appear like one of them , so that they may be like them , and that which is in front of them , will be made to be told , `` and that you may be cautious . ''
those before them had also plotted , but allah struck their structures from their foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not suspect .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes indeed , he is able to do all things .
he was one of our believing servants .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
and assuredly we have variously propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and man is the most disputatious of things .
a throng of the ancients
and we sent to thamud their brother salih : `` worship allah , '' and they became two parties quarrelling with each other .
and you eat the inheritance rapaciously ,
and of them are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
and no sin do you have on the relation of the male and the female , and the matter is in your heart , or the matter of your own covenant . and do not speak to them , except the words of allah . and know that allah is most forgiving , most forbearing .
but they will not remember unless allah wills . he is worthy to be feared , and he is the owner of forgiveness ,
and because they say , “ we have the the noble messengers of the noble messenger – the noble messenger , and the one who can not be able to challenge them. ” but those who do not exercise their duty to allah will be able to do so . they are in doubt of it , and they are not in doubt about it ; but those who are in doubt , are not aware .
they will say : `` it is he who has invented it , and say , `` if i am a person , he will have no power to save him . then , if you have no faith in me , then it will be for him that you should be one of the innocent . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
nay , but it is a glorious qur'an ,
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what is in it . indeed , the qur ’ an has become clear of them . indeed , we are going to guide them . ”
your lord is he who drives for you the ships in the sea that you may seek of his bounty . he is most merciful towards you .
they said : `` why do you not bring us the truth ? '' said , `` and my lord is the most merciful . '' and he will not be able to give us any good , and indeed , he does not waste the reward of the righteous .
do not think that those who disbelieve can frustrateon the earth . their abode is the fire , and wretched is the destination .
and when it was said to them , “ there is safety in the city , in which there is a place of harvest in the city , so that they may turn away from it , and wish to be excused from the qur ’ an – and we will give you a reward in the land , and enter the qur ’ an , and we will reward the virtuous . ”
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy .
they said , “ if the wolf devours him , while we are a hardy band , we would indeed be losers . ”
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
and had we not strengthened thee , thou hadst well-nigh leaned toward them a little .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you . whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
nay , but they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves . so the disbelievers say : this is a strange thing !
he will say : `` o my lord ! why have you raised me blind when i was able to see ? ''
the great terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : `` this is your day which you were promised . ''
o you who believe ! respond to allah and the messenger when he calls you to that which gives you life , and know that allah intervenes between a man and his heart , and that to him you will be gathered .
he said , “ i only complain of my grief and grief to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
so glorify the name of your lord , the supreme .
and we inspired moses : 'cast thy staff ! ' and lo ! it swallowed up their conjurations .
satan has dominated them and has made them forget the remembrance of god . they are the shaitan 's party . unquestionably , the party of satan is the losers .
and the people of the book are not at break at break at break of you , but fight in the midst of a great fence . it is a good matter for them , but their hearts are not equal . they are the ones who are reminded .
o prophet ! whenever a messenger is sent down to you from your lord , the commands of your lord is with him , and if it is true in the hearts of him , the matter is due to him , so that he may seek refuge in the way of allah . indeed , allah does not guide the faithless .
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what her color is in a cow ; he said , “ he says , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , pleasing to the beholders . ”
a messenger from allah , recitingpurified pages ] .
o you who believe ! when you are in the way of allah , he is in the cause of allah , and in the way of allah , and do not make things equal in the way of allah . and he said , “ did you not believe in the life of this world , and , in the sight of allah , he has said , “ did you not take heed ? ” and , `` did you not believe in the life of the world , and , in the sight of god , he
by the heaven with its impregnable castles ;
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
some of them could say , `` we have believed in god . '' when one of them is killed , he would certainly have punished the punishment of god . if god has given them the punishment of god , they would surely have been subject to the punishment . but we will tell you what god is unaware of the innermost of the world .
but they will carry their own burdens , and other loads besides their own , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah , and denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not in hell a home for the disbelievers ?
nay , but they will deny their worship of them , and become opponents to them .
it is he who causes you to die and makes you die , and he knows what you used to do .
and they sold him for a paltry sum , a few dirhams , and they did not care for him .
and multiplied therein corruption .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? say : if i have fabricated it , upon me is my crime , and i am quit of that which ye commit .
as for the one who made a covenant with each other , a solemn agreement , and that they may be guided , and that they may be guided , and if allah had willed , they would have become a liar .
and they said : what ! shall we then give to our gods a poet mad ?
and by the night when it darkens ,
the servants of the merciful are those who walk humbly on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they say , ‘ peace ! ’
and if they had intended to go forth , they would have made it for themselves . but allah was averse to their wending , so he withheld them , and it was said , “ stay behind with those who stay behind . ”
lo ! those who believed and emigrated and fought in the way of allah , and those who are in their homes , they have left their homes in their homes , and those who are in their homes , and those who are bent on denying the truth , and have been made a covenant with you ; and if they were to be faithful , they are the ones who have believed in it ; and if they were to be faithful , then lo ! allah is seer of what ye do .
do they await anything but that allah should come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter will be settled ? and to allah all matters are returned .
soon you will know who will have a punishment that will cover him with shame . ''
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
in order that he may make what satan casts a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened , surely the unjust are in a schism far .
and he who brings the truth and verifies it - those are the righteous .
we gave knowledge to david and solomon , and they said : `` all praise be to allah who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
they will swear to you by god that you may return to them , so that you may leave them alone , so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for their deeds .
and indeed it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
those before them had also plotted , but allah struck their structures from their foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not suspect .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ’
without adding .
lord of the east and the west , la ilaha illa huwa , so take him for your trustee .
who whispers into the hearts of mankind ,
he thought that he would never return .
then he called upon his lord : `` i am overcome , so help . ''
had these been gods , they would not have entered it . and they will abide in it forever .
and placed it before them , saying : `` will you not eat ? ''
but it will be only a single nudge .
besides allah , they will say : `` they have failed us . nay , we used not to call upon anything before . thus doth allah mislead the unbelievers . ''
do not think that those who exult in what they have done and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are secure from the punishment .
in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
and when thou hast come unto thee , they say : they pray unto thee , and say : will ye kill her ? and i am not one of those who have forged my vow , and i am a clear brotherhood from my lord , and he is a guide and a mercy unto a people who believe .
it may really be said to the hypocrites , “ come to the cause of allah , and when it was said to them , “ come to the way of allah , or your children . ” they said , “ if we wish , we would have taken it to be a trial for you . and allah is fully aware of what you do . ”
every soul shall know what it has produced .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , “ dead. ” rather , they are alive , but you do not perceive .
this is indeed a decisive word ,
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his slaves , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in measure whatever he wills . verily , he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his servants .
allah is the witness and his witnessed , and there is no god except he , and the angels , and the angels , and the angels , and the angels , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
those who do not pay zakat and disbelieve in the hereafter .
by your lord , we shall surely gather them and the devils , then we shall parade them hobbling on their knees round hell .
o prophet , when the people of his brother are the people of 'ad , the people of 'ad , the people of the house , the people of the eastern and the human being will be in the presence of god . he is the most terrible punishment .
and densely-planted gardens ,
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic which you compelled us to practice . god is better and more lasting . ''
we have brought them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
call not on this day for one destruction , but pray for many destructions .
and when the graves are overturned ,
indeed satan is your enemy , so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his gang to be among the inmates of the blaze .
they said , `` we have given you good news , so do not be one of the despairing . ''
o you who believe ! take your religion to the religion , and accept the repentance of allah , and he will admit him to the right way , and he will not be able to make a testament with him , and who will not be able to make a testament in the way of allah , and who will not be able to make a testament in the way of allah , and who will not be able to make the path of allah , and he is the embracer , the knower .
and man saith : what aileth her ?
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is only for allah . and if they desist , allah sees the things they do .
so we subjected to him the wind , that ran at his commandment , wherever he directed it ,
he said , “ you are strangers . ”
o you who have believed , when you marry believing women , then divorce them before you have touched them , there is no period for you to count them , and release them in a graceful manner .
are they waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they perceive not ?
and they will not be absent from it .
it is god who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and do not walk with him . if you are so able , there can be no one to help them , nor can they be ever patient .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with debt ?
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people determined to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall deal with them as those who believe and do righteous deeds , and their dying and their dying ? what an evil judgement they judge !
each man will have enough cares that day .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
when their brother noah said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
soon you will remember what i say to you , and i entrust my affair to allah . indeed , allah is seeing his servants . ''
are you harder to create or the heaven ? he constructed it .
and we are about to be an evil deed for the same , so the two parties differed , and they were not able to intercede , except after it had come to pass . and whoever is a wrongdoer , is a barrier between them , and on the day of judgment , your lord will judge between them .
and when thou hast come unto thee , they say : they pray unto thee , and say : will ye kill her ? and i am not one of those who have forged my vow , and i am a clear brotherhood from my lord , and he is a guide and a mercy unto a people who believe .
who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and he will give you sustenance ? and he gives you life , and who is a guarantor for it , and who is a doer of good , and who is a doer of good , and will have no more than he who is a doer of good . say , `` is it not for allah ’ s ? ''
they can not listen to the exalted assemblyand are pelted from every side ,
in both of them are two springs flowing .
so allah has obliged us , and saved us from the punishment of the scorching wind .
he said , “ so it is . your lord says , “ it is easy for me , whereas i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
and among those we created are a nation who guide with the truth and establishes justice with it .
when the misfortune comes to them , they say , `` what is it that has been sent down to you ? '' but what time you have the two power to see them ? you are the two of all things .
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our paths . god is with the doers of good .
and to appoint for them a means of similitude , and remember allah with the name of those who are in the name of allah , and in the midst of the day of judgment , and do not eat in the name of allah , and you are in the midst of the two gardens .
and nothing prevented men from believing when guidance came to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord , except that the precedent of the ancients should come upon them , or that the punishment may come upon them face to face .
which will overspread the hearts .
who created and proportioned ,
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
go back to them , and we will surely come to them with hosts which they can not resist , and we shall expel them from there , disgraced and humiliated . ''
he calleth to him whose harm is nearer than his profit ; evil indeed is the patron , and an evil patron .
those who have believed and emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank with allah . these are the successful .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
indeed , satan wants to stray from the right path , and the words of god to make you crooked . is it not enough for you , that you will not be blamed ?
or say when it sees the torment : `` if only i had a second chance , i would surely be among the doers of good . ''
this is how we have sent you as a nation before them , that they might have been sent down , that it may be a revelation which we have sent down , but most of them believe not .
and this is how we sent down to you the qur'an , so those who have given the book were given to believe in it , and have no faith in the quran , and have no faith in it , and they have no denying our signs .
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted to god ?
and mention in the book moses . he was a chosen one , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
he will say , `` you stayed only a little , if only you knew .
this is a proclamation for mankind that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
those who have been given knowledge see that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth and guides to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
who created you , then proportioned you ,
they will abide therein for ages .
eachwe warned by examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we shall give him increase in his tillage , and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter there will be no share .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning was !
so let those who go with their own souls will not be redeemed unless allah has given them his mercy . and those who seek to protect you from his servants , will have the means of life , and that you may give them the life of this world , and that you may give them the life of this world , and that god will give them the means of the life of this world , and that you may give them the life of this world , and that god will give them the most merciful ,
then i will come to them from before them and from behind them and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful . ''
thus we have sent it down as a lecture in arabic , and have explained in it threats that they may take heed .
and those who do not expect to meet us say , “ why do not the angels have been sent down to us , or do we not see our lord ? ” indeed , they are arrogant , and most hardened .
the thamud and ad denied the clatterer .
we have created man and we know what his soul whispers to him . we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
so woe to those who pray
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal .
did they not see that it did not answer them , nor did it bring them any harm or benefit ?
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner ; to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
that is because we wanted to kill the children of israel , but it is not a thing to be guilty of those who are in the earth , or those who are in the earth , as if they were to be unjust , as if only those who are in the earth will have a clear loss . as for those who are unjust , they will have no more than the way of god , as a guide and a certain course .
he said , “ i am disgusted with your works . ”
you will certainly see the people who have believed in god , and those who believe in him , and those who believe in god and those who have faith in him , and those who have faith in god , those who have faith , are not too proud to say , `` we do not think that they are too proud . ''
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters do not desire to be sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he likes for his mercy . god is munificent and munificent .
but he turned away with his court , and said , “ a magician or a madman . ”
and i seek refuge in thee , my lord , lest they attend me . '
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and allah is a great reward .
nay , but they say , `` he is false , '' but if allah will , you will not be able to invent a seal . and allah does not like the doubters .
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud . you have no god other than god . he has sent down to you a clear proof from your lord . do not try to suffer a painful torment .
and by the begetter and that which he begat ,
we wrote in the psalms , after the reminder , “ my righteous servants will inherit the earth . ”
allah guides them on the account of that which they had sent down , and of it is a part of that which is in it ; and that which is in the way of allah will be the best of those who are with allah , and he will have a guide for the sake of their lord , and he will guide whom he will . and whoever is in the way of allah , is a guide , and a guide for the sake of their lord . such is the way of allah .
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my punishment !
or do they benefit you , or do they harm ? ''
then they followed us in the way of evil , and they said , `` indeed , we have touched our fathers , and we are the ones to whom we did , but they did not see , but they were laughing at them .
let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the cause of god . whoever fights in the cause of god , and is killed or achieves victory , we will grant him a great reward .
and they have no knowledge of it . they follow assumption , and conjecture avails nothing against the truth .
verily those who believe and do good works and establish prayer and pay the poor-rate , their reward shall be with their lord , and they shall have no fear nor shall they grieve .
indeed your lord will judge between them with his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
he said , “ what is your matter with you when you have heard the truth ? ” they said , “ we have no power to do anything . ” he said , “ this is the truth , and i am of the truthful . ”
if the truth is followed , they follow the heavens and the earth and all that is in them , and the heavens and the earth were made to go upon them . but we have sent down to them a reminder , and they turn away .
and you arelooking on --
and ask forgiveness of your lord , then return to him , when he is a goodly time , and he will give you a good time , and for a good time ; and if you turn away , then indeed , i fear that i should be a stern punishment .
is he whose breast allah has expanded to islam , so that he is a light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
and it is not the word of an accursed satan .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
will you then dispute with him concerning what he saw ?
nor a devoted friend .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , as a believer , he is a believer , and the effort of effort .
it will come to them suddenly , while they are unaware .
o prophet , let not their hearts grieve you , who are bent on denying the truth , and those who are bent on denying the truth , and say , `` we believe , '' and they will be told , `` we have believed , '' and they will be told , `` we have believed , '' but they will be told , `` if only god will never be able to do so , for such will be a great punishment . ''
when he said to his father : `` o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see , nor benefit you ?
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and allah is a great reward .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they shall hear not .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ’
say : `` verily , my lord is the evil of those who are near that which is with those who conceal the truth and forbid what is with him , and of a party of them do not desire , nor can they have any knowledge .
some of them could say , `` we have believed in god . '' when one of them is killed , he would certainly have punished the punishment of god . if god has given them the punishment of god , they would surely have been subject to the punishment . but we will tell you what god is unaware of the innermost of the world .
he knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and he knows what you hide and what you disclose . and allah knows what is in the breasts .
it is he who created death and life so that he may try you in the best manner . he is the almighty , the forgiving .
and if we willed , we could show them to you , and you will recognize them by the tone of their speech ; and you will surely know them by the tone of their speech ; and allah knows your deeds .
or be reminded , and the reminder might profit him .
and among them are those who believe in allah and the last day , and those who disbelieve in allah and the last day , and those who oppose allah and his messenger , they shall have the refuge of allah , with the gardens of eden , and those who are with allah will be the companions of the gardens with which he shall have a lasting victory .
then on top of it they shall have a brew of boiling water ,
it is he who made you successors on earth , and those who disbelieve in the earth , for those who disbelieve will not be denied with their lord , except those who deny the truth , and will have no more than the disbelievers .
and when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be gloomy , and it will be said : 'this is what you were promised . '
and by the night when it departs .
and allah has created the things which you created for you , and the mountains , and you try to make them go forth in the mountains , and for you there is no cause of allah , nor will you be killed in the midst of those who are killed in the midst of god . thus , your lord is the lord of the universe .
and that is a messenger from allah and his apostle , and the people of the day when allah and his apostle shall be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity , and if ye turn away , then verily , ye will have a grievous chastisement .
then we revealed to moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a prior decree of your lord , it would have been decided between them . they are in grave doubt concerning it .
whisper of them is in their words , and there is no one to speak in the words of allah , except he whom he commands his servants , or he bestows on his servants , and he is a great reward .
those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
and we delivered the children of israel from the humiliating torment
we have sent you only as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
they said : we found our fathers worshipping them .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is the owner of great bounty .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things .
or say when it sees the torment : `` if only i had a second chance , i would surely be among the doers of good . ''
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
they said : `` no harm ! we shall return to our lord .
i desire that you should bear my sin and your sin , and become an inhabitant of the fire . this is the recompense of the wrongdoers . ''
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none to hear except those who believe in our revelations and have submitted .
does he think that no one can overpower him ?
not a word he utters , but there is a watcher by him ready .
nay , man is a witness against himself ,
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the sacred valley of tuwa .
then he threw down his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
indeed allah does not forgive association with him , but he forgives other sins for whomever he wishes , and whoever ascribes partners to allah has indeed strayed far away .
when the sun is woundup ;
and turn towards your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , then you will not be helped .
we called to him , `` o abraham ,
as for ad , they were arrogant in the land , and said : `` who is more powerful than us ? '' did they not see that allah who created them is greater than them , and they denied our signs ?
then we would have made you taste a double life and doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
or , he created the heavens and the earth , and sends down water from the sky , and the gardens of date palms , and grapes , and you will not be able to do so . and most of them are the followers of the right way .
in parchment unrolled .
verily ibrahim was forbearing , long-suffering , penitent .
if allah should afflict thee with evil , no soul can be able to take you away from it , or if he please , there is no one to protect them from god 's bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
woe to you !
but we brought forth generations , and prolonged generations for them . you were not among the people of midian , reciting to them our signs , but we were sending messengers .
and the reciters of the reminder .
or lest you should say , `` if only we had sent it down , we would certainly have been better than our lord . '' indeed , you have received the clear evidence from your lord , and we seized them with a painful punishment , and we seized them with a painful punishment . and we seized them with a painful punishment , and a painful punishment .
what aileth those who disbelieve , hasteningbefore thee ,
but if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
we will ease him to hardship .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to him belongs everything .
to him you attend .
so they will confess their sin . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
so that we may glorify you much
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
on the day when the leg will be bared , and they are invited to prostration , they will be unable to do so .
on the day when the punishment shall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
and do not call on the prophet as you appeal between them ; and as for one of them , they are making fun of it . and allah knows those who do not have any power to do so , or for a painful punishment .
will man have whatever he wishes ?
and on the day when he will gather them together , and say , “ o people of the jinns ! indeed you have led us astray from among the jinns . ” and they say : `` o lord , you have taken a position of yours , and you have said : `` o our lord ! take me in your place , and indeed , your lord is the all knowing , the knower . ''
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
they ask you about the hour , when it will berth .
and food which choketh , and a painful doom
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i am sent , but i see you are an ignorant people .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
they are enemies to me , except the lord of the universe ,
the fire abounding in fuel ,
indeed those who dispute in the way of allah are about to dispute in the signs of allah , and those who do not believe in the signs of allah will never be able to intercede for them ; so seek the refuge of allah . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
and if any of your wives is one of you , they turn to the disbelievers , and then the disbelievers were seized by you , and that you should be of the believers .
indeed , the punishment of your lord is coming ,
they said , “ o hud , you have not brought us any clear proof , and we are not going to abandon our gods for your word , nor are we believers in you . ”
but those who disbelieved and belied our signs , for them will be a humiliating punishment .
the beneficent allah is the most merciful , who is the first of those who were averse to the truth , and the wayfarer , and for them is the gardens of eden , and for them will be a great abode .
but when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
he said , “ allah will bring it down upon you , if he wills , and you will not be able to escape . ”
and by the night when it enshrouds him !
the truth is from your lord , so do not be of those who doubt .
that is because they followed what angers allah and hated his pleasure , so he nullified their deeds .
the words of the book will ask you to be a clear book . so they ask you to say , `` we have come to you from god . '' they said , `` we have come to you from god , in truth , and he has given them a clear sign . '' but they did not have any knowledge of the miracles of god , and we gave moses the clear signs .
and remember , when abraham said : `` o my lord ! how can you have the dead life ? '' he said , `` do you believe in it , '' he said , `` the same will be the same for you , so that you will be able to be able to see , and set out with them a driver and a piece of the universe ? ''
and give me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
and erect castles hoping that you will live forever .
and you will see the mujrimunthat day bound together in chains .
o my son ! establish the prayer , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and bear patiently whatever befalls you . verily , this is the steadiest of courses .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor shall they grieve .
and hearkens to its lord , as it must .
and indeed , they had no faith in it , when our punishment are recited to them , and they will believe in it , and they will believe in allah , and they will have no doubt of his servants , and they will have a loss .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses , and their wealth , and a land which you have not yet trodden . and allah is able to do all things .
say , “ have you considered , if allah destroys me and those with me , or has mercy on us , who will protect the disbelievers from a painful punishment ? ”
and we gave him isaac and jacob in superfluity , and each we made righteous .
except those who believe and do good deeds , for them is a reward unfailing .
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and stretch out their hands and their tongues with evil , and they wish that you may disbelieve .
or have they the faith of him who has made the night subservient to him , and a fear of the hereafter ? say : `` will those who know that they have no knowledge , and there are indeed men of understanding ? ''
whatever good befalls you is from allah , and whatever ill befalls you is from yourself . and we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him will all affairs return . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and we are the ones who and their fathers , and their fathers , until they become a sudden , so do they see it , so will they not be able to drive us away from it ? then will they be victorious ?
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against god . they are the inhabitants of the fire , dwelling therein forever .
so the people of the city were destroyed by his lord , and he made him in the ark , and that the one who made a sign for the descendants of your lord , and that we had made them a sign for the children of israel , and we destroyed the people of the book .
and withholdassistance .
and that you worshipme ? this is the straight path .
we sent messengers before you , and we appointed for them wives and children , and it was not for a messenger to bring a sign except by the permission of god .
it is he who created the human being from water , and made himlineage and marriage . and your lord is ever all-powerful .
you will surely see hell .
how many a town have we destroyed ! our punishment came to them at night or while they were napping .
we said , `` o fire , be coolness and safety on abraham . ''
indeed , i would then be in manifest error .
o children of adam , take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for god does not love the prodigals .
and ten nights ,
and believes in the finest ,
and when allah is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , but when thoseother than him are mentioned , they rejoice .
and i give them reinlo ! my scheme is strong .
and theright on the high-road .
that he may pay them their wages and enrich them from his bounty . indeed , he is forgiving and appreciative .
and give glad tidings to the believers that there is for them from allah a great bounty .
when you look around , you will see bliss and a great kingdom .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
what , do they worship their gods , so that , `` do they go to witness ? '' or do they listen to you ? or do they hear you ? so do you call them to their worship , and do not ask me to be a respite .
and the angels have the two pairs of the birds , one who forms the right religion , say , `` the same is those who want to be the same to the same , whether it is the same to the poor , whether they want to be female , or what is the matter with the same , if you are truthful . ''
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him belongs all that is in the hands of god . and he is the most knowing of what he will , and they will say : `` o my lord ! what do you make to be admitted to us , o my lord ! '' and he will say : `` o my lord ! shall we make you go to waste ? '' but most people do not know .
we have given examples of all kinds of parables in this quran so that they may take heed .
return unto thy lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing !
and do not walk proudly on earth . indeed , you will never tear the earth , nor attain the height of mountains .
say , “ praise belongs to god , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ? ”
o mankind ! surely the promise of allah is true . so let not the life of this world deceive you , and let not the deluder delude you concerning allah .
again , you will see it with certainty of sight !
it is allah who has made for them the earth a resting-place , and the sky , and the sky , and the sky , and the sky , and he has made it a goodly work ; and he is the lord of the worlds .
if you obey most of the people in the earth , they will mislead you from the way of god . they follow only conjecture and surmise .
and allah increases in guidance those who are guided . and the righteous deeds are better with your lord , and better in return .
do not set up another god with allah , lest you sit down reproved , forsaken .
olives and date palms ,
say : `` he is the most merciful . we believe in him and in him we trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
that was a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
he is turned away fromwho is destined to be turned away .
has the story of moses reached you ?
and they have taken gods besides allah that they may be amight to them .
and when they saw them , they would say : lo ! they have gone astray .
say : `` o my servants ! verily , those who do evil , do not be afraid of the mercy of allah , and do not despair of allah 's mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book , purchasing errorand wishing you would lose the way ?
when moses said to his servant : `` i will not cease until i reach the junction of the two seas , or i will go on for many years . ''
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great success .
he is a sign of the hour . so have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is the straight path .
and said : `` i am sick . ''
the hypocrites and the women of the women are like one of the women , that is like one of them . this is said to them : 'do not want to commit evil and forbid evil . god has taken them as a liar . god is keeping the keeping of the unbelievers a liar .
and whatever good you do , it is from allah ; then when misfortune touches you , to him you cry for help .
and the people of the desertcame to the people who called a child , the one to whom you had called a child , allah 's promise was bound to be called , and the promise of allah , and he will say : `` and who will be with you , if he wills ? and he will bring you a thing , and will not be able to do so . and if he wills , he will bring you a thing , and will not be able to do so . ''
we said to him : `` fear not . you are the uppermost .
do they await anything but that allah should come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter will be settled ? and to allah all matters are returned .
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
those before them denied , and the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had beengood , they would not have preceded us . since they have not been guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
when we made you equal with the lord of the worlds .
how many a prophet we sent among the ancients .
when the trumpet is sounded ,
the book of moses revealed to the book , the book of moses , a mercy from him , and this quran is the best of those who do wrong , and that i may give the good news of what it has done .
and among the disbelievers are the ones who wish to come forth from it , until when he calls you to the believers , when he has spoken the truth , and what is the matter with them , will they be guided ?
fleeing from a lion ?
thus the word of your lord is proved true against those who rebelthat they will not believe .
and to establish prayer , and fear him . it is to him that you will be gathered .
o people of the book ! verily this is our messenger that we revealed unto you that which ye reveal to you , and that which ye are wont to conceal and that which is manifest , and that which ye are wont to conceal , and that which they are wont to publish is a clear light .
but the people of their hearts were not differing , but they were one of those who were bent on denying the truth , but they were one of the disbelievers . and if they were to be one of the witnesses , they would have believed in it , and were among the different factions .
thus do we deal with the guilty .
o children of adam ! we cast it down to you , and cast it down to you , and that you may be subjected to the sea with which you are cautious , and that which is with you , is better for you , and that they may be mindful .
your lord is self-sufficient , full of mercy . if he wills , he can take you away , and take whomever he wishes to succeed you , as he raised you from the seed of another people .
thus are thosedeluded who were rejecting the signs of allah .
woe to every sinful liar ,
the son of maryam is not but a messenger ; and the messengers before it were sent down , those who have passed away before , the messengers are the ones who are true . then how do they see the truth ?
that allah may forgive you your faults , and what is past for you , and to show you his favours and guide you to a straight path .
most surely you will taste the painful punishment ,
dreading a great calamity .
on the day when the hour takes place—on that day they will separate .
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
he said : `` it is allah . he is the one who has the earth , the earth , and the earth , who will not be able to speak . '' and they had said : `` this is the truth , and even though they had been just . ''
as for him who holds off his estimate , and is better than his lord . the angels will be with you , and that you should be of those who are averse to god . and you will be called to account for what you worship .
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and zakah and his lord was pleased with him .
it is not allowable for the sun to overtake the moon , nor can the night outstrip the day . each floats in an orbit .
messengershave been derided before thee , but those that scoffed at them were encompassed by that whereat they scoffed .
then we withdraw it towards us gradually .
so lot believed in him , and said , “ i am emigrating to my lord ; indeed he is the almighty , the wise . ”
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
a warning to mankind ,
say , `` we believe who will be given to the children of israel what is given to the children of israel and what was with him , and of the messengers , and the messengers , and the messengers , and the messengers , and we are not one of those who are with their lord .
and the abundance of the date-palm and the adornment of it is with its lord ; and whoever changes the rocks of the bad , then it will be not in any way , but such are signs in the sight of allah .
if we will , we would have revealed to you what is revealed to you , and then you will find none to help them . you will find no help for them .
and a barrier is placed between them and what they desire , as was done with the likes of them . indeed , they were in disquieting doubt .
the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime . and if you believe and fear god , he will give you your reward , and will not ask you for your possessions .
and that we may guide them to the right way , and that the promise of allah is the dead , and that the promise of allah is the dead , and they said , “ let them create a thing , and we are the best of what they used to do . ”
and do not extend your eyes towards what we have given them for some couples to enjoy , and that we may test them with the wares of the life of this world , and the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but aenjoyment .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? yet they frighten you with those besides him ; and whomever allah sends astray , there is no guide for him .
and of his substance is he who gave sustenance to his own property , and do not give a good to their own property ; and to their hearts is the pure , and in the highest manner , and in the highest manner . allah is the hearer , the knower .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind their wealth and kin . this is a duty upon the pious .
indeed those who do not believe in the signs of allah , allah will not guide them , and for them is a painful punishment .
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said , “ we hear and we obey ” ; and fear allah , in the breasts of people .
what ! do they not ponder for the people , and say to the people : `` give to the people a good people ? '' and they said , `` indeed , a magician is a magician , a magician , a clever magician .
and he who brings the truth and verifies it - those are the righteous .
and allah said : `` o adam ! tell them the story of them . '' when he came to them , he said : `` did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that i know what you conceal and what you reveal ? ''
how do i take you away from what you worship besides god ? why do you not consider what you associate with god ? if you know , they will be of the cautious .
and we have certainly been with thee , , o dear prophet , and verily , with allah is the truth , and it is . and if they are a section of them , they will see it , or , if they are one of them , they will be brought back to us .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good deeds , he will be among the successful .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said , “ would that we had the like of korah ’ s life , he is indeed a fortunate . ”
there is no belying its coming to pass .
and made them like chewed-up leaves .
on the day when he will call you and you will answer praising him , and you will think that you have stayed but a little . ''
the day when neither wealth nor sons will avail ,
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
our lord ! take us out of this ; then if we return , we shall indeed be unjust .
i will certainly punish him severely or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
he was created from spurting fluid ,
so that you may not transgressbalance .
on that day the heaven will split asunder with clouds , and the angels will be sent down , descending , -
and from the evil of the darkness when it overspreads ,
and indeed , for those who do wrong , we shall make them like a portion of the fire , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of moses said : `` indeed we are overtaken . ''
in a lofty garden ,
the unbelievers almost stab you with their glances when they hear the reminder , and they say , “ he is crazy . ”
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the sacred valley of tuwa .
and had we made him an angel , we would surely have made him a man , and we would have caused them to see that they are confusing to them .
lo ! we suffice thee against the mockers .
have you not seen those who have been told , `` do not be afraid ? '' do not give prayer , and pay the alms , and give the zakat , and they will have a great punishment .
nay , i have followed the religion of old and my fathers , and the family of jacob , and for him is no thing , and for us is the word of allah , and that is for us , but most of mankind do not give thanks .
he said , “ yes , and you will then be among those brought near . ”
and assuredly we established you in the earth and made for you therein livelihoods . little thanks ye give !
indeed the wasteful are brothers of the devils , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
you are neglectful of him .
and among the disbelievers are the ones who wish to come forth from it , until when he calls you to the believers , when he has spoken the truth , and what is the matter with them , will they be guided ?
then fasten him with a chain seventy cubits long .
, `` separate yourselves from this day , you criminals .
and that is not difficult for allah .
and he turned his face towards a state of justice , and he was a section of the people of the woods , and he came to a section of the companions of the woods , and he said , “ o prophet , what is it that you have been taught ? ” he said , “ o prophet , i have been taught what you are taught . ”
then he will be of those who believe and urge one another to steadfastness and compassion .
this is nothing but the habit of the ancients ,
in fact , they are in doubt about it . indeed , they are in the sight of allah , and in the sight of allah , he is the lord of all things , and he has knowledge of everything .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
so do not strike parables for allah ; indeed allah knows and you do not know .
so glorify the name of your lord , the supreme .
and those who take patrons beside him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not a guardian over them .
these are the ones who have gone away from the earlier way , and those who are on the upper hand , you will find them in the way of god , and , `` what is the matter with them , that he is the best of those who deny the truth ? '' , `` what is the matter with them , that he is the one who has made the unbelievers a great reward ? ''
this is hell which you were promised .
and how many a sign in the heavens and the earth they pass by , while they turn away from it !
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
those whom the angels take in a state of purity , and say , `` peace be with you . enter paradise for what you used to do . ''
and for their taking usury , which they had been forbidden , and their consuming of the people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the unbelievers a painful punishment .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil . ”
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
and a few of you have a specified number of time in the world to come , and if any one of you was in a state of the night , or by the force of the night , i will give them the by the night , so that you may give me a better part of the night . but if you do , you will have a better reward , if only they should be better .
i have chosen you for myself .
“ throw into hell every stubborn disbeliever .
is he who walks prone on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
indeed those who give the purity to men and women , and those who lend a goodly loan to allah , will have double it and will receive a generous reward .
he said : my lord ! lo ! my bones have become feeble , and my head is white , and my lord , i have never been unblest in my prayer ,
you are indeed watching over us . ''
allah is the witness and his witnessed , and there is no god except he , and the angels , and the angels , and the angels , and the angels , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
we have warned you of a near chastisement , a day when a man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust '' .
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work ; for such allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and of his signs is that he looses the winds as bearers of good tidings and to make you taste the mercy of his mercy , and that ships may sail by his command , and that you may seek his bounty , and haply you will be thankful .
and indeed for those who do wrong , there is another punishment besides this , but most of them do not know .
and those on the left hand , what are the companions of the left ?
those who spend their wealth by night and day , privately and publicly , will have their reward with their lord . they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
nor canst thou guide the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and are muslims .
and the messengers we have mentioned to you before and messengers we have not mentioned to you . and allah spoke to moses directly .
and he it is who is your lord , the true , and what is there after the truth , save error ? how then are ye turned away ?
he said , “ there is no reproach on you today . allah will forgive you , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
on the day when some faces will be bright , some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened : `` did you disbelieve after you had believed ? then taste the punishment for your disbelief . ''
so where are you heading ?
or dost thou ask them for tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
of jinn and men .
say , “ i do not ask you any reward for it , and i am not a pretender .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
and they have taken gods besides allah that they may be amight to them .
he it is who has created you from all things , and in order to make it clear to each other , and when the whole of the wife is made to pass , they will be made to draw their fingers into the presence of god , and said , `` god is by you , if you are a companion , we will certainly give you a great account . ''
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
and there is the matter of allah ; then they will say : `` those who were arrogant , will say : `` if allah had followed us , we will certainly be guided by you . '' then , will you , then , be able to show us the way , and we shall give you no more than the way of allah ? and we shall not be able to save you .
and we are about to be an evil deed for the same , so the two parties differed , and they were not able to intercede , except after it had come to pass . and whoever is a wrongdoer , is a barrier between them , and on the day of judgment , your lord will judge between them .
the bounty of your lord we provide for them , and the bounty of your lord is not restricted .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
and imbued it withits evil and its piety .
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
the bounty of your lord we provide for them , and the bounty of your lord is not restricted .
and when you give mercy to life , and give them to life , they will not be able to yield , and when evil befalls them , their ears , the great , the great .
`` and fear allah , and do not disgrace me . ''
they said : `` by allah ! you know well that we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves . ''
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
because he possesses wealth and sons .
then we destroyed the others .
and to every people we have appointed a way for the sake of allah , to make it proper . and your allah is one allah , and give glad tidings to those who are obedient .
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promise binding on him , but most of mankind know not .
say , `` i am not a new thing among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow that which is revealed to me , and i am only a plain warner . ''
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; then when the promise of my lord cometh to pass , he will make it dust , and the promise of my lord is true .
so as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
again , you will soon know .
we shall bring a witness from every nation , so that people will say , `` bring you your evidence , and you will be told , `` do not see what you have been doing , and what is with allah is the truth , and what they used to do is in the end , and what they used to do is null .
indeed , they did not expect a reckoning ,
a questioner asked about a torment about to befall
and who is better in religion than he who submits himself wholly to allah , and follows the religion of ibrahim , and follows the religion of ibrahim , the upright , the upright ?
for the living and the dead ?
as for those who have knowledge and know that it is the truth of the lord of the truth . those who are with their lord will have their due faith . and allah is the guide of those who believe .
and take vigil the night as an additionalprayer for you , as an additionalprayer for you , so that your lord may raise you to a laudable position .
say , `` in the bounty of allah and in his mercy , let them rejoice in it . it is better than what they accumulate . ''
no intercession shall be of any avail to him , except for him who gives permission to their hearts , when they have safety , they say : `` what is the truth ? '' and he is the most high , the most great .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
`` o zakariya ! verily , we give you the glad tidings of a son , whose name is yahya : we have not afore-time made his namesake . ''
and those who believed and did the right , and those who have believed in them , we shall have their own good deeds , and they are not in the midst of it ; and we shall not give them a reward in the least for a while .
and when those who came to our signs , then say to them : `` peace be on you , your lord has told you , `` peace be on you , for he is the lord of the universe who have done evil , and he will have the means of god . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
what you possess will pass , but what is with allah is lasting . and we will certainly give those who are patient the best of their deeds .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
it is allah who has made cattle for you , that you may ride some of them and some of them you eat .
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger .
and glorify him in the night , and at the declining of the stars .
indeed in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
indeed , he used to be joyful among his people ,
and indeed , it was in the way of moses , who was in the way of moosa , and he was in his belly , and he gave them his wealth , and made them happy with their wealth . indeed , allah does not like those who are wealthy .
do you not see that allah is the knower of all that is in the heavens and the west ? and he is not one of those who do wrong . and he is not one of those who do right , and in the least , he will inform them of what they have done . indeed , allah is cognizant of all things .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them , and for the disbelievers is a thing comparable .
when they hear the reminder , they will see the reminder when they have been told , `` our lord , we believe , '' and they will say , `` our lord , we believe in you , and we have been among the witnesses . ''
instead of him they call upon besides him , and they invoke none but a rebellious satan .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? they will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , “ these are the ones who lied against their lord. ” indeed , the curse of allah is upon the wrongdoers .
and the example of the women of mary 's son is a covering of women , and we breathed into her of the spirit , and we breathed into him of the spirit , and he was submissive to his lord .
the revelation of this book is from allah , the all-mighty , the all-knowing ,
but he tarried not long , and said : i have compassedwhich thou hast not compassed , and i have come unto thee from sheba with a sure news .
he said : the lord of the east and the west and all that is between them , if ye understand .
so i swear by the galaxies .
and he created cattle for you . in them are warmth and benefits for you , and of them you eat .
except an old woman who was among those who remained behind .
then it will be said : this is that which ye used to deny .
o you who believe ! fear allah , and speak the right word .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
and the curse shall be on you till the day of judgment . ''
that which you have made to seem decorous to you , and to their spouses , then , to their spouses , they will be left with their wives and their feet , and they will be made to leave their heads , and if they run away , they will be left in the lurch , and if they run away , then indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
no affliction befalls in the earth or in your own souls , but it is inscribed in a book before we bring it into existence . that is easy for allah .
nay , the hour is their appointed time , and the hour is calamitous and bitter .
and those who stand firm in their testimonies .
praise be to allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and has created darkness and light ; yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
in the desert some of the bedouins are those who do not believe in allah and the last day , and they rejoice in it , and that they may be near to allah , and that he may cause them to enter in the way of allah . indeed , allah will cause them to enter into his mercy . indeed , he is the most merciful of the mercy .
and by this city of security .
then they proceeded , until they met a young boy : he slew him , and said : `` have you slain an innocent person who has slain no one ? you have indeed done a horrible thing . ''
what is the inevitable calamity ?
when you call to prayer they take it in derision and play . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning was !
and your lord do not serve any other than that , and you have the knowledge of the eye of your parents and your mother . when some of them went forth , they would have been told , `` and do not speak with them in the least , and do not speak with them . ''
and if there are some of you who believe in what i have been sent with , and some have not believed , then be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges . ''
and we cut them up into communities on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them are otherwise , and we tested them with good things , so that they may return .
this is hell which you were promised .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , it will not be accepted from any of them , even if he gives a ransom to ransom . for them is a painful punishment , and they will have no helpers .
so fear god and obey me .
and otherof the kind in pairs !
do not exalt yourselves against god . i come to you with clear authority .
indeed those who fear their lord in secret will have forgiveness and a great reward .
are they looking for aught but the day of judgment ? the day when they will say : `` indeed , the messengers of our lord came to him , '' and they will say : `` is there not a sign for him who came to you , or has been the truth of what they used to do ? ''
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
no indeed ! do not obey him . prostrate yourself and draw near .
and zachariah , when he cried unto his lord : o my lord ! leave me not childless , though thou art the best of inheritors .
and he said , “ i am a son of my son ’ s son , and i am a woman who will be a child in two times , and i will see what you have been working . and if you were to see a number of years , i will make you go about the righteous . ”
if a provocation from satan should provoke thee , seek refuge with god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
by allah , we sentto many nations before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , and he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
and most of the people are not believers , but you will not believe .
they will say : `` it is he who has invented it , and say , `` if i am a person , he will have no power to save him . then , if you have no faith in me , then it will be for him that you should be one of the innocent . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
do not think that those who exult in what they have done and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are secure from the punishment .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not consume their wealth with your property . that is a great sin .
they said : `` you are only one of those bewitched .
it spares not , nor does it leave .
you will surely see hell .
i will exhaust him increasingly .
o mankind ! we have made you as a heritage to the male and the female , and we have made them as a heritage to one another , so the one to whom is the best , and for allah is the best knower of all things .
but when we lifted the torment from them , they immediately broke their promise .
and whoever turns to allah after they have believed , they will have the faith in their hearts , but those who disbelieve in their hearts are full of faith , but those who disbelieve will have the wrath of allah , and for them is a terrible punishment .
and they say , “ if allah had so willed , we would not have ascribed partners to him . ” and we have not made them a thing , nor did we have given them any knowledge . so we have made no knowledge of them , and we have no knowledge of it , except that you have no knowledge . and we have no knowledge of it .
and after the time of musa moses took up a calf from their ornaments , and a calf which did not speak to them . did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to any way ?
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
no ! indeed , we have created them from what they know .
these are the unbelievers , the libertines .
so that they become scattered dust .
who doto be seen ,
a provision for you and your cattle .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a community that is upright , and they recite the verses of allah in the night and prostrate themselves .
and they say : `` all of this is in your bellies , and we have forbidden to the males of the world . but if the matter was resolved on , then indeed , allah ’ s reward is all that he has given them . indeed , allah is the all-knower of everything .
how many generations have we destroyed before them ! they cried out , but there was no longer time for escape .
do they not see that we have made the night to rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , “ our lord , why did you not send us a messenger so that we might have followed your verses before we were humiliated and disgraced ? ”
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs will be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
when they have made a covenant with the covenant , the promise of allah , and the covenant after it had come to you , and to make it clear to you , when you have been warned , you will be fully aware of what you do .
and when we took a covenant from the prophets , and from you , and from noah and abraham , moses and jesus son of mary . we took from them a solemn covenant .
he will say , `` be quiet and do not speak to me .
then they will say : are we to be respited ?
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man that will tell you that when ye are scattered into dust , then ye shall be in a new creation ?
did he not find you poor and suffice you ?
say thou : the holy spirit hath brought it down from thy lord with truth , that the believers may have faith and glad tidings unto the muslims .
and gardens and springs .
repel evil with that which is best . we know best what they allege .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
and i give them reinlo ! my scheme is strong .
allah , there is no god but he , the lord of the mighty throne . ''
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
he said : my lord ! judge thou in truth , and our lord is the most beneficent , whose help is against that which ye ascribe .
woe to those who give short measure ,
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
they will not escape in the earth , nor have they protectors besides allah . the punishment will be doubled for them , and they did not see .
how can you have a covenant with god to his messenger ? but those who have received the sanctity of the holy mosque , and their claim is only to make a covenant with you , and we are the cautious .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and they say , “ if allah had so willed , we would not have ascribed partners to him . ” and we have not made them a thing , nor did we have given them any knowledge . so we have made no knowledge of them , and we have no knowledge of it , except that you have no knowledge . and we have no knowledge of it .
have you seen him who denies the truth ?
and when the two of you came to the point of pharaoh , he would have given you the truth , and had the same to them , they would have had their knowledge , but when they had resolved on their wives , they would have received their good deeds , but when they were in a battle-field , he would have given you the good things , and is the best of those who do not know .
what you possess will pass , but what is with allah is lasting . and we will certainly give those who are patient the best of their deeds .
and they sold him for a paltry sum , a few dirhams , and they did not care for him .
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
say , `` o people of the book ! why do you bar those who believe from the path of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? allah is not unaware of what you do . ''
and to him come to you , they will ask you about what they have been worshipping , and say , “ allah will inform them of what he has said , and he will inform them of what is with him ; and he is the best of those who do good , and with him is the best of what you do . ”
and glorify him in the night , and after theprostrations .
all this ; but for the transgressors is an evil destination .
say : `` it is the she-camel that you may be cast , then do not keep your wives away from your wives , and do not go to their offspring , but when they are clean , then , when they are clean . allah is indeed the oft-forgiving , the most merciful .
those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment , and those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is forgiveness and a great reward .
praise be to allah who has sent down the book to his servant , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
and if we had revealed it to one of the foreigners
allah exhorts you never to repeat the like of it , if you are believers .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every obstinate tyrant .
and they have made a kinship between him and the jinns ; but the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
they will not escape in the earth , nor have they protectors besides allah . the punishment will be doubled for them , and they did not see .
as for those who are wretched , they will be in the fire , and they will sigh and sigh ,
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
how can you have a covenant with god to his messenger ? but those who have received the sanctity of the holy mosque , and their claim is only to make a covenant with you , and we are the cautious .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and we gave them shelter on a height , a place of flowing water .
nay ! he has brought the truth , and confirmed the veracity of the messengers .
then as for him whose scales are heavy ,
o ye who believe ! expend of that which hath come unto thee of the twain , and that which hath caused us to grow in the earth , and ye are not aware of it .
and your people denied it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not a guardian over you . ''
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
he said , “ allah forbid that we should take anyone except him with whom we found our property ; then indeed , we would be unjust . ”
and remember our servant job , when he called to his lord , “ satan has afflicted me with hardship and suffering . ”
that you will have whatever you choose ?
no man is there for those who believe and do good deeds , that they may have the permission of allah , and when they are secure , they would have been godfearing . and allah loves those who do good , and allah loves those who do good . allah loves those who do good .
then we withdraw it towards us gradually .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
so we subjected to him the wind , that ran at his commandment , wherever he directed it ,
so look at the mercy of allah , how he revives the earth after its death . indeed , he is the reviver of the dead . he is able to do all things .
and the answer of his people was only that they said : drive them out of your town ; they are people who keep themselves pure .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and caused the grain to grow therein ,
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promise binding on him , but most of mankind know not .
did they not see that it did not answer them , nor did it bring them any harm or benefit ?
those who follow the book of the book , those who are given the book are recorded in the book , and their duty is to do good , and their duty is to do good , and their duty is to keep their duty to god , and those who have faith and follow the right path , and those who have faith and follow the right path , they will have the blissful conquest .
but when it descends into their courtyard , evil will be the morning of those forewarned .
nay , but ye honour not the orphan ,
and certainly we gave him the power of his people , and we were not able to make them understand , and we gave them the hearing , and the eyesight , and the brains—but they were , with their hearing , and they were not harassed .
in paradise you will neither be hungry nor naked therein .
so allah seized him with the punishment of this world and the hereafter .
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , and fears allah , and fears allah , is the winners .
the words of the book will ask you to be a clear book . so they ask you to say , `` we have come to you from god . '' they said , `` we have come to you from god , in truth , and he has given them a clear sign . '' but they did not have any knowledge of the miracles of god , and we gave moses the clear signs .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people determined to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
those who promise the covenant of allah after it has been given to them , allah has already ordered them to be joined , and to make mischief in the land , and make mischief in the land , and for them is the destination .
and why do you not believe in allah when the messenger calls you to believe in your lord , and he has made a covenant with you , if you are believers ?
and as for those who disbelieved and belied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they will be brought into the punishment .
with the help of god . he helps whomever he wants . he is majestic and all-merciful .
and he overthrew the subverted cities
and when mankind are gathered together , they will be enemies to them , and will deny their worship .
when you left your family in the morning to post the believers at their stations for the battle- and allah is hearing , knowing .
did you see him who turned away ,
and do not approach the way of allah , and to those who believe in allah and those who have faith in allah , to be guided to the way of allah , and remember what is in the way of allah , and then see what sort of fate befell the mischievous !
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and come to you , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
and behold , they see the punishment of the day of resurrection , those who are bent on denying the truth , and they will be made to follow their own souls , and when they are visited by the punishment , they will be made to be recompensed with a terrible punishment .
your god is one god . there is no god but he , the beneficent , the merciful .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
and indeed , to our lord we shall return . ''
say , “ have you considered if the punishment of allah comes upon you or the hour comes upon you , will you call upon any other than allah ? if you are truthful . ”
and recall what time ye had made that which ye had made to be seduced , and in the cities ye are created in the land , and on the mountains , behold , ye are subjected to the earth , and cause mischief in the mountains .
o prophet ! we have sent you as a witness , and a bearer of glad tidings , and a warner .
whoever commits a plan , people will take a part of that which is good for him . that is a reward for those who want to take a part of that which is good for them , and that he may take a part of what he will . god is watchful over all things .
and some faces will be covered with dust
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , has power to create the like of them ? and he has appointed for them a term whereof there is no doubt . but the unjust refuseexcept with ingratitude .
so turn away from him who turns away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the worldly life .
and watch—they will soon see .
who will enter the great fire ,
nay , but those who disbelieve deny ,
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
if he will , he can take you away , o people , and bring others . god is powerful over that .
he said , “ so it is . your lord says , “ it is easy for me , whereas i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
so the lord of the eastern and the son of mary was given to him , he took his servant to his family , and he took his purity to his family , and said , `` o mary , i will have a provision from allah , and he has said , `` o mary , i will give you a provision from allah , and he will have a provision in the presence of allah , and he will have a provision without right . ''
go to pharaoh . he has transgressed all bounds . ''
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fruits and fodder ,
perish man ! how unthankful he is !
and recompense them for their patience with a garden and silk .
when affliction befalls men , they cry to their lord , turning to him in repentance , then when he has given them mercy from him , some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates whatever he wills . he grants daughters to whomever he wills , and he grants daughters to whomever he wishes .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : 'would that my people knew
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
we will certainly test you with his wealth and your children and your people before you , and the polytheists , and if you are patient , god is well aware of the deeds of god .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
who collects wealth andcounts it .
say : `` do you teach allah your religion , when allah knows all whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ? and allah has knowledge of all things . ''
the men are they who have gathered their wealth in the life of the world , and the children of israel , and the birds in their parents , and the one in whose parents is a particular thing , and only a few of them .
and we did not create the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the assumption of those who disbelieve , so woe to the disbelievers from the fire .
the warnings came to the people of pharaoh .
have we not made for him two eyes ,
we revealed to moses , `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . you have no fear , nor will you be afraid . ''
the path of allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . indeed , to allah domatters evolve .
why have bracelets of gold not been cast upon him , or angels not accompanied him ? ''
that he may pay them their wages and enrich them from his bounty . indeed , he is forgiving and appreciative .
indeed , allah knows those who believe , and indeed , he knows the hypocrites .
let the wealthy spend in his wealth , and he whose provision is restricted , let him spend according to what god has given him . god does not burden any soul exceptwhat he has given him . god will bring ease after hardship .
so do not be unfaithful to the unbelievers , but allah took off their killing , and you cast a handful of dust as if it were a dust , so you cast it into a trial , and it is , for allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
then we drowned the others .
so glorify the name of your lord , the supreme .
and be thou patient for the sake of those who call their lord 's remembrance in the mornings and the evenings , and that they should be guided by their lord . and do not be of those who are heedless of the life of this world , and do not be of the cheats , the lord of the world .
and the messenger of their lord has come to believe in his lord and the angels and his messengers , and they will not have any faith in allah and his messengers , and they said , “ submit to your lord , and submit to you , and to you will be turned back . ”
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , as a believer , he is a believer , and the effort of effort .
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
and take vigil the night as an additionalprayer for you , as an additionalprayer for you , so that your lord may raise you to a laudable position .
“ this is indeed a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
and we left hisfor posterity .
and set not up with god another god . i am a plain warner to you from him .
then it occurred to them after they had seen the signs , that they should imprison him for a time .
woe to the deniers on that day ,
my lord ! grant me a righteous son .
for those who forswear their women a wait of four months . if they reconcile—god is forgiving and merciful .
and the shades of thewill come low over them , and itsto be picked .
and leave them desolate waste .
where they will abide for ever , never wanting a change .
and do not be in doubt of what is in the least , and do not follow the vain desires of those who worship any other worship and do not follow anything except what they used to worship ; and we are the multipliers .
what is the jinn , the men of the jinn and the earth , and the difference of allah , and the sun , and the earth , and the difference of the sun and the gospel , do not give thanks .
you call me to disbelieve in god and to associate with him what i have no knowledge , while i call you to the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
i wish that i should turn away from him and all that you worship instead of allah , and i call to my worship , and i will not call to my lord , and do not call to me .
the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and made the day to be his throne . he knows what is in your earth . and he knows what is in you and what is behind you . and he knows what is in you and what is behind you . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
and establish the prayer at the two ends of the day and in the first hours of the night . indeed good deeds remove evil deeds . that is a reminder for those who remember .
as for thamood , we guided them , but they preferred blindness to guidance , so the thunderbolt of the humiliating punishment seized them because of what they used to earn .
he was one of our believing servants .
`` theseare but a small band ,
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word is realized . i will fill hell with the jinn and mankind together .
our lord ! indeed you know what we hide and what we disclose , and nothing is hidden from allah in the earth or in the heaven .
indeed , you love the likes of yourselves , but they do not consent to you ; but they do not like you ; and when they are alone , they will say , ‘ we are indeed believers in the hearts of allah ; and when you are alone , they will say , ‘ indeed allah is well aware of what is in the breasts . ’
he placed firm mountains on it above it , and blessed it , and measured therein its sustenance in four days , equally for all seekers .
but if he is one of those who rejectedand went astray ,
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall wed them to houriswith wide lovely eyes .
and that they say what they do not do ?
in fact , they are in doubt about it . indeed , they are in the sight of allah , and in the sight of allah , he is the lord of all things , and he has knowledge of everything .
and confers no favour upon anyone for recompense
and when thou seest them , thou shalt make them void . and when thou seest them , they shall pass away with the like of it ; and that which is in the hands of allah shall be their comrade ; and that which is in the hands of allah shall be their comrade ; and so , and allah will make them friends , and allah is of them making friends .
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . when the time of allah comes , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
who used to say : art thou one of those who believe ?
and eliaswas among the messengers .
woe on that day to the deniers .
and those who gave the lie to the truth when it has been recited to him , he would have sent it down , and said , “ why will allah be sent down to whomever he wills ? so there will be a humiliating punishment for those who deny the truth . ”
he is the first and the last , and the outward and the inward ; and he is the knower of all things .
they denied all our signs . so we seized them with the seizing of oneall-mighty , omnipotent .
`` make full-length coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work for righteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do . ''
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
the example of this world is the life of this world ; and we send down water from the earth , and in the sun 's splendour , it is he who made the earth a habitat for you ; and that we make clear the signs for you , and that we may make clear the signs to you , and that we may make clear the signs to you , and that we may make clear the signs to those who have been warned .
if they disobey you , say : `` i am quit of what you do . ''
and ease my task for me .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil and your sight today is sharp . ''
verily allah hath cursed the infidels , and hath gotten ready for them a blaze .
they will say , `` if you revert to the people of the town , they will be told , `` if only they were to be given to the most honourable , the most honourable , the most honourable . '' they do not believe in god and his messenger , and the believers are the believers .
so be patient . the promise of allah is true . and ask forgiveness for your sins , and celebrate the praise of your lord morning and evening .
those whose efforts are misguided in the life of this world , while they thought that they are doing good .
they said : shall we believe in thee when the meanest follow thee ?
everything , small or great , is written down .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the all-giving ?
and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
when the most wicked of them broke forth ,
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
and that we may guide them to the right way , and that the promise of allah is the dead , and that the promise of allah is the dead , and they said , “ let them create a thing , and we are the best of what they used to do . ”
so let man consider from what he was created .
and unto the people of madyan , we have sent unto you the messenger , and said : o my people ! i have no god other than allah , o my people ! there is no god but he ; and i have no allah other than a thing , and i shall be of those that go forth . i fear for you the chastisement of the doom .
that my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones . ''
and you are those who turn away from your homes , from among you , but they turn away from you , but if you were not to be annoyed , it is for you , and that you will be among those who do not have faith in it , and in the life of this world is the hereafter ; and what is the matter with you that you will be of those who are cautious ?
and we have a way of the children of israel in the way of the right and of sustenance , and we have given them the provisions of allah , and that they could not make them knowledge , until the day of resurrection . it is your lord that will be in the midst of that wherein they are differing .
but you took them for a laughing-stock until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , or he who hides himself in the night , and he who sallies by day .
and they do not repent , and their worship , and allah is appreciative , while they are , prostrate , prostrating themselves , and give good news to the believers .
some faces that day will be beaming ,
he who gives me food and drink
a reward for what they used to do .
but they defied the command of their lord , so the thunderbolt seized them as they looked on .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of this world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
the duty of the people who said to them , `` if they disbelieve in us , then say to them , `` if you are not of those who are bent on denying the truth , will be told , `` if you are telling the truth in the way of god , you will have no share in the way of god . they are alive , with their lord , and provided ,
you do not take revenge on us except because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims . ''
and he said : `` what is the matter with you that allah has sent it down to you , '' but they said , `` how is it that he is one of those who are with him ? '' he is the one who is well aware of all that he will , and he is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
we have sent to you the blessings of allah , that we should send down to you the ships , and to make it a means of pure sustenance . so eat of the good things which we have not given them , but they wronged themselves .
we would have seized him by the right hand
but if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ’
and we raised him to a high place .
and he had no host to help him besides allah , nor was he able to defend himself .
say , `` whoever is an enemy to gabriel , '' he has brought it down by god 's permission , confirming what wasbefore it , and a guidance and glad tidings to believers .
bring you , then , when he was sent down to his master , and when he was raised to his master , he said : `` then , what was it that he was sent back to his lord ? '' say : `` then what was it that my lord has abandoned ? ''
but if ye desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then verily allah hath prepared for the well-doers among you a mighty hire .
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense .
he said , “ you will sow for seven years continuously ; so leave the harvest of its harvest , except a little which you eat . ”
endued with power , with the lord of the throne , secure ,
whoever invokes another god besides allah , when he has no proof , his reckoning is with his lord . indeed , the unbelievers will not prosper .
he said : `` would that i had power to suppress you , and i could betake myself to a powerful support . ''
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
we have made it a trial for the wrongdoers .
and let them respond to me , and let them respond to me , and i am near .
and the earth , how it is spread out ?
so how were my punishment and my warnings ?
did they not see that it did not answer them , nor did it bring them any harm or benefit ?
i have warned you of a blazing fire ,
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
man is created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
allah will guide those who follow the right path , and he will lead them in the right way , and will lead them to the right way , and will guide them to a straight path .
he said , “ do you worship something instead of allah that can not benefit you , nor harm you ?
where they will abide for ever , never wanting a change .
but the sects differed among themselves , so woe to the disbelievers because of the scene of a dreadful day .
but deniedand turned away ,
on that day , they will be just as if they were to turn away from it , and on the day when they will be raised up as if they are the winners .
and let there befrom you a nation inviting togood , enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong , and it is they who are the successful .
say : `` i am only a warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the irresistible .
and how can you disbelieve , when the verses of allah are recited to you and his messenger among you ? whoever holds fast to allah , he is indeed guided to a straight path .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said , “ would that we had the like of korah ’ s life , he is indeed a fortunate . ”
they said , `` we augur ill omen from you and those with you . '' he said : `` your ill omen is with allah . nay , but you are a people being tested . ''
did they not see that it did not answer them , nor did it bring them any harm or benefit ?
and you will see the angels thronging round the throne , singing the praises of their lord , and judgment will be justly between them , and it will be said , “ praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds . ”
so they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it .
who establish the prayer and pay the alms , and are certain of the hereafter .
as if they were frightened asses
o messengers , eat of the good things , and act righteously . i am aware of what you do .
but if they do not respond to you , know that it has been revealed to you with the knowledge of god and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
this is a proclamation for mankind that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
those who ascribe partners to god , say , `` if god willed , we could not have taken any thing apart from him . we have not made any one of them to be worshipped , nor did they have any knowledge of the miracles of god . god has sworn the clear delivery . ''
have we not made the earth a bed ,
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
and when the shaitan has made a great reward for them , he said , “ no soul will be responsible for you . i will not be able to protect you , and then , when one of you saw the two , then he said , “ i am not a pretender .
so bear with patience what they say , and exaltwith praise of your lord before the rising of the sun and before sunset .
and forgive my father , for he is one of those astray .
and remember you much .
verily he reflected and guessed ,
and of their wives is that . this is our lord , the most gracious , the most gracious , the most praiseworthy .
andfaces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
if thou couldst see when they are stationed before their lord , he will say : is this not the truth ? they say : aye ! by our lord ! he will say : taste ye the chastisement of our lord !
and if a grace from allah comes to you , he would surely say , as if there had not been any affection between you and him , and i would have achieved a mighty achievement .
and because they say , “ we have the the noble messengers of the noble messenger – the noble messenger , and the one who can not be able to challenge them. ” but those who do not exercise their duty to allah will be able to do so . they are in doubt of it , and they are not in doubt about it ; but those who are in doubt , are not aware .
we have indeed given you abundance .
or do they say , `` he is possessed ? '' rather , he has brought them the truth , but most of them hate the truth .
marked from your lord , and never far from the wrongdoers .
he said , “ by your majesty , i will seduce them all .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said : `` by the might of pharaoh , we shall surely be victorious . ''
and we did not create the heaven and the earth and all that is between them in vain . that is the assumption of those who disbelieve , so woe to the disbelievers from the fire .
they respect neither kinship nor treaty with a believer . these are the transgressors .
indeed successful is the one who purifies it .
“ this is our bestowal ; so give or withhold without reckoning . ”
for the beggar and the deprived .
that we may test them thereby ; and whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will admit him into a severe punishment .
this is a reminder , so whoever wills , let him take a way to his lord .
o ye who believe ! be thou steadfast in the law of allah , and bear witness to allah , and his parents , and your parents , and unto your parents , and that ye may not be able to be able to be able to be able to be aware of it ; and if ye are not better than allah , and that ye may be of those who are better , or be thou patient .
surely your lord is ever watchful .
they will be given their reward twice , for they are patient , and repel evil with good , and spend out of what we have provided them .
and if you do not help them , then indeed allah has given them victory in the cave , and when the disbelievers were in a cave , and said , “ do not grieve , and allah is most mighty , most wise . ”
then they will have no excuse except that they will say : by allah , our lord , we were not idolaters .
so indeed , you and what you worship ,
`` o zakariya ! verily , we give you the glad tidings of a son , whose name is yahya : we have not afore-time made his namesake . ''
then depart from the place where the people depart and ask allah for forgiveness . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
those who oppose allah and his messenger , they will be among the lowest .
and when mankind will come to them in a state of evil , we will surely give them out of our bounty , and say to them , “ allah is with them . and indeed , the angels are contriving in rebellion . ”
may allah forgive you ! why did you give them leave until those who told the truth were the liars ?
they said : `` thus says your lord . he is the wise , the knower . ''
say : `` in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and he protects , and none protects against him , if you know ? ''
said , `` do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me . ''
in it every wise matter is determined
why do you not bring us the angels , if you are truthful ? ''
and the answer of his people was only that they said : drive them out of your town ; they are people who keep themselves pure .
he said , “ this is the parting between me and you . i will inform you of the interpretation of that which you could not have patience .
a mercy from your lord . he is the hearer , the knower .
so it will be . we shall wed them to wideeyed houris .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his apostle have decreed a matter that they may have a matter , and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , he is indeed a plain straying .
but as for those who were bent on denying the truth , he will say , `` woe to you ! '' and you will say , `` woe to you ! '' and you are the ones who will say : `` what is the matter with you ? '' and they will say : `` what is the matter with you , that you are a man of old ? '' and he will say : `` this is the truth , and he is the true . ''
and such fruits as they prefer
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
have you not considered how your lord dealt with ad ?
and he has subjected the night and the day for you and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . indeed in that are signs for people who exercise their reason .
or say , “ if only allah had guided me , i would have been among the pious . ”
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he will . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say : `` shall i be one of the lord of my throne ? he is the lord of all things , and he has no one to whom he will . he will have no one to save himself from among the sins of your lord . to your lord you will be brought back .
but those who seek beyond that are transgressors .
and among the people of the book were some of the people of the book , that if a reasonable thing is given to any of them , it will be an emotional deed , and some of them who say , `` let you be among the people of the book , who will be called to witness , and they will think that they have been fabricating by god .
allah abrogates or confirms whatever he wills , and with him is the mother of the book .
and a summoner unto allah by his leave , and as a light-giving lamp .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and the believers , and sent down hosts which you did not see , and punished the disbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
whoever is an enemy to god and his angels and his messengers , and gabriel , and michael , god is an enemy to the unbelievers . ''
he is allah , there is no god but he , the knower of the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent , the merciful .
we communicated to him this decree , that the root of themwas to be cut off .
he said : i am only a messenger of thy lord , that i may give thee a faultless son .
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and it was not the hands of their own hands . will they not then be grateful ?
and we admitted him into our mercy ; surely he was of the righteous .
we have made the quran easy to understand . is there any that will remember ?
and indeed for those who do wrong , there is another punishment besides this , but most of them do not know .
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . when the time of allah comes , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
and some faces will be covered with dust
`` o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat of your garden , but approach not this tree , lest ye become wrongdoers . ''
except the chosen servants of allah .
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs will be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
what are they asking each other about ?
and assuredly he came unto them with clear signs , so that they might be guided , and lo ! they were in doubt of that which had been sent down upon them , and lo ! allah hath caused to go astray from his messenger , and that allah guideth the ungodly .
so turn away from them for a while .
by the sky and at-tariq .
say , “ i fear , if i disobey my lord , the punishment of a tremendous day . ”
what , even if we give the trust to the lord of the throne , he is the one who has guided us to the right path , and the right path , and the right path , and in god let those who have been patient .
they will say : `` woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? this is what the most merciful promised , and the messengers spoke truth . ''
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what will make you realize what the hour is near ?
indeed , the likeness of jesus with allah is like adam . he created him from dust , then said to him : `` be ! '' and he was .
indeed your god is one ,
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
and in heaven is your sustenance , and what you are promised .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they will abide in allah 's mercy , and they will abide in it forever .
say : `` i am only a human being like you , but it is revealed to him that allah is one god . he is only one god . he who does so , does so for his deeds . ''
by your lord , we shall surely gather them and the devils , then we shall parade them hobbling on their knees round hell .
behold ! that which ye have been wont to worship , verily , it is a time for allah and his apostle , and the prophets and the wayfarer . if ye have faith in allah , the day of resurrection , he shall be a watcher over us , and allah hath power over all things .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
we are the rangers ,
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will assign you palaces .
and if he was to be his parents , he made them a sign for them , so that they may have no knowledge of it . and to me , i will give you a good things , and to me i shall be given the good news of what you have done .
do they not reflect that their companion is not mad ? he is only a plain warner .
and he said : `` what is the matter with you that allah has sent it down to you , '' but they said , `` how is it that he is one of those who are with him ? '' he is the one who is well aware of all that he will , and he is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and allah is a great reward .
you did not hide yourselves from yourselves , lest your ears and your eyes and your skins should bear witness against you , but you thought that god did not know much of what you do .
and we have made the signs of allah a lie to the right way , and they were in an unused , and in order that they may make clear to them , and that they may make clear to them ; and that is not a witness .
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah , and denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not in hell a home for the disbelievers ?
we sent our signs to them with clear signs , and a clear authority . and we gave him the measure of the book , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make a strong covenant with him .
o ye who believe ! there is no house save in your house , but ye are not allowed to be respited to the people , but that ye may be given respite , and that ye may be given to the people that ye may be given to the rest ; and thus do ye make a way to rest .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
o my people , i fear for you a day of mutual calling .
he does not fear its sequel .
my lord , grant me wisdom , and join me with the righteous .
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
no indeed ! soon they will know !
whomsoever god leads astray , there is no guide for him . he leaves them blundering in their transgression .
if allah should afflict thee with evil , no soul can be able to take you away from it , or if he please , there is no one to protect them from god 's bounty . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
`` and fear allah , and do not disgrace me . ''
and we appointed a party of those who are excellent among our bondmen , and of our slaves are the ones who have been wronged . some of them are upright , and some of them are in the best manner . that is the best triumph .
and preferred the life of this world ,
it is he who produced you from a single person , then a repository , and a repository . we have detailed our signs for a people who understand .
nor did we feed the poor .
it is only a revelation revealed ,
and shake the trunk of the palm-tree towards you . it will drop fresh ripe dates upon you .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and made the day for rising .
and the heaven and the earth wept not for them , nor were they respited .
and placeda light of splendour ?
to your lord will be the driving .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them will be the reward of their deeds , and he will give them the reward of their good deeds , but those who are bent on denying the truth will receive the punishment of god , and he will make them a painful punishment .
do you then hope that they may believe in you , while a party of them used to hear the word of allah , and then they understood it after they had understood it ?
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
so that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them . so enjoy yourselves , for you will soon know .
such is god , your lord , there is no god but he , the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
had it not been for a previous ordainment from allah , a great punishment would have touched you for what you took .
say : `` tell me , should it be that if it is a revelation from allah , then you will have the faith of him , then will you know ? who is the one who is a guardian over you ? ''
as for those who accuse a falsehood of you , do not consider what is unlawful to you , but those who have been innocent of what has been given to you is a false accusation and a great punishment .
he is in order to come to you , so that he may bring to you the enemy , and do not make the ties of war to you . and do not let them take you in the way of god , but you will not be able to see other than this . and you will find it in the way of god , and you will not be able to do wrong . and you will not be wronged .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the book will be set in place , and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought and the prophets and witnesses will be brought , and they will not be wronged .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and those in whose hearts does not desist , we will surely incite you against them , and they will not be your neighbors in it except for a little .
and that they say what they do not do ?
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
o prophet ! we have sent you as a witness , and a bearer of glad tidings , and a warner .
and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil save that which my lord hath mercy ; verily my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and placeda light of splendour ?
and when they came to the sulaiman , they were afraid of the brother . they said , “ do not be afraid , and we have made a mistake , and we may make you enter the matter , and we will guide you to the straight path .
answer your lord before there comes to you from allah a day that will not be turned back . on that day you will have no refuge , nor will you be able to deny .
verily unto us is their return .
and allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
o you who have believed , when you marry believing women , then divorce them before you have touched them , there is no period for you to count them , and release them in a graceful manner .
whomsoever allah guides , he is the rightly guided , and whomsoever he sends astray , they are the losers .
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
yet they play in doubt .
and you will be three sorts .
do they want to hasten our punishment ?
those who are bent on denying the truth who are true in the way of god to those who are upright in the way of god , those who are upright in the way of god will have no escape , and they will have a painful punishment . they will have a painful punishment .
for what day is it postponed ?
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
when they came to a journey , they will be with you , and with you is the company of all things , and they will be able to do so , and leave them in the same way , and those who have fear of god and in the last day will have the right path . god will show him the law of the hereafter , and he will show him the law .
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , and i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ”
it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and made the day to be his throne . he knows what is in your earth . and he knows what is in you and what is behind you . and he knows what is in you and what is behind you . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
and they worship besides allah that which has not sent down any proof , and that they have no knowledge of it , and the wrongdoers have no helpers .
indeed those who believed and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , such hope hope that allah is forgiving , merciful .
lo ! those who disbelieve after theirbelief , and afterward increase their infidelity , their repentance will not be accepted , and it is they who are the astray .
and of their wives is that . this is our lord , the most gracious , the most gracious , the most praiseworthy .
and they derive other advantages and drinks from them . will they not then be grateful ?
and when hell is set ablaze ,
will you not be surprised that when they have been given , they said , “ what , when i have been worshipping what i have been worshiping ? ” they said , “ god and his forefathers worship us , and we are the muslims . ”
and when the messengers areappointed a time .
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and to him will all affairs return . so worship him and put your trust in him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
those who believed and were godfearing .
when they came to a journey , they will be with you , and with you is the company of all things , and they will be able to do so , and leave them in the same way , and those who have fear of god and in the last day will have the right path . god will show him the law of the hereafter , and he will show him the law .
but it will be only a single nudge .
and when they marched out to meet goliath and his hosts , they said , “ our lord , pour patience on us , and make us victorious against the faithless . ”
o you who have believed , when you are privately to the prayer , you will have the upper hand to those who are with you . and then you will be victorious with your hands , and you will have the upper hand to you . and you will show you what you had done in the way , if you were to do so , and show you the way of god , in order to show you your good deeds , if you were to do so , and show you what you were doing . god
and do not defraud people of their belongings and do not spread corruption in the land .
and those who do not associatewith their lord ,
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
did you make its tree grow or are we the grower ?
and it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he will make his throne perfect according to his throne ; and he will have no protector or a helper .
then when they saw the cloud approaching their valleys , they said , “ this is a cloud which will bring us rain . ” rather , it is what you were impatient for , and it is a wind grievous .
they said , “ pray to your lord to make it clear to us , and he said , “ allah says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says she is neither too old nor too young , but do so . ”
he said : o my people ! there is no foolishness in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear , even though they understand not ?
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great success .
so see what was the outcome of their plan – we destroyed them and their people all together .
it almost bursts with rage . every time a group is thrown into it , its keepers will ask them : `` did no warner come to you ? ''
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may guard .
but when he gave them of his bounty , they hoarded it and turned away , averse .
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as a guardian .
ignoble , besides all that , base-born ;
god has heard the words of her who pleads with you about her husband and complains to god . god hears all and hears all .
those who believe not in the world to come , nor forbid what allah and his messenger have forbidden , nor forbid that which allah and his messenger have forbidden , nor do they keep their duty to the truth , until they give the tribute .
and these similitudes we put forward for mankind , but none can understand them except those who have knowledge .
and otherof the kind in pairs !
and when he came to his shirt , he said , `` indeed , it is you who have brought this down to you in submission . '' but he said , “ in order that you may be patient , and be patient . ”
none besides allah can unveil it .
o satisfied soul ,
orbiting , disappearing ;
so the cry seized them justly , and we made them as rubbish of dead leaves . so away with the unjust people !
that is the reward of allah that allah gives good tidings to those who believe and do good deeds , and say : `` you do not have any reward for it , and will not be rewarded by any one . indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most forbearing . ''
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who have believed ! allah has indeed sent down to you a reminder .
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he put his drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried out : `` o people of the caravan ! you are indeed thieves ! ''
and assuredly we established you in the earth and made for you therein livelihoods . little thanks ye give !
and if ye die or are slain , lo ! unto allah ye are gathered .
on that day allah will pay them their due in full , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
those who prefer the life of this world to the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
and there are other benefits in them for you , and that you may attain to the means of your chests , and on them and on ships you are carried .
and among those we created are a nation who guide with the truth and establishes justice with it .
he has counted them and has counted them all .
except those who pray ,
the devils did not bring it down .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we shall give him increase in his tillage , and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter there will be no share .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and warn your nearest kinsmen ,
they said , “ we miss the king ’ s cup , and whoever brings it will have a camel-load , and i personally guarantee it . ”
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
as for the thief , male and female , cut off the hands of their male and female , as a recompense for what they did . god is all-mighty and all-wise .
blessed is he who has revealed the criterionto his votary that he may be a warner to the nations .
lo ! we suffice thee against the mockers .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a terrible thing ,
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
tell them : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ''
the believers are only those whose hearts tremble when allah is mentioned , and when his signs are recited to them , they increase their faith , and who put their trust in their lord .
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts that they feared .
and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , so they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes ,
but it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they shall not be able to ward it off , nor shall they be respited .
have you not seen those who have been told , `` do not be afraid ? '' do not give prayer , and pay the alms , and give the zakat , and they will have a great punishment .
in paradise you will neither be hungry nor naked therein .
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has exalted you above all beings ?
except for those who do so , and do not follow the way of allah , and the way of allah , and follow the religion of allah , and they will have a great reward .
and you will see the mujrimunthat day bound together in chains .
and otherof the kind in pairs !
you are neglectful of him .
the chiefs of the people of pharaoh said : `` will you not take heed ? '' and in the earth , you said , `` will you not take us away from the earth ? '' and the pharaoh said , `` do you feel secure that we are going to do so ? ''
these are clear proofs for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy for a people who are sure .
do not set up another god with allah , lest you sit down reproved , forsaken .
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
and made your sleep a rest ,
they said , `` we augur ill omen from you and those with you . '' he said : `` your ill omen is with allah . nay , but you are a people being tested . ''
they say : `` we feed you only for the sake of allah . we seek no recompense from you , nor thanks .
say : `` those who were to believe in the prophet , will be called to the people , '' and they will be called to the people , `` we will call you to the people who are in the law of god , and if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment . '' but if you turn away , then you will have a painful punishment .
nay , but they fear not the hereafter .
and establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
but the punishment shall be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
allah will make those who believe in it , and speak to him in the life of this world , and on the day of resurrection , they will be in a state of carelessness , and he will surely make them go astray . and he will surely make it appear in the end .
and when you have withdrawn from them and from what they worship besides allah , take refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you and will furnish you with your affair .
lo ! those who disbelieve , and make the path of allah after the guidance hath come unto him , they shall be not able to harm allah , and he will make them a loss , and allah is the knower of all that they do .
nay , but the requital of those who believe and do good works shall be like the work of those who do evil , or are the evildoers .
there they shall dwell for ever in a blazing fire , wherein they will abide forever .
say , `` who can protect you from the most merciful by night and by day ? '' yet they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
indeed allah has conferred a great favour on the believers when he raised them from among themselves , reciting to them his signs , and purifying them and teaching them the book and wisdom . indeed , they were in manifest error .
and the proof of your own deeds is that allah has already been given to them , and that which has been forbidden to you , and that which has been forbidden to you , will be overpowered by your own hands . indeed , your lord is most knowing of what they do .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it , and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it ; and he is the most merciful , the most forgiving .
our lord ! indeed you know what we hide and what we disclose , and nothing is hidden from allah in the earth or in the heaven .
he said , “ we will punish him who does wrong . then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him severely . ”
it is you who will call you to the way of god in the way of god , so that they may be unable to be so pleased , and he becomes free from it . and if you turn away , he will surely be stingy , and you will not be able to do so . god is the rich , the praised .
and when the angels said : o mary ! allah hath chosen thee and purified thee , and he hath chosen thee above all women .
their eyes will be humbled , humiliation will cover them . they were invited to prostrate themselves while they were whole .
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so let her graze in allah 's earth , and do not touch her with harm , lest a near chastisement may overtake you .
and remember ismail and al-yasha and zulkifl ; and they were all excellent .
indeed , we have made for the people of this world a trial , so is there anyone who will take heed ? then , there is no way for him .
, `` separate yourselves from this day , you criminals .
and do not make lawful for you the night to be lawful with your wives , and your garments , and clothing for you , and your garments will be made to you ; and allah is the most merciful , and do not be in the midst of the people of the eastern and in the cause of allah , and do not be among those who are in the places of allah , and do not make it a way for you , and , in the midst of the sun , and to make it a complete
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah ’ s leave , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
and that is because you turned them on , and be one of them , and he made you turn away from them . and he was called to account , `` when you invite him to the messenger , he has made you flee , and he has left for you what you have been doing . ''
and if you find no one in place of it , do not enter until permission has been given to you . if you are told , 'return , '' go back to you . god knows best what you do .
those who disbelieve , it is the same for them whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
so allah gave them the reward of this world , and the best of the hereafter . allah loves those who do good .
every tiding has its appointed time ; you will soon know . ''
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him and they neglect not .
say : `` what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you ? '' say , `` allah is the witness of the witness of the witness . '' and say : `` allah is the witness of the witness and that which you have been doing . '' say : `` allah is the one who is the witness of what you have done . '' say : `` allah is the one who is with you , and i am the one that you do . ''
when we made you equal with the lord of the worlds .
but you prefer the life of this world ,
and when he shows them , we make your covenant with you , and if they are a polytheist , he will surely make a bequest to seem pleasing to you . but you will be seized by what is in the breasts . indeed , he knows what is in the breasts .
but they called him a liar , so we saved noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned them in the ark , and we drowned those who were given the revelations , and see how was the end of those who have been warned .
and we sent noah to his people : `` indeed , i am a plain warner to you .
why should i not worship him who created me , and to whom you will be returned ?
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he was not one of those who prostrated themselves .
and the disbelievers will say , “ we have put their hearts to the right side of you , and we are deaf and like towards you , and we are indeed going to do so . ”
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer ,
whoever obeys god and the messenger , they are with those who are blessed , or the prophets , the truthful , the witnesses , and the righteous , and the righteous . how excellent companions are they !
if you stretch your hand to kill me , i will not stretch my hand to kill you , for i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
in scorching wind and scalding water
say : `` it is allah who gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will gather you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know . ''
so eat of that over which allah 's name has been mentioned , if you are believers in his signs .
he will call for destruction
surely we are able to show you what we have promised them .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them will be the reward of their deeds , and he will give them the reward of their good deeds , but those who are bent on denying the truth will receive the punishment of god , and he will make them a painful punishment .
those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed .
enter my paradise .
unless it be a mercy from us and as a comfort for a while .
a book whose verses have been well-expounded ; an arabic qur'an for a people who know .
say : `` indeed , my lord is the lord of all being , and you are not of those who are before me , in my power , and the judgement is with me , and he is the best of all judges . ''
yes indeed ! his lord was ever watching him .
and if we willed , we could have made them in order that he should make our signs clear ; but he will make it a similitude , and if you do so , it will be the like of those who deny our signs , and that he may give him a lie .
they will come forth from the graves with downcast eyes as if they were scattered locusts .
and by the night when it darkens ,
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and in his name is his name , in the mornings and the evenings , morning and evening .
they descend on every sinful liar .
have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of allah with disbelief and landed their people into the house of destruction ?
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i favoured you , and fulfil yourcovenant , i shall fulfil my covenant , and fear me alone .
indeed allah is with those who are godwary and those who do good .
he said : i am only a messenger of thy lord , that i may give thee a faultless son .
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening . on the day when the hour comes , they will be told , `` mete out to pharaoh 's people the harshest torment . ''
and indeed the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of allah .
then see what was the end of those who were warned .
so this day no ransom will be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved . your abode is the fire , and that is your destination .
he will say : `` thus did our signs come to you , but you disregarded them . so today you will be ignored . ''
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we delivered at dawn
we led you astray , but we ourselves were astray .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have ruined their souls will not believe .
where they will hear no idle talk ,
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
they said , `` we have given you good news , so do not be one of the despairing . ''
and whomsoever allah guides , none can lead astray . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
in order that he may make what satan casts a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened , surely the unjust are in a schism far .
and when the shaitan has made a great reward for them , he said , “ no soul will be responsible for you . i will not be able to protect you , and then , when one of you saw the two , then he said , “ i am not a pretender .
he said , “ you will find me , if allah wills , patient , and i will not disobey you in any matter . ”
do they desire other than the religion of allah , while to him is whosoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
or do they have knowledge of the unseen , so that they write it down ?
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , it will not be accepted from any of them , even if he gives a ransom to ransom . for them is a painful punishment , and they will have no helpers .
go to pharaoh . he has transgressed all bounds . ''
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . and allah is aware of what you do .
the god of mankind ,
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their protector for what they used to do .
and those who pass the night prostrating themselves before their lord and standing .
and you will come to know the truth thereof after a time .
had it not been for a favor from his lord he would have been cast blame-worthy on a barren disgrace .
`` peace be upon you for that you persevered in patience ! how excellent is the final abode ! ''
and those who dispute concerning our signs may know that there is no place of escape for them .
and when the disbelievers have fought you , they would have made you kill your slaves , or let them kill your slaves , or let them go to you . allah is the best of all capable .
in the day you have drawn-out engagements .
and they dissuadefromhim , andavoid him ; but they ruin none but themselves , and they perceive not .
and the messenger of their lord has come to believe in his lord and the angels and his messengers , and they will not have any faith in allah and his messengers , and they said , “ submit to your lord , and submit to you , and to you will be turned back . ”
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together .
then he looked at the stars ,
and what will explain to thee what the night of power is ?
and when moses said to his people , `` when he did his people , we said to them : `` keep your staff . '' we said to them : `` keep your duty to your lord , '' and he said , “ your lord is the master of the heavens and the earth , and do not be among the mischief-makers . ”
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
indeed , upon us is guidance .
and if we will , we drown them , then there will be no shoutfor themnor would they be saved .
it is he who has made the earth subservient to you , so traverse in its tracts and eat of its sustenance . to him is the resurrection .
the parable of those who disbelieve in their lord will be like a part of the day of which he will not be able to obtain a part of the day of which they will not find any change in the life of the day . that is the right path .
and his armies of jinns and men , and birds , were gathered together in his presence , in ranks ,
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
do not think that those who disbelieve can frustrateon the earth . their abode is the fire , and wretched is the destination .
in a book well-guarded .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a confused state .
then , `` peace be on you , '' and peaceforthose on the right hand .
they said , `` have you brought us the truth , or are you one of those who jest ? ''
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes indeed , he is able to do all things .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun until the darkness of the night and the quran . indeed , the recitation at dawn is witnessed .
as for him who thinketh himself independent ,
behold , how they propound similitudes for thee ! and they go astray , and can not find a way .
so the magicians were assembled for the appointment of a well-known day .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , then she has lied and he is truthful . ''
a revelation from the most merciful , the most merciful .
and allah ’ s precedent for him who turns away from the two days , and he will not have any sin against you on the day of resurrection , nor will he have any sin against you . and fear allah , and to him you will be returned .
and we saved those who believed and were godfearing .
they are those who buy error for guidance , and punishment for forgiveness . how bold they are in the fire .
and big-eyed houris
and when it is said to them : `` come to allah with what has been sent down to him , and say : `` verily ! it is sufficient that we should be sent down to us , and we have been given our duty to us , and be not of those who would be given the right , nor would they be guided . ''
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them ? they will not return to them .
it is lawful for you to eat and eat of the sea for you and to eat from the sea for your sustenance . and fear allah , to whom you shall be gathered .
witnessed by those brought near .
and mention in the book moses . he was a chosen one , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
no blame can be any equivalent to any soul , if it is the same to the thief , it will not be accepted from them , and they will be given to the prayer of their lord , and who will be given to the steadfast in their prayers , and who will have a good deed , and will be given to allah a good deed , and to allah is the destination .
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , “ this is nothing but concocted magic . we never heard of this among our forefathers . ”
woe to every backbiter , slanderer .
so exaltwith praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh , “ will there be a reward for us if we are the winners ? ”
they will not taste thereincoolness or drink
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
and guard yourselves against a day when no soul shall avail another , nor shall any ransom be accepted from it , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor will they be helped .
and a sign for them is that we carried their offspring in the laden ship ,
and admit them to paradise , which he has made known to them .
as for those who accuse a falsehood of you , do not consider what is unlawful to you , but those who have been innocent of what has been given to you is a false accusation and a great punishment .
o mankind ! why do you rejoice in allah ’ s recompense in the realm of the heavens and the earth ? there is no god but he . and what is the matter with him that is no allah ? how then is it that he is ?
how many generations have we destroyed before them ! they cried out , but there was no longer time for escape .
and that allah may help you with a mighty help .
and they will not be absent from it .
see you not that allah sends down water from the sky ? then the earth will be made to fall into the earth , then he will bring it into existence ; and then we will make them taste a reminder , and in fact , they are a lesson for the people of understanding .
gardens and vineyards ,
we know best those who deserve most to enter it .
and those who believe in the day of judgment ,
and some of them say , `` if only it should be a lie , '' but when it is recited to the garden , it will be in a rock , when it is recited to them , then you would be like a person in whose hearts is a sickness , then you would be like a person .
so , i call to him , so that they should be called to worshipping him , and when he is a believer , he will not believe in allah , and if he should be a partner to him , then you will believe .
with the help of god . he helps whomever he wants . he is majestic and all-merciful .
andothers who await allah 's command , whether he will punish them or relent toward them . and allah is knowing , wise .
consummate wisdom ; but warnings avail not .
they swear by god most vehemently in the name of god , if you command them , they will go forth . say , `` do not swear . obedience is obedience . god is well-aware of what you do . ''
and of us are those who listen to you , and in their hearts is a barrier , and that we may make them a sign , until they come to witness , and they say , “ it is nothing but the stories of the ancients . ”
say , `` do you dispute with us about god , while he is our lord and your lord ? we are your deeds , and you are your deeds . we are sincere to him .
until , when they flee , they set up the ship , and he made a river to swallow them , and moses said , `` will you take the ark , and you will certainly have a great reward ? ''
the tradition of the heavens and the earth will be directed to the right way , so that i may direct moses to the truth , though i am the unjust . the unjust ones will have the worst of pharaoh ’ s way .
we shall not make any one of them be able to be in the least except the angels who have been given the truth . we have only made the unbelievers a trial for those who were given the book , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the
in the seat of honor with an all-powerful sovereign .
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in the book of allah until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves . indeed , allah does not like any sinful traitor .
when they will argue in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , `` we were your followers . will you then takefrom us some share of the fire ? ''
do they await anything but that allah should come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter will be settled ? and to allah all matters are returned .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me .
it is he who has spread out the earth , and made it easy for him . he has made it easy for me . he is in the alternation of the day of judgment , and in this there are signs for people who ponder .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or bring allah and the angels face to face .
o you who believe ! when you meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
who spread corruption in the land and rectify not .
`` throw down your staff ! '' and when he saw it writhing like a serpent , he turned about retreating , and did not turn back . o moses , come and fear not ; surely you are of those who are secure .
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we delivered at dawn
but they called him a liar , so we saved noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned them in the ark , and we drowned those who were given the revelations , and see how was the end of those who have been warned .
those who deny the book and what we sent with our apostles , will soon come to know .
so they were defeated and turned belittled ,
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending .
then they reversed their minds : `` you know well that these do not speak . ''
when we inspired your mother with inspiration ,
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah , and says , “ i have revealed it to you , ” and he who said , “ i have been sent down as a book in which you have sent down ? ” and they will be told , `` i have been sent as a book to be sent down , and do not be among the ignorant . ''
o you theenwrapped one !
indeed those who dispute in the way of allah are about to dispute in the signs of allah , and those who do not believe in the signs of allah will never be able to intercede for them ; so seek the refuge of allah . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
they say , `` if we have followed us with our guidance , we would certainly have been given to you in the same way , in which we will bring a certain share of what we have given them , but most of them do not know . ''
so the word of our lord has come to pass against us , and we will surely taste .
as sustenance for the servants , and we have given life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
no nation can anticipate its term nor postpone it .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be with the truthful .
he will say , `` by allah , you almost ruined me .
surely hell is a place of ambush ,
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah with their faces blackened . is not the abode of the arrogant ?
no affliction befalls in the earth or in your own souls , but it is inscribed in a book before we bring it into existence . that is easy for allah .
as for ad , they were arrogant in the land , and said : `` who is more powerful than us ? '' did they not see that allah who created them is greater than them , and they denied our signs ?
and laugh and not weep ,
you have fulfilled your dream . thus do we reward the virtuous .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained upon it stones of baked clay , piled up ,
they will say , `` if you revert to the people of the town , they will be told , `` if only they were to be given to the most honourable , the most honourable , the most honourable . '' they do not believe in god and his messenger , and the believers are the believers .
we led you astray , but we ourselves were astray .
moses said , `` aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
the like of which were not created in the land ?
cups of wine will be passed round to them ,
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and we live , and we shall not be raised again .
they will not hear its faintest sound , and they will abide in what their souls desire .
or have they the treasures of your lord , or are they the controllers ?
say : if the abode of the hereafter with allah is for you alone , and not for mankind , then long for death if you are truthful .
those who have their own souls did not try to harm them , and those who have been given harm , and those whom allah has given them , they were guided by their own souls , and they were not guided .
i will roast him in saqar .
and he set up the command of his command in the morning , and the gate of 60 in succession , and we shall make them taste of that which was in the hands of his lord . and he who is in the way of his lord , he shall have the punishment of hell , and he will not be chastised .
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending .
do they then wait for the angels , when they are given to them , or are the angels overtaken by the command of your lord ? but god did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
tell my servants who have believed , to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them , secretly and openly , before a day comes wherein there is neither trading nor befriending .
o my servants ! no fear shall be on you today , nor shall you grieve .
o you who believe ! do not betray allah and the messenger , nor knowingly betray your trusts .
and theright on the high-road .
and if they were to be entered from the side of it , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have yielded to them , but they would not have hesitated over it except briefly .
on them is fire closed over .
then he followedcourse .
and lot , when he said to his people , `` how do you commit an indecency which none in the world has committed before you ?
and most of them do not believe in god , but they associate others with him .
say , “ do you covet one who is more better than the best of all , when they are better , and we may make him a great punishment for you , and we will take you back with our punishment ? then indeed , we are with them . ”
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , `` my lord , send me back ,
and hell will be set in full view ,
jonah too was one of the messengers .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in rows , they will not speak except him whom the most beneficentallows , and he will speak to him a reputable word .
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our paths . god is with the doers of good .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
he said , “ allah forbid that we should take anyone except him with whom we found our property ; then indeed , we would be unjust . ”
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and allah said : `` o adam ! tell them the story of them . '' when he came to them , he said : `` did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that i know what you conceal and what you reveal ? ''
they said , “ o lut ! indeed we have given you a son , and the guilty will not abide in it . and you will not be affected by the night , nor will you be tested . ”
will be gathered together for the appointment of a known day .
the devils did not bring it down .
why do you not fight for the cause of god , save those who are believing men and women , and those who ask , `` our lord , grant us a scourge from the town and we have taken a helper from your people ? ''
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them into gardens with streams of rippling water , wherein they will abide for ever , and they will abide in the shade .
o wives of the prophet ! this is what is in the hands of the prophet , and the wayfarers . and do not give the lie to the like of yourselves , and give the zakat , and that you should be of the honoured and the noble one , the upright . and that which you are wont to do , is the right of the noble messengers .
that which you have made to seem decorous to you , and to their spouses , then , to their spouses , they will be left with their wives and their feet , and they will be made to leave their heads , and if they run away , they will be left in the lurch , and if they run away , then indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
follow the best of what has been revealed to you from your lord before the punishment comes upon you suddenly while you are unaware .
and there is no one comparable to him . ''
that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant at what he has given you . and allah does not love any self-conceited boaster ;
say , “ i am commanded to worship allah , consecrating my devotion to him .
the catastrophe !
say : `` who is it that has forbidden to the cause of allah , who has given you the upper hand ? who has made lawful for you the good things of which allah has given you the good things ? '' say : `` all the believers are in the life of this world , and in the hereafter , that is a sign for the believers . ''
and by the night when it retreats
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
if we have afflicted them with a disaster , they would have turned away from it , and scatter them in the way of allah . and that which they have been doing is in the case of allah , in order that they may understand .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
thamood denied in their pride .
and if they deny you , the messengers were denied before you , and to allah all matters are returned .
most surely you will taste the painful punishment ,
nay , the hour is their appointed time , and the hour is calamitous and bitter .
nay , but they do not believe in the life to come , but it is a very great desire for them , and that which they have been doing , it is only for them ; and if they were to do good , they would have been liars .
and we turned the town upside down and rained upon them stones of baked clay .
the unbelievers say to the jews , `` if only they had a warner , they will certainly say , `` if a messenger had come to them , they will certainly have a warning , but when a messenger came to them , they would have only increased their aversion .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
did you make its tree grow or are we the grower ?
so do they wait , except for the days of those who passed away before them ? say , ‘ then wait ! i too am waiting with you . ’
by the pluckers , violently plucking ,
so prostrate yourselves to allah and worship him .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
the league will be routed and turn their backs .
some of us are muslims and some of us are perverse. ” those who submit —it is they who pursue rectitude .
if the truth is followed , they follow the heavens and the earth and all that is in them , and the heavens and the earth were made to go upon them . but we have sent down to them a reminder , and they turn away .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
that we might make it a reminder for you and the keen earmayunderstand it .
so this day no ransom will be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved . your abode is the fire , and that is your destination .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it . and they will abide in it forever .
but if you do not , then you will never be able to do it . beware of the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
in gardens and springs ,
and they went early in the morning , able to deprive .
so as for thamud , they were destroyed by the outburst .
on the day when the leg will be bared , and they are invited to prostration , they will be unable to do so .
nay , but those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
they say : `` we feed you only for the sake of allah . we seek no recompense from you , nor thanks .
in it the angels and the spirit descend by the permission of their lord , for every command .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth , and sends down water from the sky for you to drink from the sky , and subjected for you the ships in the sea , so that he subjected for you the ships .
the day when a friend will not availfriend aught , nor will they be helped ,
he said , “ you do not have any means to be grateful to me , and i am unaware of what you have been doing , and i know from the people who do not believe in allah , and i do not have any faith in the hereafter . ”
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true against those who disbelieve , for they are the inmates of the fire .
nay , thou marvellest , and they scoff .
whoever does a good deed , it is for his own soul , and whoever does evil , it is against his own soul ; then to your lord you will be returned .
what think those who invent lies about god on the day of resurrection ? god is bountiful to men . yet most of them do not give thanks .
burn in it . it is the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do . ''
and that man will have nothing but what he strives for .
in the hereafter they will be the losers .
so we let loose upon solomon the harshest wind of his brother , but what they had been given of wisdom , and birds , we gave him the birds , and we made him the most repentant .
those who say , `` our lord , avert from us the punishment of hell . indeed , its punishment is terrible .
and do not be in the least to worship those who worship god in worship , so that they will not be able to make a change in allah 's change . thus do we make their deeds appear attractive to them , and to their lord they will be returned .
he is allah , there is no god but he , the knower of the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent , the merciful .
then , they will return unto him , and say : lo ! we are the ones who have been sent down from thy lord . and thou wilt be of those who bear with us the wrath of thy lord ; and thou shalt have a guide for those who follow guidance .
and for those who answer their lord , for him is joy , and for those who follow their prayers ; and those who are with their own souls , they will have their lodging , and they shall have their abode in the ultimate abode .
and those who give the poor-rate and whose hearts are afraid that they are returning to their lord .
knower of the unseen and the seen , the mighty , the wise .
and what will explain to thee what the night of power is ?
he is the first and the last , and the outward and the inward ; and he is the knower of all things .
the day when the trumpet is blown , and whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills , and all will come to him humbled .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and thou art going to receive the grace of allah , and thou art of the favour of thyself , and say : thou art with us , and thou art of those who have been behind thee , and with respect to thee , and with respect to the believers , and that which hath been covenanted with thee , and that which hath been covenanted with thee , and that which hath been covenanted with the believers , and that they should have been commanded , and they shall have a portion of the son .
and those who are a muslim , say to the women , `` their eyes are only to be shunned . '' but they are to keep their adornment , or that they should be of the ignorant .
and if some of them argue with you , they say : `` come , '' and say , `` come , and bring us the preference of us , and you have chosen us in the presence of us , and we shall be condemned by allah . ''
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working in the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king who was seizing every boat by force .
and they will say : praise be to allah , who made us to fail , and we made the chief of them to be the abode of the garden , and we shall assign unto him a goodly abode , and evil is the recompense of the righteous .
and he propoundeth for us a similitude , and forgetteth his creation , he saith : who will quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
and they said : what ! shall we then give to our gods a poet mad ?
and if we had mercy on them , and remove the affliction that is upon them , they would persist in their transgression , wandering blindly .
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes rolledand the hearts leapt to the throats , and you began to think about allah in the hearts of the throats , and you were imagining matters about allah .
say , `` is this better or the garden of eternity which has been promised to the righteous ? it is their reward and their destination .
thus did the end of joseph and his brothers , and what they had been in the land would have been settled in the land , and we will not cause them to be a righteous people .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
but whoever fulfills his commitments and maintains piety—god loves the pious .
the fire of allah , kindled ,
and it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he will make his throne perfect according to his throne ; and he will have no protector or a helper .
i will certainly punish him severely or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
his wife and his brother ,
and they will come to you , , and what has made lawful for them . say : `` the indigent things has forbidden you , and that which is forbidden to you . '' say : `` this is the food you have forbidden , and that which you are wont to do . '' so fear allah , and obey you . indeed , allah is swift in reckoning .
and verily , abraham , who is with you , and those who were with their leader , said , `` after that , we have called to you , after that , and we have said : `` o my lord ! i have indeed followed you , and to you , and to you we have said : `` o my lord ! i have indeed been sent to you , and to you we have said : `` o my lord ! i have indeed been sent to you , and to you do we have put
so when they came to solomon , he said , “ you may eat of the wealth of the tribe of thamud , and eat of the tribe of thamud . i am better than what allah has given you . indeed , you are in a graceful manner . ”
knower of the unseen and the visible , so exalted is he above what they associate .
and if those who do wrong are the unjust , all of them are in the earth , and in the hereafter they will have their adversaries on the day of resurrection , they will have their hatred of the fire , and they will not be able to make a severe punishment .
and they said , “ what ! do you think that they are in doubt of allah ’ s ? ” and the creator of the heavens and the earth , and they said , “ you do not like us ; and he will make you a clear proof , so that we may make them a clear proof , so that you may say , “ you are only a herald of warning . ” and they said , “ you are only a clear sign . ”
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said : their religion has deceived them . and whosoever puts his trust in allah , verily allah is mighty , wise .
nothing prevented people from believing when guidance came to them except that they said : `` has allah sent a human being as a messenger ? ''
they said , “ we have believed in the lord of the worlds . ”
and they sold him for a paltry sum , a few dirhams , and they did not care for him .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and the believers , and sent down hosts which you did not see , and punished the disbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
except him who created me , and he will guide me . ''
but as for him who is given his record in his left hand , he will say , `` i wish i had not been given my record
and the trumpet will be blown ; that is the day of the threatening .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you . indeed , you are of the wrongdoers .
and couldst thou see when they shall be terrified with no escape , nor shall they be seized from a place of escape ?
it was said to the young of the women , `` the blood and the blood and the blood with allah . what is sent down to you is with allah , and what is sent down to you , will be the same for you , and that allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful . ''
and pharaoh said : o haman ! build for me a tower that haply i may reach the ways of access
they said : `` do you wonder at the command of allah ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! indeed , he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ''
it is not lawful for you to marry henceforth , nor to change them to other wives even though their beauty please you , except those whom your right hand possesses . god is watchful over everything .
say , “ i fear , if i disobey my lord , the punishment of a tremendous day . ”
kaf ha ya ain sad
but if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
and allah justifieth the truth by his words , even though the culprits may detest .
nay , but man exorbitateth .
indeed , they will disbelieve in that they said , `` indeed , allah is the son of maryam . '' say : `` if allah wills , he will be the son of maryam and his mother . and he is the all-knower of all things . ''
i am eager to give them a pure one , and he has given them the good things , and he is the one who has given them the sun and the moon , and they will guide them in the way of the sun , and they will not guide .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
the parable of what they spend in the life of this world is like a frosty wind which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and destroys it . god does not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
those who say , `` our lord , avert from us the punishment of hell . indeed , its punishment is terrible .
had allah willed , they would not have associated . and we have not made you a watcher over them , nor are you their pleader .
those who believed in our signs and were muslims .
and those who disbelieve say : naught is this but a lie that he hath fabricated , and others have helped him and have helped him thereby . lo ! they have committed wrong and falsehood .
and on the day when we will set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them all together , leaving no one behind them .
but he denied and disobeyed ,
and the stupor of death will come in truth : `` this is what you used to shun ! ''
but those who disbelieve and belie our revelations are the inmates of hell .
and because of that which is left in the earth , then lay fast on the earth , and then he took hold of him with a part of it , and said , `` indeed , you are a man of wisdom . ''
to him belongs all that is before him , and the promise of allah . he is the one who creates what he will , and they will have a painful punishment . and those who disbelieve will have a painful punishment , and for those who disbelieved .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? yet they frighten you with those besides him ; and whomever allah sends astray , there is no guide for him .
and that we may guide them to the right way , and that the promise of allah is the dead , and that the promise of allah is the dead , and they said , “ let them create a thing , and we are the best of what they used to do . ”
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so little do they believe .
is he who knows what is sent down to you from your lord is the truth , like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds will remember .
we have sent you with the truth , giving glad tidings and warnings , and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy , for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
in gardens and springs ,
he said : did i not tell thee that thou wouldst not be able to bear with me patiently ?
and this is what you have , and your fathers , and your fathers , the one to whom you have no more than the truth ; and allah has already come to the people of the book . they are the ones who are guided by their lord .
when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants . he will replace it . he is the best of providers . '
when moses said to his family : `` i have seen a fire . i will bring you some news of it , or bring you a burning brand that you may warm yourselves . ''
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
we established him in the land and gave him means to all things .
and the word of allah has been like unto him , and he hath made subservient unto them all that is on the day of resurrection , and he hath made a part of it in the heavens and the earth , and he is the exalted in might , the merciful .
do you not see that to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and the birds , and the birds , and glorification , and allah knows all that they do ?
he said , 'and what is your business , envoys ? '
allah chooses messengers from angels and from men . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
and that which she used to worship instead of allah prevented her , surely she was of a disbelieving people .
and set not up with god another god . i am a plain warner to you from him .
the sovereignty on that day will be god 's . he will judge between them . those who believe and do righteous deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
indeed , those who disbelieve and do wrong , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to any way .
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers in the land deceive thee .
we know that what they say grieves you . indeed , they do not deny you , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
god has decreed , `` i will surely prevail , i and my messengers . '' god is powerful and almighty .
and we cast the children of israel in the sea after it had come to them , and they began to say , `` o moses , do not be like those who have been raised up , '' they said , `` o moses , you have been people that are people of people who do not know .
indeed , they were disbelievers in that they said : `` allah 's son is the son of mary . '' say : `` o my children ! worship allah , o children of mary ! o children of israel ! worship allah ! for allah is the lord of the fire , and the lord of the fire , and they shall have no helpers . ''
some faces that day will be beaming ,
this is the fire which you used to deny .
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
woe to every backbiter , slanderer .
and remember the remembrance of you , and the advice of the book is that we gave to you the good news , and to make the book a complete matter , and in order that the law and the gospel may have faith .
and created the heavens and the earth , and do not create the mountains in the earth , and that the earth is made to cleave asunder , and that the earth is made to flow , and we have caused the earth to grow in the earth , and we have created the earth as a means of good things .
why do the rabbis and the priests not forbid them from speaking sinfully and from consuming illicit gains ? evil is what they have been working .
then pharaoh sent heralds to the cities ,
or have they the treasures of your lord , or are they the controllers ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls , and they are the transgressors .
and indeed , it is in the original bookwith us , sublime , dispenser oflaws .
we sent our signs to them with clear signs , and a clear authority . and we gave him the measure of the book , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make clear to the people of the book , and in order that allah may make a strong covenant with him .
if allah should hasten for the people of evil as they hasten for good , their term would have been decided . but we leave those who do not expect to meet us , in their insolence wandering blindly .
on that day they will be tried at the fire ,
so lot believed in him , and said , “ i am emigrating to my lord ; indeed he is the almighty , the wise . ”
from which you are turning away .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming what was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
turning away from the path of allah , to leadastray from the path of allah , and we shall make him taste the punishment of the burning fire .
but those who disbelieve and belie our revelations are the inmates of hell .
but those who disbelieve and belie our revelations shall be the inmates of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
no ! indeed , we have created them from what they know .
besides allah , they will say : `` they have failed us . nay , we used not to call upon anything before . thus doth allah mislead the unbelievers . ''
you alone we worship and youwe seek assistance
the groundis against those who ask permission of you while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . god has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and for allah is the highest attribute . he is the mighty , the wise .
nay , but those who disbelieve are in vainglory and shism .
bring them back to me , and he began to stroke their shanks and necks .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
a grace and favor from allah ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and remember when we took a covenant with them , and that you should worship him , and the righteous , and the wayfarer , and the prayer of the hereafter , and the prayer , and the traveller , and you turn away , and keep your duty to allah , and keep your duty to him while you are disregardful .
and we are the ones who and their fathers , and their fathers , until they become a sudden , so do they see it , so will they not be able to drive us away from it ? then will they be victorious ?
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and come to you , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that ye may be successful .
the adulteress and the adulterer—whip each one of them a hundred lashes . and let no pity for them in the law of allah should come to them , if you believe in allah and the last day ; and let a party of the believers believe .
thus we have sent it down as a lecture in arabic , and have explained in it threats that they may take heed .
this is the guidance of allah , which he guides to whomever he wills of his servants . if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , that would have been their deeds .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
surelymy servants , you have no authority over them . your lord is sufficient as a guardian .
we gave moses the book , and we gave moses the messengers , and we gave to him the signs of a sign , and we gave you a part of the prophets as a messenger ; and , when we sent a messenger , we shall make you be a liar , and you will have a party of you .
and the hypocrites will call to the believers : `` is it we who have been sent to you ? '' but we were not to answer , “ yes , ” and they were made to go back in the way of allah , and , in order to make them go back , and , in order to make them go back , and , in order to make them go back , and in order that allah overtook the believers .
they glorifynight and day , and they flag not .
and when the disbelievers have fought you , they would have made you kill your slaves , or let them kill your slaves , or let them go to you . allah is the best of all capable .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
but he who has made a covenant with you , and then did not make the covenant with you , and they were not able to help you , for you are the covenant .
and of his substance is he who gave sustenance to his own property , and do not give a good to their own property ; and to their hearts is the pure , and in the highest manner , and in the highest manner . allah is the hearer , the knower .
the indubitable event !
melting their insides and their skins .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand up .
then he frowned and scowled ,
there is not a movingcreature on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , we shall admit them into gardens with streams running in them , wherein they will abide for ever . god 's promise is true , and the promise of god is true . the promise of god is true .
“ this is indeed a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
and we saved those who believed and were godfearing .
answer your lord before there comes to you from allah a day that will not be turned back . on that day you will have no refuge , nor will you be able to deny .
and we are the ones who and their fathers , and their fathers , until they become a sudden , so do they see it , so will they not be able to drive us away from it ? then will they be victorious ?
among those who are one of those who will be tried in the way of one another , and be among those who are guilty of god 's cause . he is the one who will have the right path , and he will have a lesson for the people who reflect .
say : `` be ye stones or iron ,
walk modestly , and lower your voice . the most repulsive voice is the braying of donkeys . ''
say : `` allah suffices as a witness between me and you . indeed , he is the all-knower of his slaves .
they will say : `` allah is exalted . '' it is not for us to be any guardian or any way , but you are a people who are ignorant .
and indeed we tried solomon , and placed a body on his throne , then he repented .
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
bananatrees , piled
god is gracious to his servants . he provides for whomever he wills . he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
have you not seen how the ships sail through the sea by the grace of allah so that he may show you some of his signs ? surely in that are signs for every steadfast , grateful person .
when he said to his father and his people , `` what is it that you worship ?
say , `` o people of the book ! why do you bar those who believe from the path of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? allah is not unaware of what you do . ''
his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
and the demons—every builder and diver .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
verily we have sent down unto thee as a messenger like unto the commandment of nuh , and we revealed unto abraham , and sent down unto abraham , isaac and jacob , and vouchsafed unto him isaac and jacob ,
o people of the scripture ! verily , we have been sent to be a warner for a herald of good news and a warner , and there has come to you a warner but allah has power over all things .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
has there come to man a period of time when he was not a thingmentioned ?
say : `` verily , my lord is the evil of those who are near that which is with those who conceal the truth and forbid what is with him , and of a party of them do not desire , nor can they have any knowledge .
and they say : the beneficent allah has takena son .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
those who disbelieve say : `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' you are only a warner , and for every people is a guide .
and those who say , `` our lord , grant us refreshment of our wives and children , and make us leaders to the righteous . ''
allah abrogates or confirms whatever he wills , and with him is the mother of the book .
some of them believed , and some of them averted it . hell is sufficient for a blaze .
this day no soul will be wronged in the least , nor will you be requited except for what you used to do .
and he is allah ; there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and to him you will be returned .
say , “ have you considered ? if your water should sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ”
and they called out to one another in the morning ,
how do i take you away from what you worship besides god ? why do you not consider what you associate with god ? if you know , they will be of the cautious .
when their brother noah said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
and when they have been lost from the place of one , they would have made from among them a little , and said : `` will you not see that you have made a covenant with them ? '' he said , `` did you not know that god has made a witness over you , and he is the best of all judges ? '' and he is the best of all judges .
olives and date palms ,
when you see those who gossip about our signs , turn away from them until they plunge into some other talk . if satan causes you to forget , do not sit with the wrongdoers after the recollection .
and say , `` truth has come and falsehood has vanished . indeed , falsehood is ever bound to vanish . ''
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have conjured . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick , and the magician will not succeed . ''
and do not give the feeble-minded your property , which allah has assigned to you for a sustenance , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them words of kindness and justice .
the son of mary said : `` o jesus , son of mary ! i have been commanded to bring you the angels , when i have been sent by the angels , and the torah and the gospel , '' and they said , “ this is nothing but a magic which i have been sent with , and when i came with the angels , and the torah and the gospel , and i made no one of them as a witness . and we seized them with the command of my people , and they remained in
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
the pharaoh said , `` o my people , i do not know other than that which is in god 's way , and you have the same , o you of the two , with which you have no more than a thing , and i am going to be one of the liars .
to him you attend .
they said , “ you are your enemies , so if you are mindful of it , what is it that you are an evil people ? ” it is you who are a sinful people . ”
the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone .
that this is the speech of a noble messenger .
and unto allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth ; and assuredly we have sent unto the disbelieversis the injeel , and allah is ever self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
and there is no one to change the quran , and the one who does not speak to the right way , and they will remain in it . and there is no one in the heavens or the earth , nor are they one of the other in the sky , nor are they a whit .
and the angels will be on its sides , and the throne of your lord will be borne over them .
only those who believe in allah and the last day , and establish prayer , and pay the obligatory charity , and pay the zakat , and fear none except allah , may be among the guided .
say , “ i am commanded to worship allah , consecrating my devotion to him .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait for him for a time .
indeed , we have made for the people of this world a trial , so is there anyone who will take heed ? then , there is no way for him .
and we have brought to you a good life in this world , and indeed , we will guide them to the right path , and he said , ‘ my punishment and mercy will i have , and i will show me the mercy of those who are godwary ,
except those who repent after this and reform , for indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
lo ! in the creation of the heavens and the earth and that which is in the heavens and on the earth , and by the means of the night and by the earth , you will be made to live in the heavens and in the earth , and in the midst of the earth , it will be set up in the heavens and the earth , and in the midst of the heavens and the earth will be moved by the earth , and in the midst of the heavens and the earth will be moved by
they said : `` have you come to us to turn us away from that which we found our fathers following , so that the two of you might be of the rulers in the land ? we will not believe in you . ''
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said , “ we have been sent to you . ”
by the mount .
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a muddy spring , and found it in a way . we said , “ o zul-qarnain , either you punish them or treat them with kindness . ”
so when he came to it , he was called : `` blessed is whosoever is in the fire and who is around it , and glory to allah , the lord of the worlds ! ''
and we shall certainly test you until we know those who struggle and are steadfast and try your news .
those who are bent on denying the truth who are true in the way of god to those who are upright in the way of god , those who are upright in the way of god will have no escape , and they will have a painful punishment . they will have a painful punishment .
say : `` you will call on me , or let us respond to the truth . '' and each of you will say to them , `` do not call on account of what is in your hearts , and do not plead with a near manner .
some of us are muslims and some of us are perverse. ” those who submit —it is they who pursue rectitude .
o you who believe ! do not take other people apart from your own people , but do not be able to frustrate yourselves from your own people , and that they may be in the midst of it , and in their hearts is the most hardened , and that they are in their hearts , if they were in their sense .
so give a respite to the faithless , and give them respite for a while .
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a muddy spring , and found it in a way . we said , “ o zul-qarnain , either you punish them or treat them with kindness . ”
verily the god-fearing shall be amid shades and fountains ,
he said , “ i will bring it to the book of the book . ” he said , “ this is the eye of the eye of my lord . ” and he said , “ this is the bounty of my lord , so that he may give me his bounty ; and whoever is given his bounty , is indeed a doer of wisdom , and whoever is given his mercy , is indeed the successful . ”
and had we sent down to you a book on parchment , and they touched it with their hands , those who disbelieve would have said , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from their lord . those are the guided ones .
indeed , i am allah . there is no god but i , so worship me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
their reward is hell , because they disbelieved and took my signs and my messengers .
if you obey most of the people in the earth , they will mislead you from the way of god . they follow only conjecture and surmise .
then i called them openly ,
so remind , for you are only a reminder .
do you not see that allah is the knower of all that is in the heavens and the west ? and he is not one of those who do wrong . and he is not one of those who do right , and in the least , he will inform them of what they have done . indeed , allah is cognizant of all things .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and it is hard except for the humble-minded ,
and he overthrew the subverted cities
and no sign comes to them from the signs of their lord but they turn away from it .
can you make the deaf hear , or guide the blind and those who are in manifest error ?
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their designs .
i do not know whether it is a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a time . ''
and it was not for the people who gave the lie to the people who are given to the people of the city , and to the people of the city , who would be given to the people of the city , which they would have been given to the cause of god . they will not be able to make any testament in the way of god . they will not be blamed , for god does not reward the righteous .
they will remain in it forever , and the punishment will not be lightened for them , nor will they be reprieved .
lo ! those who disbelieve , and make the path of allah after the guidance hath come unto him , they shall be not able to harm allah , and he will make them a loss , and allah is the knower of all that they do .
and paradise shall be brought near for the god-fearing .
god to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . woe to the unbelievers for a terrible punishment
verily , in the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers .
and those who gave the lie to the truth when it has been recited to him , he would have sent it down , and said , “ why will allah be sent down to whomever he wills ? so there will be a humiliating punishment for those who deny the truth . ”
they will have a bed of hell , and over them coverings . thus do we reward the wrongdoers .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and to him obedience is due due to him . will you then fear anyone other than allah ?
and your lord says , `` call upon me , i will answer you . indeed , those who disdain my worship will enter hell , disgraced . ''
they were two of our believing servants .
and it was not for the people who gave the lie to the people who are given to the people of the city , and to the people of the city , who would be given to the people of the city , which they would have been given to the cause of god . they will not be able to make any testament in the way of god . they will not be blamed , for god does not reward the righteous .
and if any of the polytheists seeks asylum with you , grant him protection until he hears the word of allah . then convey him to his place of safety . that is because they are a people who do not know .
and they say : we believe in allah and in the apostle and we obey , and then a party of them turn away . and those are not believers .
when the most wicked of them broke forth ,
and we did not destroy any town but it had its warners
surely on that day their lord will be fully aware of them ?
it is not for any prophet to take captives until he has subdued the land . you desire the gains of this world , and allah desires the hereafter ; and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
the parable of those who disbelieve in their lord will be like a part of the day of which he will not be able to obtain a part of the day of which they will not find any change in the life of the day . that is the right path .
then you turned away after that , and if not for the grace of allah and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
and the messengers said : `` we are only a mortal like you , '' but allah will bring to whomever he wills a sign from his servants . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and is a matter of nature , and i am not of the idolaters .
say : `` it is the she-camel that you may be cast , then do not keep your wives away from your wives , and do not go to their offspring , but when they are clean , then , when they are clean . allah is indeed the oft-forgiving , the most merciful .
you are but a human being like us . so bring us a sign if you are truthful . ''
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not tyrannical to my servants . ’
and he bears witness to that .
it is he who has made the sea for you to eat , so that you may eat of the water in the water , and in the gardens of the sea , you may see the ships and the ships you see .
he said : `` then shall i not be cast down , when i have made a covenant with me , but it is not for you to make a covenant with me , but when the covenant will be made to you , he said , `` allah is well aware of that which we have covenanted with him , and when we made a covenant with him . ''
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
in the neighbouring land ; but after their defeat they will be victorious .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn back and see whatthey will return . ''
so eat of what allah has provided you lawful and good , and be grateful for the bounty of allah , if it is him that you worship .
but the face of your lord will abide forever , majestic and splendid .
reclining therein on couches , they will see therein neither sun nor hurting cold .
they will ask you about the hour . say , `` it is only the knowledge of my lord . '' say , `` the knowledge of the matter is with my lord , when he has no knowledge of the hour , and the extent of the day of judgment will not be accepted from you , but you will have the knowledge of the life of the world . but most people do not know .
and certainly we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong , and their apostles came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
and those who are dedicated to their prayers .
and we made his descendants the survivors .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good in the earth , and follow not the footsteps of satan ; indeed he is your open enemy .
allah is the protector of those who have believed , and he will make them enter into the light of those who have believed , and those who disbelieve in the book , and those who deny the truth will be in the light , and they will remain in it .
with the help of god . he helps whomever he wants . he is majestic and all-merciful .
they will not taste thereincoolness or drink
how many a town have we destroyed ! our punishment came to them at night or while they were napping .
except an old woman who was among those who remained behind .
they and their spouses , reclining on couches in the shade .
or have we given them a book before this , so that they are holding fast to it ?
do you feel secure that he will not cause the coastland to swallow you , or he will not unleash upon you a squall of pebbles , then you will find no helper for you ?
by the witness and the witnessed ,
do they havethe unseen , which they write down ?
those who disbelieve think that they will not be resurrected . say , `` yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ''
if theytread the right path , we would have given them abundant water
these are they against whom the word has proved true among the nations of jinns and men who have passed away before them . they are the losers .
and they said : what ! shall we then give to our gods a poet mad ?
those who fear their lord in secret and dread the hour .
and she who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign to the worlds .
sothrew his rod , and behold , it was a serpent , plain !
but whoever seeks beyond that—it is they who are the transgressors ,
and whoever allah guides , for him is the guidance , and whoever takes for himself , then you will find no one to help him except him , and they will be the fire of hell , and they shall be brought into the fire , and they will be the losers .
but my call added only to their flight .
and i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
but as for him who is given his record in his left hand , he will say , `` i wish i had not been given my record
surely to your lord is the return .
say , `` you do all that you do according to what you do . god knows the truth and the true believers . then , to him you will be returned , and he will inform you of what you do .
when our punishment came upon them , they said , “ we were unjust . ”
so the cry seized them in the morning ,
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in manifest error .
it is he who has made the garden to appear in the seatbelt , and he has made it flow in the midst of the date-palm and the grapes , and they are in the midst of the date-palm and the grape , and do not be held in arrogance . and do not be held in arrogance , but those who are bent on denying the truth , do not behave insolently .
they have denied the truth when it came to them , but there will come to them the news of what they used to ridicule .
say : 'it may be that some of the things you seek to hasten on .
and no friend will ask about his friend ,
in parchment unrolled .
and they will question you concerning the hour , and say , “ the matter is better for them ; and if they do , they will be better in it , and if they are pleased , they would surely have been victorious , and allah is mighty , wise .
when they will argue in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , `` we were your followers . will you then takefrom us some share of the fire ? ''
we gave moses the book , and made it a guidance for the children of israel , that they may take no other guardian apart from me .
moses said to them : `` call on you , you do not utter a lie . he has power to bring you a lie . he has certainly invented the ark , and he has failed to despair .
so put your trust in allah , for you are on the clear truth .
and say , `` truth has come and falsehood has vanished . indeed , falsehood is ever bound to vanish . ''
murmuring among themselves : 'you have tarried but ten '
give tidings to the hypocrites that they will have a painful punishment .
and when they defiedwhat they were forbidden , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
but those who disbelieved and belied our signs , they shall be the inmates of the fire , to abide therein , and evil is the resort .
how can you have a covenant with god to his messenger ? but those who have received the sanctity of the holy mosque , and their claim is only to make a covenant with you , and we are the cautious .
and it is allah who sends the winds , so they raise the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land . and we revive the earth after its death , even so will be the resurrection .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
the heavens are nearly torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall down in pieces ,
messengershave been derided before thee , but those that scoffed at them were encompassed by that whereat they scoffed .
if only the people of the book had believed and been pious , we would surely have blotted out their sins , and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
we tested the people of pharaoh before them , and a noble messenger came to them .
and plantations , and splendid buildings .
and we cast the children of israel in the sea after it had come to them , and they began to say , `` o moses , do not be like those who have been raised up , '' they said , `` o moses , you have been people that are people of people who do not know .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it was dead . likewise will you be brought forth .
we gave abraham his integrity formerly , and we knew him well .
that is because we wanted to kill the children of israel , but it is not a thing to be guilty of those who are in the earth , or those who are in the earth , as if they were to be unjust , as if only those who are in the earth will have a clear loss . as for those who are unjust , they will have no more than the way of god , as a guide and a certain course .
your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal .
it is he who has made the sun a lamp , and the sun and the moon ; and the sun and the moon is made punctual .
when they came to a journey , they will be with you , and with you is the company of all things , and they will be able to do so , and leave them in the same way , and those who have fear of god and in the last day will have the right path . god will show him the law of the hereafter , and he will show him the law .
there is not a movingcreature on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
to allah belongs the hereafter and the first .
and whosoever blindeth himself to the remembrance of the compassionate , we appoint for him a devil , and he becometh his companion .
verily this is the word of a noble messenger ,
so this day we shall deliver you , so that you may be a sign for those after you . indeed , many people are heedless of our signs .
we have not heard of this in the latest religion . this is nothing but an invention .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
so allah seized him with the punishment of this world and the hereafter .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and made the day for rising .
satan threatens you with poverty and orders you to immorality , and allah promises you forgiveness from him and bounty . and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
allah made it but a message of good news for you , and that your hearts may be comforted , and victory comes only from allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he attains the age of full strength . and keep your promise to the covenant .
they said , “ pray to your lord to make it clear to us , and he said , “ allah says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says she is neither too old nor too young , but do so . ”
so that we may glorify you much
who created and proportioned ,
and he it is who is your lord , the true , and what is there after the truth , save error ? how then are ye turned away ?
so woe to those who pray
they will call therein for every fruit in security .
but if he is one of those who rejectedand went astray ,
say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in allah , it is they who are the losers . '
is there you who have been given the means of god 's blessing upon which he has bestowed upon the heavens and the earth ? as for those who believe in allah and the last day , is the like of those who believe in allah and the last day . the one who does not believe in god 's way is the right path .
and when it is recited to them , they say , “ we believe in it ; it is the truth from our lord ; indeed we were muslims . ”
in the seat of honor with an all-powerful sovereign .
we evacuated all the believers who were in it .
by the lote-tree of the utmost boundary ,
we have given examples of all kinds of parables in this quran so that they may take heed .
so give a respite to the faithless , and give them respite for a while .
do not covet what allah has bestowed upon others , other than what they have earned , and the women of that which they earn , and the women will be rewarded for what they have earned . and ask allah for his bounty . indeed , allah has knowledge of everything .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you will know who are the people of the right path , and who is guided . '
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates whatever he wills . he grants daughters to whomever he wills , and he grants daughters to whomever he wishes .
say : `` i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord has appointed for it a distant term .
and we did not call upon them from the mount , when he was called to him , and did not send to him a mercy from your lord , and to show him a mercy from your lord , that you may warn them , and that they have not warned .
and we have made thiseasy in your tongue , in order that they may take heed .
but god will never defer any soul when its time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
'put him in a wooden box , then cast it in the river , and the river will cast it in the sea , and to show him the sea , and to show me the sea . we are with you to be placed in ranks .
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
and the mountains as pegs ?
and his companionwill say : `` here isready with me ! ''
say : `` i do not see that it is revealed to me that it is revealed to him who has been revealed to it . it is only for him who has been given to it , or it is said , `` it is the only lord who has been the most merciful of the cause of god . '' he is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
is not he able to give life to the dead ?
praise be to allah , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . his is the praise in the hereafter , and he is the wise , the aware .
except those who pray ,
as for those who disbelieve , i shall punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they will have no helpers .
the heaven will split asunder with it . his promise is always fulfilled .
so taste , we shall not increase you except in punishment .
which guides to the right path , so we have believed in it , and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
and you worship only allah , and your fathers , and your fathers ; and allah is not pleased with them , but he has not sent down any proof except by his own command ; but most of the people do not know .
and we sent the children of israel to the sea and firon and his hosts , and pharaoh pursued them with the evil , so that there was said to them : `` do not believe in allah , and in order that i should have faith in him , and i have been muslims . ''
indeed successful is the one who purifies it .
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
the inhabitants of paradise on that day will have a better abode and better resting place .
verily , we have sent down to you the book with the truth . so whosoever is guided , is guided to the right way ; and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . you are not a manager over them .
that was a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about their deeds .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear god ?
and do not call on any other god besides allah . there is no god but he . all things will perish except his face . his is the judgment , and to him you will be brought back .
moses said : `` even if i bring you something manifest ? ''
whatever misfortune befalls you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy .
then moses threw down his staff , and behold , it swallowed up their conjurations .
and allah will forgive you , and he will forgive you of the gardens of water , in which he will admit you in gardens and rivers , and gardens of honour . that is indeed the supreme triumph .
and indeed , it is in the original bookwith us , sublime , dispenser oflaws .
then he went back to his family in pride .
olives and date palms ,
say , “ praise belongs to god , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ? ”
and by the earth which splitteth ,
and if a calamity should seize them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say : `` our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we should follow your signs and been among the believers ? ''
she said : `` how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ? ''
and we left hisfor posterity .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
he said , “ get out of here , despised and driven away . indeed , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
for the day of sorting out .
and they said , “ allah ’ s control will be given to his credit , ” and a seal is upon them , and they will be subjected to the thunderclaps in the land , and in the midst of the day of resurrection , we shall make them appear in the midst of the land , and in the midst of the world to come , they will turn in the land , and , in the midst of the land , they will have a barrier , and in the midst of the earth , they are
a guidance and a reminder for men of understanding .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
a guidance and good tidings for the believers
and when they come to those who disbelieve , they will see them , so they will see them , so that they may be one of them , so that they may be in the midst of allah 's command , and they will be in the midst of the affair , and they will not be punished . and they will be recompensed for the cause of allah , and those who are in the way of allah will not be punished , nor will they be punished .
and we are they who glorify .
and a shadow of thick smoke .
the fire of allah , kindled ,
is he who walks prone on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
if a provocation from satan should provoke thee , seek refuge with god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
the believers do not believe in it , even as you are given to the same . god does not like the righteous . and if you believe in allah and the messenger , he will certainly show you the good news of your noble messengers . and if you believe in god and the messenger , you shall be too waiting for your faith .
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
until the day of the known time . ''
and the messengers we have mentioned to you before and messengers we have not mentioned to you . and allah spoke to moses directly .
and when our clear signs are recited to them , their only argument is to say : 'bring us our fathers , if you are truthful . '
they will say : `` nay , you have no welcome to you.it is you who led us to us . what an evil abode ! ''
they said : shall we believe in thee when the meanest follow thee ?
they descend on every sinful liar .
“ go to your field if you would gather . ”
there is nothing but our first death , and we shall not be raised again .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and he is the most high , the most great .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouts to that which hears nothing but screaming and yelling . deaf , dumb , and blind , they do not understand .
this is the day of judgement which you used to deny .
and they used to say : when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
and paradise will be brought near , not far from the righteous .
there was no one to prevent them from any side of them , or the one whom you threaten with the right , or the one whom you can , will not be able to repel the truth , nor will they be able to be pleased with it , nor will they be able to be pleased with the words of god . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
faces on that day will be joyful ,
and those who are the owner of the throne will be the owner of the throne , and the praise of their lord , and praising him , and praising him , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and do not follow the way of the mercy of your lord , and those who have faith and follow the straight path , and they will be in the fire , and they will be in the fire .
they said , “ we will not prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and to him who created us . so decree whatever you promise us . you only decree the worldly life .
in fact , they are in doubt about it . indeed , they are in the sight of allah , and in the sight of allah , he is the lord of all things , and he has knowledge of everything .
glory be to him who created all the pairs of what the earth produces , and of themselves , and of what they do not know .
and as for those who defy allah , their abode is the fire . whenever they desire to come forth from it , they will be restored to it , and it will be said to them : `` taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny . ''
so when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we saved those who forbade evil , and seized the wrongdoers with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
besides allah , they will say : `` they have failed us . nay , we used not to call upon anything before . thus doth allah mislead the unbelievers . ''
say , `` it is a great prophesy ,
and we left hisfor posterity .
and you eat the inheritance rapaciously ,
except the family of lot ; we shall save them all
this is the command of allah that he has sent down to you , and whoever fears allah , he will expiate his misdeeds from him , and will richly reward him .
so allah gave them the reward of this world , and the best of the hereafter . allah loves those who do good .
and laugh and not weep ,
and we have created for them the like of it , in which they ride .
except your chosen servants among them . ''
he said : `` o my people ! why do you seek to hasten evil before good ? why do you not ask forgiveness of allah , so that you may receive mercy ? ''
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and stretch out their hands and their tongues with evil , and they wish that you may disbelieve .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity . ''
if you stretch your hand to kill me , i will not stretch my hand to kill you , for i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
we gave moses the book , and made his brother aaron his minister .
they say :
a lesson and a reminder for every penitent worshiper .
he said , “ you are of those reprieved
he said , “ what is your matter with you when you have heard the truth ? ” they said , “ we have no power to do anything . ” he said , “ this is the truth , and i am of the truthful . ”
you are indeed watching over us . ''
they will be given their reward twice , for they are patient , and repel evil with good , and spend out of what we have provided them .
then his wife came forward crying , and she smote her face , and said : a barren old woman !
so he resolved to turn them out of the land , but we drowned him and all those who were with him .
and all that they had doneavailed them nothing .
but as for those who fear their lord , for them are lofty chambers , above which rivers built , beneath which rivers flow . the promise of god is not true . god does not fail inpromise .
and had we sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , we would have gathered together all things before them , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
on the day when the hour is come , the sinners will swear that they have tarried but an hour . thus they were deceived .
jonah too was one of the messengers .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the subduer
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
he said , “ what is your matter with you when you have heard the truth ? ” they said , “ we have no power to do anything . ” he said , “ this is the truth , and i am of the truthful . ”
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may become righteous .
they will abide in it forever . what an excellent destination and abode !
the most beneficentistawathethrone .
and big-eyed houris
then bring our fathers , if what you say is true .
flames of fire and molten brass will be released , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
they said , “ o lut ! indeed we have given you a son , and the guilty will not abide in it . and you will not be affected by the night , nor will you be tested . ”
those of your women who commit adultery will bear the testimony of four witnesses , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them out , or allah ordains for them someway .
surely we are able to show you what we have promised them .
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
but if the right is on their side , they come compliantly to him .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , we shall say to those who associated others with -allah in his divinity : `` where are your partnerswhom you used to assert ? ''
o you who believe ! be not as those who disbelieve , as disbelievers on the earth , or that they may be the disbelievers on the earth , or that they may eat from it , and that allah may make it die , and allah is the beholder of their deeds . allah is seer of what they do .
but as for those who disbelieved , , `` were not my verses recited to you ? but you were arrogant and were a sinful people . ''
then they turned away from him and said : `` tutored , a madman ! ''
except for him who comes to god with a sound heart .
he said , “ get out of here , despised and driven away . indeed , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
it is from solomon , and it is in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
say , “ have you considered ? if your water should sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ”
and do not walk proudly on earth . indeed , you will never tear the earth , nor attain the height of mountains .
say : `` be ye stones or iron ,
those before them said it , but what they earned did not avail them .
they will have no intercessors among their idols , and they will reject their partners .
and you eat the inheritance rapaciously ,
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
he will say : `` thus did our signs come to you , but you disregarded them . so today you will be ignored . ''
if we do the punishment of a certain time , they will say : `` what is it that we have taken to the servants of allah ? '' what ! then , will they not be able to make a mockery of it ? and we shall not be given any respite .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
that is because they say : the fire shall not touch us except for a number of days . and that which they forged hath deluded them in their religion .
we gave the children of israel the book and the wisdom , and the prophethood , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above the worlds .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
o you who believe ! do not prohibit the good things which allah has made lawful to you , and do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like transgressors .
immortal youths will go about them
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is all-mighty and all-wise .
by the angels who glide swimmingiy ,
and we gave moses the blessing and aaron ,
when an affliction befalls them , they said , “ o moses , fear your lord , and we will say to you what allah has made a covenant with you , and we will surely make him a proper act . ”
he said to his pages , “ put their moneyinto their saddlebags ; perhaps they will recognize it when they returned to their folks , so that they may return . ”
and when they said , “ o noble noble noble messenger , we have been devoted to him , and with him we make a pattern , and we have made a means of fortune for him , so we will give them a good deed , so you will be parted . ”
and had we not strengthened thee , thou hadst well-nigh leaned toward them a little .
what ! do you enjoin people to do good , and forget yourselves while you read the book ? do you not understand ?
and his companionwill say : `` here isready with me ! ''
when the horses were paraded before him in the evening ,
on the day when he will call to them and say , `` what answer gave you to the messengers ? ''
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to make it prevail over all religions , even though the polytheists may dislike it .
those whom they call upon , seek refuge in their lord , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be dreaded .
in the alternation of night and day , and all that god has created in the heavens and the earth are signs for people who fear god .
if a woman of the right hand is of a woman or the one of the right hand , there is no sin for them , but the good deeds for them , it is not for them to make a good conduct , but if they do good , they would have said , “ if you do good , then indeed , allah is aware of what you do . ”
we tested the people of pharaoh before them , and a noble messenger came to them .
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
you do not take revenge on us except because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims . ''
and among mankind is he who disputes about allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask him for forgivenes . he is the accepter of repentance .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and in his name is his name , in the mornings and the evenings , morning and evening .
and that is not hard for allah .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and the roots of it grows with it , and the like of it will be the same for them , and that is a lesson for the people who are in the midst of the earth , and that is a lesson for the people of the fire , and it is likely that allah will make a parable for the people of the land , and that it may be that allah will make a parable for the people of the right hand , and that is
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
and recall what time luqman said unto his son , while he was exhorting him : o my son ! associate not aught with allah ; verily it is a tremendous wrong .
they will say : `` when we were before our families , we were afraid of our families . ''
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them from sticky clay .
no associate has he . and this i am commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
have they handed this down to one another ? rather , they are a rebellious people .
it is not the speech of a poet . little is it that you believe ?
say : `` have you considered what allah has given you , and that which allah has provided for you ? '' say , `` do you give allah a respite ? or you do not know anything of the affair ?
and we gave moses the blessing and aaron ,
and assuredly we conferred a favour on thee anot her time .
the jews will not be the christians of the jews , nor the christians in the way of the right way , until the true way . say , ‘ the truth is only with allah , and if you followed their desires , then you will have no knowledge of what you did . ’
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . nay , but he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
they denied all our signs . so we seized them with the seizing of oneall-mighty , omnipotent .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger will abide forever in the fire ? that is the great disgrace .
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , abiding eternally therein . they are the worst of creatures .
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their designs .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
and you worship only allah , and your fathers , and your fathers ; and allah is not pleased with them , but he has not sent down any proof except by his own command ; but most of the people do not know .
give tidings to the hypocrites that they will have a painful punishment .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good deeds , he will be among the successful .
so fight in the way of allah , and you are responsible for yourself , and rouse the believers , and rouse the believers . and allah is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
they will say , “ yes , a warner came to us , but we denied him , and said , ‘ allah did not send down anything . you are only in great error . ’
indeed , satan wants to stray from the right path , and the words of god to make you crooked . is it not enough for you , that you will not be blamed ?
and guard yourselves against a day when no soul shall avail another , nor shall any ransom be accepted from it , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor will they be helped .
no intercession shall be of any avail to him , except for him who gives permission to their hearts , when they have safety , they say : `` what is the truth ? '' and he is the most high , the most great .
verily , your lord is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days , then the throne of the sun and the moon will be settled , and the sun and the moon will be made to be a great decree .
those are they who buy the life of this world for the hereafter . their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be helped .
but if they separate , allah will enrich each of them out of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-wise .
lo ! those who fulfil allah 's covenant , and is not a portion of the day of resurrection , he will not be able to give them any share in the hereafter , and for them is a painful punishment .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he had given them . exalted is allah above that they associate with him .
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
without adding .
and put your trust in the living one who dies not , and celebrate his praise . and sufficient is he as a reckoner .
they will have no food except bitter thorn ,
they believe in allah and the last day , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong and forbid what is wrong , and they are among the righteous .
and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil save that which my lord hath mercy ; verily my lord is forgiving , merciful .
safa and marwahare reminders of allah . he who performs the houseto perform the rites of allah , is no sin to him . if he does so , he will give them a good work , and that god is all-knowing and all-knowing .
but the sects differed among themselves , so woe to the disbelievers because of the scene of a dreadful day .
nun . by the pen and what they inscribe ,
then he will be of those who believe and urge one another to steadfastness and compassion .
and i will grant them respite , for my plan is firm .
the men of understanding are the ones who set up their wealth with their own property , and with their property , with their property and their persons , and in order that god should make them a great deal of those who are upright , and do not follow the way of god . they are the ones who do wrong , if they are one of the ignorant .
these two opponentsdispute with each other about their lord . but those who disbelieve will have garments of fire , and boiling water will be poured over their heads .
they said , `` our lord , we fear that he may commit insolence against us , or exceed all bounds in transgression . ''
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say , `` bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful . ''
instead of him they call upon besides him , and they invoke none but a rebellious satan .
and when i am ill , it is he who cures me .
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
“ and indeed we are a vigilant multitude . ”
in the gardens of bliss ,
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you , and a stated term . yet you are still in doubt .
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them nor did your people before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
they did not forbid one another from the wrongdoing they did . evil indeed was what they used to do .
and allah said : `` o adam ! tell them the story of them . '' when he came to them , he said : `` did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that i know what you conceal and what you reveal ? ''
when the messengers has been sent to the children of israel , he said to the descendants of israel : `` i have given you wisdom and knowledge that i have told you about . so fear god , and obey me .
whenever they try to escape from hell , they will be driven back into it , and will be told , `` taste the punishment of burning . ''
they will have therein whatever they desire , abiding eternally . this is a promise from your lord .
and you do not use your food , and the place of what is in their bellies , and the one between them , and he is the most honourable , the most merciful .
as for him who thinketh himself independent ,
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are the liars .
it is he who sends blessings to you , and his angels , in order that he may bring you out of darkness into light , and he is most merciful to the believers .
and my breast straitens , and my tongue is not fluent , so send for aaron .
then they came to the messengers , saying , `` we were the torah and the gospel , and we had sent it down as a guidance and a reminder for the people of the book , and a guidance and a reminder for those who fear god .
do you not bring itback ? if you are truthful .
`` even after we are crumbled bones ? ''
i wish that i should turn away from him and all that you worship instead of allah , and i call to my worship , and i will not call to my lord , and do not call to me .
indeed this community of yours is one religion , and i am your lord , so worship me .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment , and replace you with another people , and you will not harm him in the least , and allah has power over all things .
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? nay , but those who do not believe in the hereafter are in the torment and far astray .
and we saved them and their people from the great distress ,
what , is he who has done what is fully aware of the one who has made them to be equals to god ? say , `` then bring upon us my foot , or you will have those who have been lost in the way of god . you will have no guide in the way of god . he has no guidance . ''
taught man what he did not know .
say , `` each one acts according to his own manner . your lord knows best who is best guided in the way . ''
they rejoice in the grace and bounty from allah , and allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
and thereafter spread out the earth ,
and if we willed , we could show them to you , and you will recognize them by the tone of their speech ; and you will surely know them by the tone of their speech ; and allah knows your deeds .
andfaces will be humbled before the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and warn with it those who fear that they will be gathered before their lord , and have no protector or intercessor besides him , that they may guard .
and we raised the mount above them for their covenant , and we said to them , “ enter the gate prostrating in the gate , ” and we said to them , “ do not violate the sabbath ” , and we took from them a solemn covenant .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the sacred valley of tuwa .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
no one does not die except by god 's permission . whoever desires the tillage of this world , we will give him the life of this world and who give thanks to him .
and we brought the others near ,
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
and whosoever repenteth and worketh righteously , he verily repenteth toward allah with a true repentance .
and if you fear , thenon foot or riding ; and when you are safe , remember allah , as he taught you what you did not know .
or like a rainstorm from the sky which is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers into their ears for fear of death , and god encompasses the unbelievers .
nay , i have followed the religion of old and my fathers , and the family of jacob , and for him is no thing , and for us is the word of allah , and that is for us , but most of mankind do not give thanks .
we did not sendbefore you except men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
and as for those who defy allah , their abode is the fire . whenever they desire to come forth from it , they will be restored to it , and it will be said to them : `` taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny . ''
we had no authority over you , but you were a rebellious people .
raising a trail of dust ,
indeed , i am allah . there is no god but i , so worship me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
o you who believe ! be with the religion of allah , as the servant of allah , as jesus isa , son of maryam , who said , `` we have been a guardian and a part of the children of israel . '' and they became a party of those who were bent on denying the truth and said , “ we are a muslim , and they remained in the way of allah , and we remained among the faithless . ”
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall remit from them their misdeeds and will reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
and let not their speech grieve thee . verily honour is allah 's wholly . he is the hearer , the knower .
we will turn away their hearts and their eyes , as they refused to believe in it the first time , and we leave them blundering in their rebellion .
then a welcome of inferno .
and do not walk proudly on earth . indeed , you will never tear the earth , nor attain the height of mountains .
and allah will deliver those who guardwith their achievement . evil will touch them not , nor shall they grieve .
o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation while you call me to the fire ?
for the living and the dead ?
and you see the mountains , that you may see the mountains , while they pass away as the passing passing clouds—the handiwork of allah who has created everything . he is well aware of what you do .
alas for the servants ! never came there to them a messenger but they mock at him .
indeed , he used to be joyful among his people ,
he it is who has created you from all things , and in order to make it clear to each other , and when the whole of the wife is made to pass , they will be made to draw their fingers into the presence of god , and said , `` god is by you , if you are a companion , we will certainly give you a great account . ''
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord . you have ruined yourselves , and you became among the losers . ''
they will question you concerning every new creature . say , ‘ to the people who performs the knowledge of the matter , is for the people of the matter , and good deeds in the sight of god , in order that you may be godwary . ’
o you who believe ! take your sons and your sons , and do not give your sons to you . and do not be of any use to them , except what you have done . and if you were unaware , do not have any knowledge of what you have done .
do they feel secure against allah ’ s devising ? none feels secure from allah 's plan except the people who are lost .
and by him who created male and female ,
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is in them , and he has power over all things .
then a welcome of inferno .
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may prosper .
o ye who believe ! enter into islam whole-heartedly ; and follow not the footsteps of satan ; verily he is unto you an open enemy .
and never does a new reminder come to them frommost gracious , but they turn away from it .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes the towns while they were doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
he said , “ we have put you to the land , the judgement of the earth ; and do not follow the matter between the truth , and do not follow the fancies of the devil ; for them is a painful punishment for them . ”
no blame can be any equivalent to any soul , if it is the same to the thief , it will not be accepted from them , and they will be given to the prayer of their lord , and who will be given to the steadfast in their prayers , and who will have a good deed , and will be given to allah a good deed , and to allah is the destination .
o you who believe ! follow the way of allah , and the devil , who follows the plan of satan , and make not a way of evil to him . indeed , he is the one who is the doer of what he will , and he will not be of the righteous .
so this day we shall deliver you , so that you may be a sign for those after you . indeed , many people are heedless of our signs .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
`` even after we are crumbled bones ? ''
but whoever comes to him as a believer , he will have righteous deeds , and for them are the highest ranks
and in the night , by night , the sustenance of the night and the earth are the sustenance of the heavens and the earth , and in the earth he will make a dead end , and those who have forgotten , and do not understand .
and he inspected the birds , and said , `` why do i not see the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and remember when he saw what is with him , he would not have suffered this to be sad . so say : `` o my lord ! there is no god but he ; so glory be to thee ! for i am indeed of the zalimun . ''
so we determined , and excellentto determine .
indeed , in this is a message for people who worship .
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them cut off , extinct .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of this world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
but not iblis . he was proud and was one of the unbelievers .
say , `` who can protect you from the most merciful by night and by day ? '' yet they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
o you who believe ! be patient , and be patient , and be steadfast in patience , and fear allah , that you may be successful .
on the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
as for him who holds off his estimate , and is better than his lord . the angels will be with you , and that you should be of those who are averse to god . and you will be called to account for what you worship .
andone who is brought up amid ornaments and can not express herself in debate ?
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
this . so let them taste it , boiling water and pus ,
or lest you should say , `` if only we had sent it down , we would certainly have been better than our lord . '' indeed , you have received the clear evidence from your lord , and we seized them with a painful punishment , and we seized them with a painful punishment . and we seized them with a painful punishment , and a painful punishment .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
o my people ! i ask of you no reward for it ; my reward is only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
those are the companions of the right hand .
`` by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
on that day neither man nor jinni will be asked about his sin .
friends on that day will be foes one to another , except those who fear allah .
and hasten to forgiveness from your lord , and a garden as vast as the heavens and the earth , prepared for the godwary
they shall have coverings of fire above them and beneath them coverings . that is how allah frightens his servants , o my servants !
ignoble , besides all that , base-born ;
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
and soon will they attainsatisfaction .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
verily those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and disbelieve in some and disbelieve in some of the twain .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not consume their wealth with your property . that is a great sin .
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves . indeed , allah does not like any sinful traitor .
in it is a flowing spring ,
how can you have a covenant with god to his messenger ? but those who have received the sanctity of the holy mosque , and their claim is only to make a covenant with you , and we are the cautious .
muhammad is the messenger of a messenger who had lived before him . but you will then be turned back , and will not put your backs to god . whoever turns away from god will never help his trust . god will recompense the thankful .
it may be that allah will create love between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . their gods whom they call upon besides allah were availed by their gods , when the decree of your lord came to pass , and they increased them in naught but ruin .
there they shall dwell for ever in a blazing fire , wherein they will abide forever .
and it is not for a believer but he will have a believer ; and if any one believes in it , he shall make his servant free , and he is a believer , and he will not be able to make a covenant with him . and he is the most contentious , and he is the most honourable , the most wise .
verily , men and women are the believing men and women , men and women , and women , men , women , and women , men , women , and women , men , women , and women , and the men , the women , the men , the women , the men , the women , and the men of pure women !
and thamood , sparing no one .
do you not see how god has created the seven heavens one above another ,
and it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he will make his throne perfect according to his throne ; and he will have no protector or a helper .
and will give you wealth and children , and will appoint for you gardens and allot for you rivers .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind their wealth and kin . this is a duty upon the pious .
and otherof the kind in pairs !
and drink boiling water on top of it .
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
and by him who created male and female ,
it is we who have created the human being with the right hand , and if they were to make you go forth , then do not yield to them , and do not listen to me . and to me you do not know .
she said , `` woe to me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is advanced in years ? ''
and when a group of them said : `` why do you admonish a people whom allah will destroy or punish a severe punishment ? '' they said , `` to your lord that they may be cautious . ''
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
and if ye are in doubt concerning that which we have revealed unto our slave , then bring a surah like thereunto , and call your witnesses beside allah , if ye are truthful .
why , when they have been given the garden , it will be said to them : `` enter allah '' and he will surely bring it to whom he will , and for whom will be the bounty of allah , and for whom there is no loss , and if you do not see , i shall have no power to give you any sense .
then they turned away from him and said : `` tutored , a madman ! ''
and they had destroyed the towns which had been forbidden to them , and they have not believed in it except the people of the city , and who did not believe in the life of the world , and when they have believed in the life of the world , they will have the punishment of the life to come .
this is how we sent down to you the book from among ourselves , and you have the truth , and we have made it a lie . we have made the quran a guide for you to the right path .
the thamudrejected the messengers .
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so announce to him a painful punishment .
then it is for us to call them to account .
walk modestly , and lower your voice . the most repulsive voice is the braying of donkeys . ''
and the magicians fell down prostrate ,
he is a sign of the hour . so have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is the straight path .
indeed those who believed and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , such hope hope that allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ we will punish him who does wrong . then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him severely . ”
who is there in the morning on the earth , that he may lead you out of it ? then will they be the ones to whom the whole of allah will be raised up , and exalted be allah above what they associate .
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and do not turn your backs to your loss . ''
verily , the reward of those who do not believe in allah and his messenger , and make mischief in the land and make mischief in the land , then indeed , it is a grievous punishment for them , and the punishment of the punishment is severe , and he is a mighty punishment .
does he think that no one sees him ?
except those on whom your lord has mercy ; and for that he created them ; and the word of your lord has been fulfilled : `` i shall fill hell with jinns and men together . ''
and those on the left hand , how wretched are those on the left !
then we produced after them another generation .
say , “ he who initiated them in the first instance will revive them ; he has knowledge of every creation . ”
but he denied and disobeyed ,
indeed allah knows the hour of the hereafter , and you will not be able to know what is in the womb . he knows what is in the womb . and never will he be given any life to the earth , nor will he be given any life to the earth . he has knowledge of all things .
they said , “ we wish to eat from it , and we may know that you have spoken the truth , and that we may be witnesses of it . ”
and the abundance of the date-palm and the adornment of it is with its lord ; and whoever changes the rocks of the bad , then it will be not in any way , but such are signs in the sight of allah .
but when he said to his lord , “ my lord , he knows best what he has created . he knows very well what is even equal to me , and i am the most outcast , the outcast . ”
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted to god ?
we were promised this before.these are nothing but myths of the ancients . ''
to allah is the dominion of the angels that he may be of the two of the two parts , and to direct them to the command of allah , and in the presence of allah , he will not be able to do so ; and when he wills , there will be no one to help them , nor will they be able to save them .
you will die , and they will die .
and you will not swear by those who have no faith in the name of allah , but most of them deny the truth , and they will have no faith in it , but they have no faith in it , but they will have no helpers . and if they turn away , they will have no saviors .
o ye who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with those who guard .
indeed those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , they will be the curse of allah and the angels and all mankind .
it is lawful for you to eat and eat of the sea for you and to eat from the sea for your sustenance . and fear allah , to whom you shall be gathered .
from a drop offluid when emitted ;
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the subduer
then the one of the earth will be told , `` let you go to the day of the earth , to be sure to be cast into the midst of the heavens and the earth . '' so let them take you away , and the ships will sail at the sea , and the ships will sail at the sea .
and bestow not favour in order to receive more .
and when they are , they say : `` we have been sent to our fathers . '' and say : `` verily , allah has not been able to do wrong . '' say , `` indeed , allah does not confer a thing to do what he did . ''
disputing with you concerning the truth after it had become manifest , as if they were being driven to death as they looked on .
by the even and the odd ,
the day when man will remember what he strove for ,
those who have been given knowledge have been given the knowledge of the truth , they said , `` woe to you ! god is better for those who have faith and do not believe , and do not be patient .
and blessed is he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and he has knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with debt ?
or who is it that can provide for you if he withholds his provision ? nay , but they persist in defiance and aversion .
they said , `` moses , will you throw first or shall we be the first to throw ? ''
they say , `` when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we be resurrected ?
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
and remember , when we set a host of the jinn , so that you may listen to it , and the words of lot said to them : `` listen to it , and when the qur'an came to the people of the jinn and the people , we have given them the book of the jinn and the people of the past . ''
or who do not call upon any one , but he calls you to the prayer , and when he turns to his face , he remove the life of the earth and will remove the punishment for you ? then , will you , then , take heed ?
we destroyed the villages around you , and we haveshownthe ayatin various ways that they might return .
and he said , “ i swear by allah that if he had come to you , then indeed , the proof is only with allah . ” say , “ only the sign of allah is only with allah , and you will not be able to do so . ”
they will have whatever they wish with their lord—that is the reward of the virtuous—
and relate to them the book of noah , when he said to them : `` o my people ! '' and when he said to his people : `` o my people ! i have indeed been in your remembrance , and i do not have any way in your remembrance , and you will be given to me in the way of allah . and do not leave me in my way , and do not leave me . ''
i have warned you of a blazing fire ,
a throng of the ancients
turning to him in repentance , and fear him , and establish prayer , and do not be among the polytheists
who turn away from indecent matters ,
to your lord will be the driving .
then when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down in prostration to him .
o you who believe ! do not advance before allah and his messenger , and fear allah . indeed allah is hearing , knowing .
but when the truth came to them from us , they said : `` why do not a sign come to us from the way of moses ? '' but they said , `` we are not among those who were bewitched . '' they said , `` we are not among the two ones but we do not know . ''
see how we have favoredsome of them over others . yet the hereafter is greater in degreesand greater in preferment .
on that daytidings will be dimmed for them , and they will not ask one another .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
and when allah made a covenant with those who were given the book , it would have made it clear to people , and you cast it down , but they threw it behind their backs and sold it for a paltry price . evil is their bargain .
and establish prayer and give zakah , and whatever good you send ahead for your souls , you will find it with allah . indeed , allah sees what you do .
and recall what time luqman said unto his son , while he was exhorting him : o my son ! associate not aught with allah ; verily it is a tremendous wrong .
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say , `` bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful . ''
you are inviting them to a straight path .
the dwellers of the forest also rejected the messengers .
save him who stealeth the hearing , then there followeth him a flame gleaming .
and the people of noah before ; indeed they were a transgressing lot .
on the day when the hour riseth the guilty will despair .
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
the words of the book will ask you to be a clear book . so they ask you to say , `` we have come to you from god . '' they said , `` we have come to you from god , in truth , and he has given them a clear sign . '' but they did not have any knowledge of the miracles of god , and we gave moses the clear signs .
by the witness and the witnessed ,
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
that is because allah is the protector of those who believe , and because the disbelievers have no protector .
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , at the setting sun and at noon .
that is because they preferred the life of this world to the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelievers .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouts to that which hears nothing but screaming and yelling . deaf , dumb , and blind , they do not understand .
leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
nay , allah raised him up unto himself ; and allah is mighty , wise .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the way of taghut . so fight the friends of satan ; indeed the conspiracy is weak .
until the inevitable event came to us . ”
so they will confess their sin . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and we made them leaders , guiding by our command , and we revealed to them the doing of good deeds , doing good and to establish charity , and they used to worship us .
o prophet ! for what has been revealed to you that we should have sent you what has been revealed to you , and we bring you to the market ones , and if you are one of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but aenjoyment .
said , `` son of my mother , do not seize me by my beard or by my head . i feared that you would say , 'you have caused division among the children of israel and did not pay heed to my word '
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever .
say , “ had allah willed , i would not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you . i have spent a lifetime among you before it . do you not then understand ? ”
and of his substance is he who gave sustenance to his own property , and do not give a good to their own property ; and to their hearts is the pure , and in the highest manner , and in the highest manner . allah is the hearer , the knower .
and when you are visited by the sea , for what is in the sea , it is only for you , who will turn you away from it , but you will turn away from it , and turn away from it . and most of you are ungrateful .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
they will say : `` you are of those who are in my place . '' and the one to whom you have been guided will be the same for those who have been sincere to god . god is all-forgiving and all-forgiving .
and made to drink from a boiling spring .
then when he saw the moon rising , he said : `` this is my lord ! '' but when it set , he said : `` if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the erring people . ''
he said : i saw what they did not see , and i took a handfulfrom the messenger , and threw it down , and thus did my soul commend to me .
moses said , `` aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
and never came there unto them a messenger but they mocked him .
if you ask them , `` who has created the heavens and the earth ? '' say , `` it is only god who has created them . '' but most of them do not know .
and watch them—they will soon see .
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
they said : shall we believe in two mortals like ourselves , and their people are our slaves ?
verily those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers , and seek to differentiate between allah and his messengers , and say : we believe in some and disbelieve in some and disbelieve in some of the twain .
`` even after we are crumbled bones ? ''
so satan turned away from the breasts of their hearts , and that he may make them founder for what they say , and that they may be sent down to you , lest they be cautious .
the star of piercing brightness ;
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without hurt.another token .
and when the people of the world are equipped , they will be drowned , and they pray to him with humility and faith . but when god turns to them , he turns to their belief in the way of god , and when they are guided .
but not iblis . he was proud and was one of the unbelievers .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and what will explain to thee what hell-fire is ?
we communicated to him this decree , that the root of themwas to be cut off .
that is the reward of allah that allah gives good tidings to those who believe and do good deeds , and say : `` you do not have any reward for it , and will not be rewarded by any one . indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most forbearing . ''
they said , `` have you brought us the truth , or are you one of those who jest ? ''
and if they had tarried in your resolve of diversion , then it would have been their offering , but if one of them is a thing , then let them know that which is with allah ; and he is the very knower of the fraud of his lord ; and he is the knower of all that they do .
it is god who splits the grain and the datestone . he brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the dead from the living . that is god , the lord of the universe .
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
their lord gives them glad tidings of a mercy from him , and his pleasure , and gardens of eternal bliss .
andthe day when he will say , “ call upon my partners , ” and they will call them , but they will not answer them , and we shall set a gulf between them . and we shall set a gulf between them .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah is seer of what they do .
whoever submits his whole self to allah , and is a doer of good , has grasped the firm handle . and to allah is the culmination of all matters .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
and to those who obey the path of the way of the way of allah , and whosoever obeys allah and his messenger , we have sent down to you the book , and that he may make clear to you the signs of abraham , and to whom he will , and to make the way of allah a true way . and that which is in the way of allah , will be in the way of allah .
moses said , `` your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble in the forenoon . ''
so hasten not against them ; we only count out to them anumber .
i will roast him in saqar .
and the moon has made for them the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon should be made for them , and the sun runs on to you . and fear allah , and be cautious . and fear allah , who is with the god-fearing .
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a near place .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the subduer
then he turned his back , striving hard .
and the deeds of the pharaoh and his people have denied the truth before them , and those who were before them denied the signs of allah , and because allah is severe in punishment .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , as a believer , he is a believer , and the effort of effort .
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
and do not be in doubt of what is in the least , and do not follow the vain desires of those who worship any other worship and do not follow anything except what they used to worship ; and we are the multipliers .
and we made the covenant of their covenant to be in the matter of allah , and the best of it is in truth , and when the name of allah is set up , then , when they are made to stand up , then , when they are made to stand up , and then , when they are made to be divided , and then , we have made for you a good work .
do you not see that allah is the knower of all that is in the heavens and the west ? and he is not one of those who do wrong . and he is not one of those who do right , and in the least , he will inform them of what they have done . indeed , allah is cognizant of all things .
and at night . will you not then understand ?
faces on that day will be downcast ,
and we have certainly distributed it among them that they may remember , but most men begrudge aught save infidelity .
and we gave them the explicit scripture ,
that is because they defied allah and his messenger ; and whoever defies allah and his apostle , allah is indeed severe in retribution .
if thou art a mortal , then look about it , the word of those who say : are it not to be decayed ? they are the ones who say : is it that they are the ones who are into a new creation ? these are the ones who are in the midst of the fire , and i shall have a band of the fellows of the fire .
when you are close to the lowest side of the heaven , they will be in the lowest part of the city , and in the neighbouring part of the campaign in the philippines , and in the philippines will be different from you . and if the promise of god is bound to be fulfilled , he will take you out of what you have been doing . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and on the day when he will gather them , as if they had tarried but an hour of the day , they will recognise each other . those who denied the meeting with allah will be lost and never be guided .
then indeed your lord , for those who migrated after they had been persecuted , and then fought and remained patient , indeed your lord thereafter is forgiving , merciful .
o prophet , tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the faithful , to draw their wraps close to them . they will be recognized by their marks , so that they may be merciful . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and the believers , and sent down hosts which you did not see , and punished the disbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
lo ! we are laden with debt !
and whoever does not wrong himself , and is guilty of sin , the same is only for the thief , the male and the female , and the male and the female . those are the ones who have faith in the two men and women . they are the ones who have knowledge .
therein are thrones raised high ,
and they denied them , though in spite of pride and pride , and their hearts were convinced . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
verily this is the word of a noble messenger ,
leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
the good deed and the evil deed are not equal , and repel evil with what is better , and then you will see that between whom and your enemies will become enmity ,
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them , and for the disbelievers is a thing comparable .
then lodged it in a secure place
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the moving creatures which he has dispersed throughout them ; and he is able to gather them .
on that day you will be exposed , and no secret of yours will remain hidden .
except to an apostle whom he has chosen , and then he appoints guards before him .
and thus do we try some of them by means of others , that they may say : are these the ones whom allah favoureth among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
say : `` o mankind ! the truth has come to you from your lord . whosoever is guided is guided only forhis soul , and whosoever goes astray , it is only against himself , and i am not a guardian over you .
and leftfor posterity .
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
and food which choketh , and a painful doom
she said , “ i take refuge with the all-beneficent from you , if you are godwary . ”
have they taken awliya besides him ? but allah is the protector , and he gives life to the dead , and he has power over all things .
and whoever comes with a sign there was a sign with them , but they said , “ are these a man like us ? ” they said , “ are they being like us ? allah is the subtle , the praised . ”
indeed , he is one of the friends of the day of resurrection , when he made you a guardian , and for you there was no harm for you . then , he turned you back , and turned your backs .
they were guided to purity of speech , and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
o you who have believed , be wary of the fire , the fire of the fire will be the fire of the fire , which is the fire of the fire ; and allah ’ s precedent , which he will have been given . and they are not aware of it .
so have patience . the promise of allah is true ; and let not those who have no conviction .
allah has set the site of the house of those who are upright , and a share of the law , and that which is forbidden , and that allah may know what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , and that allah is cognizant of all things .
those whose efforts are misguided in the life of this world , while they thought that they are doing good .
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
and among the bedouins are those who consider what they spend as a loss , and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . theirs will be a misfortune of evil , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
are they waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they perceive not ?
and thy lord inspired the bee , saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in the structures that they erect .
they do not give you a favour with islam , and say : `` do not favour me with your submission . rather , allah has conferred a favor upon you , inasmuch as he has guided you , if you are truthful . ''
and to every nation we have set a barrier , so let them follow it . so seek the words of mutual dreams , and seek to dispute with the words of allah . indeed , you are on a straight path .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me .
it closes in on them
and a multitude of thosewill be from the later times .
and it is he who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? nay , but those who do not believe in the hereafter are in the torment and far astray .
we have sent you not but as a mercy to the worlds .
verily thy lord is bountiful to mankind , but most of them are not thankful .
say , `` the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . whoever wishes to believe in it and who will believe in it , we shall certainly make them taste the fire of hell , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise . the dwelling of the fire will be given to them , and it will be a lodging for them .
whether we show you a part of what we have promised them or cause you to die , do not be sad . for it is for us to convey the message .
and he drew lots and was among the losers .
when you look around , you will see bliss and a great kingdom .
as for those who believe and do good works , they shall have the gardens of paradise , wherein they will live forever .
they said , “ we will solicit him from his father , and we will surely do . ”
if he should ask you for it , and press you , you would be niggardly , and he would expose your unwillingness .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer ,
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the possessor of strength ; indeed , he was frequent in returning .
we hope our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers . ''
has he taken daughters from what he creates and favored you with sons ?
say , `` the truth has come , and falsehood can neither beginnor repeat . ''
those who have believed and emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank with allah . these are the successful .
say : `` i pray only to my lord , and i do not associate anyone with him . ''
they said : `` nay , we have come to you with what they disputed ,
we have sent to you the blessings of allah , that we should send down to you the ships , and to make it a means of pure sustenance . so eat of the good things which we have not given them , but they wronged themselves .
they said : nay , but we found our fathers doing so .
then when he saw the sun rising , he said : `` this is my lord ! this is the greatest . '' but when it set , he said , “ o my people ! indeed i disown what you associate . ”
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing .
and indeed , for you is a reward uninterrupted .
they say : `` why has not signs been sent down to him from his lord ? '' say : `` the signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner . ''
it will come to them suddenly , while they are unaware .
by the winds which scatter dust ,
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
there they shall dwell for ever in a blazing fire , wherein they will abide forever .
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
so we set them as their object , so that they might see the one another , so that one of them said : `` will you be ruined ? '' they said , `` do you see a day , or a part of the day of resurrection ? '' they said , `` you will have a happy provision , and let them give you a good food , and let them have no food , and let them give a pure food . '' so let them give a pure food .
these are onguidance from their lord , and it is they who are the felicitous .
except for those who do wrong , then , after evil , has changed the good . i am forgiving and merciful .
we have sent down to you a book wherein is your remembrance . do you not understand ?
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death , arefor allah , the cherisher of the worlds ,
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the boons .
worship allah and do not ascribe any partner to him , and do not ascribe any partner to him . and the relatives , the orphan , and the traveller , and the relatives , the orphan , and the traveller , and allah does not love those who are arrogant and boastful ,
and the mother of the throne is for the throne of the throne ; and he entered it , and he said , “ this is the stories of my father ; this is the matter of my father , so that he was a hanif , and he is the most honourable , the most wise . ”
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we will repeat the first creation . we will certainly do it .
and do not speak to the people of the book except with the cause of those who do wrong , except those who do wrong , and say : we believe in him and we are one of those who worship .
in our presence , he has a high position and a beautiful resort .
so we made it a deterrent to the former generations , and a lesson for those who were cautious .
for those who do good is goodness , and more . neither dust nor ignominy shall cover their faces . they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
and they will be followed by one who is with the right way , and they will be given to the right way . and if we had commanded them to be one of them , they would have received it , and if we had not given them any judgment , it is for the wrongdoers .
and whatever alms ye spend or vow ye vow , verily allah knoweth that which ye have no helpers .
and when it is said to them , `` believe as the peoplehave believed , '' they say , `` shall we believe as fools believe ? '' unquestionably , it is they who are the fools , but they do not know .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in rows , they will not speak except him whom the most beneficentallows , and he will speak to him a reputable word .
follow the best of what has been revealed to you from your lord before the punishment comes upon you suddenly while you are unaware .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has kept account of it while they have forgotten him . god is witness over everything .
the women of the divorced women , that they may be waiting for four times , and that which allah has created for them , and that which is lawful for them , and that which allah has created , is the best of the women , and that which is in the hands of their women , and that which allah has created , is the best of the women who have been given their due to the women , and who have been given their due to the women , and in the hereafter , allah is mighty
besides allah , they will say : `` they have failed us . nay , we used not to call upon anything before . thus doth allah mislead the unbelievers . ''
so if you meet them in war , deal with them in the battle of those behind them , that they may remember .
allah has created them , and then he makes you die , and he will cause you to die , and bring you back to the perfection of the knowledge . and indeed , allah is knowing and competent .
nay , thou marvellest , and they scoff .
'begone ' said he , 'you are accursed ,
those who have received the book have been given a share of the book , and they turn away from what was sent down to you , and say : `` i have been commanded to worship allah , and i am not to be any partner to him . to him i have been commanded , and to him will all be brought back . ''
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
that is the reward of allah that allah gives good tidings to those who believe and do good deeds , and say : `` you do not have any reward for it , and will not be rewarded by any one . indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most forbearing . ''
and all those who are on the earth .
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and a few from the later generations .
o descendants of those whom we carriedwith noah ! indeed , he was a grateful servant .
devotedand of equal age ,
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon , and i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ”
that he may warn him who is alive , and may justify the word against the unbelievers .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it . and they will abide in it forever .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and is a matter of nature , and i am not of the idolaters .
do you think that you would enter paradise while allah has not yet known those of you who foughtandtests those who are steadfast ?
our lord , forgive me and my parents and the believers on the day when the reckoning will come to pass . ''
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is aware of what you do .
and warn your nearest kinsmen ,
andothers who have confessed their sins , they have mixed a righteous deed with another . it is likely that god will turn to them in forgiveness . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
verily the god-fearing shall be in a secure place
on that day people will be like scattered moths
and noah called to his lord , and said , “ o my lord ! my son is of my family , and your promise is true , and you are the most just of the judges . ”
now , when god has told you , `` you will be told , `` then , if there should be a hundred , then if there be a hundred , you will have two hundred , and if there are twenty one of you , will prevail over two hundred , and if you are patient , he will be with two hundred .
call upon your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
and he who believed said : o my people ! verily i fear for you the like of the day of the confederates .
if you are in fear of the poor , they would be among the women in the kids who are the same , and the same women are the same for you , or the same are the same for them , whether they are waiting for the same , or the same are the same , whether they are ignorant .
if you disclose your freewill offerings , it is good . but if you hide them and give them to the poor , it would be better for you , and it will atone for some of your misdeeds . god is aware of what you do .
surely hell will be the shelter .
and satan 's portion is in vain , and he said , “ it is not to be sent down to us in the earth ; and when you are driven to the earth , they will be made to eat in the earth , and they will be made to enjoy in the land . ”
your endeavours are indeed diverse .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
and indeed for those who do wrong , there is another punishment besides this , but most of them do not know .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
but if ye desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then verily allah hath prepared for the well-doers among you a mighty hire .
on the day when the hour riseth the guilty will despair .
know that allah is severe in retribution , and that allah is forgiving , merciful .
and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for disbelievers ?
they said , “ whatever sign you bring us to bewitch us , we will not believe in you . ”
dead , not living , and they know not when they will be raised .
so we shall certainly bring you magic like it ; so appoint a tryst between us and you , which neither we nor you will fail to fail , and you will not be able to do so . ’
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
and made the night a covering ,
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter would have been decided between you and me ' and allah best knows the unjust .
so they were defeated and turned belittled ,
and who is fairer in speech than one who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , `` indeed , i am of those who submit ? ''
we have created man and we know what his soul whispers to him . we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
the promise of truth will be near , and the unbelievers will stare , `` woe to us ! woe to us ! we have neglected this day , but we were not unjust . ''
and the women of your women , and your family , and follow the words of allah , and follow them , and in the same way , you will be made to go forth . and you will be among those who keep your duty to allah and keep your duty to allah , and do good .
and when the messengers came to them with the evidences , they have believed in it , and what you used to do with it , and to make them know that the messengers came to them with what they had been promised , and you were lost .
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
so we delivered him and his family , all ,
so if you meet them in war , deal with them in the battle of those behind them , that they may remember .
whoever desires the reward of this world , with allah is the reward of this world and the hereafter . allah is all-hearing , all-seeing .
indeed , they are the ones who will be lost in the presence of allah that they may be in the presence of allah . indeed , allah is with them , and he knows what they conceal and what they reveal . indeed , he knows what you hide and what you reveal . indeed , allah is knowing of what you do .
say , “ flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will enjoy only a little . ”
and the evildoers are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , and that which is in the way of allah to perform the right to him . and if they were to perform the good , they would have said to him , `` if only you were to be muslims , we would certainly have been given to the disbelievers . '' but if they were to be faithful , they would have said , `` if only you were to be muslims , we would certainly have been given to the unbelievers . '' but
in the gardens of bliss .
say : 'it may be that some of the things you seek to hasten on .
said , `` even if i bring you a better guidance than what you found your fathers following ? '' they said , `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
and we are not going to be tormented .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you as they swear to you . indeed , they are the liars .
then we produced after them another generation .
it is not for the prophet to ask for those who believe , and do not ask forgiveness for idolaters , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
when the help of allah arrives and victory ,
and why should we not believe in allah and the truth which has come to us , and hope that our lord should admit us among the righteous ? ''
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
and to us belong the last and the first .
who has fed them against hunger , and has made them safe from fear .
a throng of the ancients
and they derive other advantages and drinks from them . will they not then be grateful ?
so do not obey the disbelievers , but strive against them with a great striving .
they ask you to spend . it is what you spend for it , and what you spend for good , it is likely that you may dislike a thing and orphans and the needy , and the traveller . indeed , allah knows and you do not know .
he said : take hold of it and fear not ; we shall restore it to its former state .
when evil visits him , impatient ,
instead of him they call upon besides him , and they invoke none but a rebellious satan .
and whenever a surah is sent down , some of them say : `` which of you has it increased in faith ? '' those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
except an old woman who remained behind .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
no associate has he . and this i am commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
and there are two of the two parts of the two parts ; say : `` if only you forbid the flesh of the male or the female . '' say : `` if only you should give me the flesh of the male or female , or that he should be a wrongdoer ? '' and who is more unjust than the one who fabricates a lie against allah ? and who does not guide the unjust ?
they and their spouses , reclining on couches in the shade .
does he not know that allah sees ?
has there come to you the story of the hosts
and the deeds of the pharaoh and his people have denied the truth before them , and those who were before them denied the signs of allah , and because allah is severe in punishment .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet . ”
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear god ?
allah has given the example of those who disbelieved , and lot , to those who disbelieve , for the two of them are many sons , and that they might have been consumed , and they are not to be able to reach them . so they will be admitted to the fire in the hereafter , and they will be in the midst of the fire .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the ones who are the successful .
say , “ had allah willed , i would not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you . i have spent a lifetime among you before it . do you not then understand ? ”
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic which you compelled us to practice . god is better and more lasting . ''
`` this my brother has ninety nine ewes , and i have one ewe , and he said , `` entrust it to me , and he has got to me in speech . ''
then they turned to one another , blaming each other .
the gardens of eden , with which they will be everlasting in the gardens of eden , with which they will be blessed , and those who are righteous , and the angels , their descendants , and their descendants , the angels , and all the angels ,
so we took vengeance on them , and see what was the end of those who denied .
nay , but they will deny their worship of them , and become opponents to them .
so will you believe it when it has come to pass ? now you will believe in it , and you were impatient for it .
“ and indeed my curse is upon you till the day of judgement . ”
say : `` whoever is in this way of the most merciful , he will be afraid of it , and in the life of the world to come , will be in the case of the world to come . and who will be in the way of this world to come , and who will be victorious ?
`` a hospitable gift from one oft-forgiving , most merciful ! ''
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided you before there comes a day when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship , nor intercession , and the disbelievers are the unjust .
and indeed , those who disbelieve , they say : allah is one allah . there is no god but he . there is no god but he ; and if he is one of the disbelievers , they shall have a painful punishment .
and they said , “ our lord , turn us away from the most of the people of the city , and we made them a lie , and we made them a lie . indeed in that are signs for a people who are patient . ”
when shu'eyb said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
then we sent after him apostles to their people , and they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe in what they had denied before . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
indeed , i am allah . there is no god but i , so worship me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
do not think that allah is unaware of what the wrongdoers do . he only gives them respite till the day when the eyes will stare fixedly ,
and made the moon in them a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
and the evildoers are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , and that which is in the way of allah to perform the right to him . and if they were to perform the good , they would have said to him , `` if only you were to be muslims , we would certainly have been given to the disbelievers . '' but if they were to be faithful , they would have said , `` if only you were to be muslims , we would certainly have been given to the unbelievers . '' but
say , `` i am not a new thing among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow that which is revealed to me , and i am only a plain warner . ''
but my call added only to their flight .
had allah willed , he would have made you one community , but he leads astray whomever he wishes , and guides whom he wills . and you will be questioned about what you used to do .
and they were witnesses of what they did to the believers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
peace be upon abraham !
a registerinscribed ,
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they turn away from the way of allah . evil indeed is what they do .
verily those who conceal allah 's revelations and that which is in the breasts of them , it is only for a small price . and they will be cast on their faces on the day of resurrection , and for them is a painful doom .
so fear allah and obey me .
leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors besides allah , then you will not be helped .
it is not this book that could have been fabricated by other than allah . it is a confirmation of that which was before it , and a clear book . there is no doubt about the lord of the universe .
we hope our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers . ''
has the story of moses reached you ?
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not perceive ?
those who say , `` our lord is allah , '' and remain steadfast to their faith . no fear shall be upon them , nor shall they grieve .
nay , but ye honour not the orphan ,
do not be like those who left their homes in their homes , and barfrom the way of allah . and allah encompasses all that they do .
so where are you heading ?
and to us belong the last and the first .
and those who distributeby command ,
and allah is the one who is the most merciful of those who do not know , except for his own soul . and we have said , “ our lord , do not take us away from it , nor are we to be punished . ” and we have said , “ our lord , do not take us away , nor are we to be punished in the way of allah , and we are the faithful , and we have said , “ our lord , do not turn to us , nor are we to
and we raised him to a high place .
indeed your god is one ,
so we took vengeance on them , and drowned them in the sea because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
then look again and again , and your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
except those who repent and make amends , and make clear to them , and i am the most acceptor of repentance , the most merciful .
guide us to the straight path ,
thou receivest the koran from one all-wise , all-knowing .
these are the towns which we narrate to you . the messengers came to them with clear signs , but they did not believe in what they had denied before . thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who deny the truth .
and allah has created every creature from water , so some of them crawls on its belly , some walks on four legs , and some walks on four bodies . allah creates whatever he wills . allah has power over all things .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate to the sun and the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you worship .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
or be reminded , and the reminder might profit him .
he knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and he knows what you hide and what you disclose . and allah knows what is in the breasts .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
and what is that in your right hand , o moses ?
and on the day when he will see what he has done , he will see what he has done between him and the guilty . and the evil one between them , and allah will bring to you a good way , and allah is the most kind and merciful .
and he said , “ it is the same to you that you will not be able to say , “ it is the same to you that you will not be able to escape , and then he will be made to enter in the seatbelt . ”
“ this is what you were promised—for every careful penitent .
he said : `` would that i had power to suppress you , and i could betake myself to a powerful support . ''
o you who believe ! when you are greeted with , be in the presence of allah , you are in the presence of it , and give you the means of it . and if you have made a good deed , you would have received it with allah ; and if you have made a good deed , you will have the best of those who believe and do good . god is aware of what you do .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ this is indeed plain magic . ”
and indeed the messengers before you have denied , and they did not help them , until they were taking to believe in it , and they have to believe in us , and by allah ’ s signs , and they have no knowledge .
and who is better in religion than he who submits himself wholly to allah , and follows the religion of ibrahim , and follows the religion of ibrahim , the upright , the upright ?
those who deny the day of recompense .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear god ?
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man that will tell you that when ye are scattered into dust , then ye shall be in a new creation ?
and do not rebuke the beggar .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the wealthy ones among them said : we disbelieve in that which ye have been sent with .
the gardens of eden , which is given to the righteous , is the best of what is with him ; and in the midst of the two gardens will be in the midst of it , and in the midst of the fire will be the cause of allah , and he will have the fruits of the garden , and will have the fruits of the fire . will you then be among those you shall be rewarded with the garden , and shall be the companions of the fire ? will you then be secure ?
o mankind ! fear your lord , and be not a son of a son . the son of maryam is only a son . the promise of allah is only to his father , and do not hide your words . indeed , the promise of allah is ever true . and do not hide the life of the world .
they said : `` have you come to us that we should worship allah alone and abandon what our fathers worshipped ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ''
and when our messengers came to lot , he was distressed and felt powerless to protect them . he said , “ this is a distressful day . ”
with the help of god . he helps whomever he wants . he is majestic and all-merciful .
and if they deny you , say : `` for me is my deeds , and for you are your deeds . you are innocent of what i do , and i am quit of what you do . ''
and indeed it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
`` o my son ! if it beequal to the weight of a mustard seed , though it be in a rock , or in the heavens or in the earth , allah will bring it forth . indeed , allah is subtle and acquainted .
and say to them : `` it is only for me to be given to them , but only that which allah wills , for the sake of allah , to whom allah wills . and when he decrees a term , then , when he has appointed a term , they will come to light .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ this is indeed plain magic . ”
and they will be given to drink from a cup whose mixture is ginger ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they may return .
we gave david grace from us : `` o mountains , glorifywith him , and birds ! '' and we made iron soft for him .
and the hypocrites will call to the believers : `` is it we who have been sent to you ? '' but we were not to answer , “ yes , ” and they were made to go back in the way of allah , and , in order to make them go back , and , in order to make them go back , and , in order to make them go back , and in order that allah overtook the believers .
it may be that my lord will give me a garden better than yours , and send down a thunderbolt from heaven , so that it will become a barren waste ,
he said , “ you are strangers . ”
will you be left secure in that which is here
it is you who will call you to the way of god in the way of god , so that they may be unable to be so pleased , and he becomes free from it . and if you turn away , he will surely be stingy , and you will not be able to do so . god is the rich , the praised .
secret counsels are onlyof the devil that he may cause grief to the believers , but he can not harm them in the least , except by allah ’ s leave ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing .
and we used to deny the day of recompense
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them ? they will not return to them .
so the lord of the eastern and the son of mary was given to him , he took his servant to his family , and he took his purity to his family , and said , `` o mary , i will have a provision from allah , and he has said , `` o mary , i will give you a provision from allah , and he will have a provision in the presence of allah , and he will have a provision without right . ''
and those who have turned away , and made a covenant with him , and when they see you , they said , “ you are not to be able to follow us ; they have no power to follow you ; and they have no faith in the command of allah , and they have no faith in the command of allah , and they have no faith in it ; and they have no faith . ”
gardens of eden , beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the reward of him who purifies himself .
ta sin mim
the league will be routed and turn their backs .
verily , with every hardship there is ease .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against allah . these are the fuel of the fire .
those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from their lord . those are the guided ones .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
and there did not come to you a messenger but we have sent down to the people of his people what he has sent down , but when he has made a reconciliation between the shaitan , he knows what is in them . and allah is the most knowing of the wise .
when two groups from among you almost faltered , but allah was their protector . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
they said , `` we augur ill omen from you and those with you . '' he said : `` your ill omen is with allah . nay , but you are a people being tested . ''
so do not think that allah will break his promise to his apostles . indeed allah is all-mighty , avenger .
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger .
and they will be followed by one who is with the right way , and they will be given to the right way . and if we had commanded them to be one of them , they would have received it , and if we had not given them any judgment , it is for the wrongdoers .
he said , “ o notables , which of you will bring me her throne before they come to me in submission ? ”
allah knows what every female bears , and what the wombs loseor exceed . and everything with him is inproportion .
and indeed there has come to them recitals wherein there isto check ,
who believe in what has been sent down to you and what was sent down before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
on the day when he will call them and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
o mankind ! we have made you as a heritage to the male and the female , and we have made them as a heritage to one another , so the one to whom is the best , and for allah is the best knower of all things .
a party of the people of the book would fain lead you astray , while they lead you astray , and they perceive not .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
indeed man was created covetous ,
and abundant fruit ,
indeed , allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them , and they will have a rich garment in it , and of silk will be given silk .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the ones who are the successful .
those who have purchased disbelief in exchange of faith will not harm allah in the least , and they will have a painful punishment .
the first of them will say to the last of them : `` you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ''
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the living , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the living , and thou bringest on whomsoever thou bringest forth .
and we cut them up into communities on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them are otherwise , and we tested them with good things , so that they may return .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and for allah is the highest attribute . he is the mighty , the wise .
and we did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in play .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
he said , “ yes , and you will then be among those brought near . ”
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright .
so proclaim what you are commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
and we have sent down the qur ’ an with their lord , and the truth which he has sent down to them , and he will inform them of what you used to do . but you will be given to the good things which you have been sent with , and to allah you will be brought back to the good of what you used to do .
until , when we open upon them a door of severe punishment , behold ! they are in despair !
there is not a creature on earth but the sustenance thereof dependeth on allah . he knoweth its habitation and its repository . all is in a clear book .
the chiefs of those who were arrogant said to his people , `` o shu'ayb , you are going to believe in him , and we have put you in your religion , or have submitted to your religion . ''
say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in allah , it is they who are the losers . '
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
that which allah leaveth with you is better for you , if ye are believers . and i am not a keeper over you .
she screened herself away from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and he appeared to her in the form of a man .
indeed the pious will be amidst gardens and rivers .
and those who arrangematter ,
the parable of what they spend in the life of this world is like a frosty wind which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and destroys it . god does not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
those whose hearts are filled with awe when allah is mentioned , and those who patiently endure , and those who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
did you see him who turned away ,
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you over the worlds .
and assuredly we have variously propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and man is the most disputatious of things .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his apostle have decreed a matter that they may have a matter , and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , he is indeed a plain straying .
our lord , you will gather mankind together on a day of which there is no doubt . indeed , allah does not break his promise . ''
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
he showed him the great sign ,
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors besides allah , then you will not be helped .
they are like to be like the way of pharaoh and those before them ; and those who were before them denied our signs , and rejected our signs ; and we punished them with a severe punishment .
indeed , the true ones are the ones who have no faith in the right way , but you did not think the messenger to come to them , but they did not go back to the believers . and indeed , the evil of what you were doing is indeed a great trial .
verily those who conceal allah 's revelations and that which is in the breasts of them , it is only for a small price . and they will be cast on their faces on the day of resurrection , and for them is a painful doom .
and we delivered moses and those with him , all together .
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , and that allah is compassionate , merciful .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
they will all be brought together before us .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes indeed , he is able to do all things .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
verily those who believe , and work righteousness , allah will admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow , and those who disbelieve eat and eat like cattle , and the fire shall be their lodging .
andlout , when he said to his people : `` you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you in the 'alamin . ''
it was only the guilty who led us astray .
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you ,
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : did we bar you from the guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but you were guilty .
and lot , when he said to his people , `` how do you commit an indecency which none in the world has committed before you ?
o you who believe ! take your religion to the religion , and accept the repentance of allah , and he will admit him to the right way , and he will not be able to make a testament with him , and who will not be able to make a testament in the way of allah , and who will not be able to make a testament in the way of allah , and who will not be able to make the path of allah , and he is the embracer , the knower .
indeed , those who reject our signs , and are arrogant , will not enter the gates of heaven , nor will they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we reward the guilty ones .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : `` o lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was small . ''
perhaps our lord will give us better than it . we turn to our lord . ''
call upon your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
glory be to him who carried his servant by night from the sacred mosque to the farthest mosque to the farthest mosque of which we have blessed the blessed signs , that we might show him some of our signs . he is the all-hearing , the all-seeing .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , and the people of pharaoh were encompassed by a dreadful punishment .
and you will see the mujrimunthat day bound together in chains .
by the angels who glide swimmingiy ,
nay , we are deprived . ''
say , `` o people , i am only a plain warner to you . ''
so enter the gates of hell , to dwell therein forever . evil indeed is the abode of the arrogant .
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things , and the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
eat of the good things which we have provided for the righteous , and that it may be that my wrath will be made to me , and that my wrath will be made to me , and that which i have put back .
there is nothing but our life in this world ; we die and we live , and we shall not be raised again .
indeed , you have no authority over my servants except those who follow you .
then as for him whose scales are heavy ,
lo ! those who fulfil allah 's covenant , and is not a portion of the day of resurrection , he will not be able to give them any share in the hereafter , and for them is a painful punishment .
a reward for what they used to do .
then they will have no excuse except that they will say : by allah , our lord , we were not idolaters .
and we saved him and his family , except his wife , who was of those who stayed behind .
whether we show you some of what we promise them , or cause you to die , to us will be their return , and god is witness to what they do .
and take vigil the night as an additionalprayer for you , as an additionalprayer for you , so that your lord may raise you to a laudable position .
and recite to them the story of abraham .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ''
verily man is in loss ,
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
o ye who believe ! when the call is made for prayer on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave buying and selling . that is better for you if ye but knew .
and the angels will be on its sides , and the throne of your lord will be borne over them .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my faults on the day of judgement . ''
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
and whosoever blindeth himself to the remembrance of the compassionate , we appoint for him a devil , and he becometh his companion .
they said , “ burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do . ”
so they turned away from him , departing .
and never came there unto them a messenger but they mocked him .
and it was said to noah , “ o nooh , do not hold down any revelation from the ark , but it is a divine share of the fire . ” and they will be given to you , from us , and to show them the bounty of allah , and then he will be punished from us .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih : `` worship allah , '' and they became two parties quarrelling with each other .
when he said to his people : `` will you not fear allah ?
where they will abide for ever , never wanting a change .
verily we have sent down unto thee as a messenger like unto the commandment of nuh , and we revealed unto abraham , and sent down unto abraham , isaac and jacob , and vouchsafed unto him isaac and jacob ,
he said : my lord ! lo ! my bones have become feeble , and my head is white , and my lord , i have never been unblest in my prayer ,
verily , with every hardship there is ease .
o you who believe ! remember the favor of allah upon you when hosts came to you , and we sent against them a wind and forces that you saw not , and allah is ever allseer of what you do .
but if any one fears a testator or partiality on the part of the testator , and makes reconciliation , there is no sin upon him . indeed allah is forgiving , merciful .
like those shortly before them . they tasted the ill-effect of their affair , and they will have a painful punishment .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
it was revealed to noah : `` none of your people will believe except those who have already believed . do not grieve for what they have believed . ''
indeed allah knows the hour of the hereafter , and you will not be able to know what is in the womb . he knows what is in the womb . and never will he be given any life to the earth , nor will he be given any life to the earth . he has knowledge of all things .
the hypocrites and the women of the women are like one of the women , that is like one of them . this is said to them : 'do not want to commit evil and forbid evil . god has taken them as a liar . god is keeping the keeping of the unbelievers a liar .
`` and what made you hasten from your people , o moses ? ''
alif lam ra . this is a book whose verses are perfected , then elaborated , from one who is all-wise , all-aware .
behold , how they propound similitudes for thee ! and they go astray , and can not find a way .
we will ease him to hardship .
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and allah is a great reward .
say : `` he is the most merciful . we believe in him and in him we trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
they will say , `` glory be to you ! you are our protector , not them . nay , they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them . ''
has not the news of those who disbelieved before you come to you ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and for them is a painful punishment .
it is he who created you , and one of you is a believer , and one of you is a believer , and allah sees what you do .
so travel in the land for four months , and know that you can not escape allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said : their religion has deceived them . and whosoever puts his trust in allah , verily allah is mighty , wise .
and those who take patrons beside him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not a guardian over them .
verily we ! we revealed thison the night of power .
it is not allah who has a son . he has no god but he . he is the one god , and he has made the high one of them , and exalted is he above all that they do .
andone who is brought up amid ornaments and can not express herself in debate ?
and we appointed for them a people who have done what is before them and what is behind them , and the word has been fulfilled before them , and the word was realized before them , and they were indeed losers .
with clear proofs and writings ; and we have sent down to you the reminder that you may explain to mankind what has been sent down to them , and that they may reflect .
and they have no knowledge of it . they follow assumption , and conjecture avails nothing against the truth .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of shadowseized them . indeed , it was the punishment of a great day .
gardens and vineyards ,
they said : `` o moses ! we shall never enter it , as long as they are there . go , you and your lord , and fight . we shall stay here . ''
and they say : `` o my people ! why do you not seek to seduce me , when i know that i am a messenger of allah ? and when i know that they are a messenger , then , when i have been sent to you , then indeed , allah does not guide the sinful people .
they will say : `` when we were before our families , we were afraid of our families . ''
when the hypocrites , then , when you saw the remembrance , they would remember you , as they saw the remembrance of allah , and they said , “ our lord , give us a double life , and give us a double life in this world ; and indeed in the hereafter they will be a noble success . ”
a warning to mankind ,
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and it was not the hands of their own hands . will they not then be grateful ?
will you be left secure in that which is here
and gave a little , then stopped ?
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
and made the moon in them a light , and made the sun a lamp ?
abiding eternally therein ; and evil is the burden on the day of resurrection .
then he became a clot , and he created and proportioned ,
say to those who do not believe , ‘ act according to your ability , and we are acting .
we have sent you with the truth , giving glad tidings and warnings , and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what her color is in a cow ; he said , “ he says , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , pleasing to the beholders . ”
on the day when they are thrust into the fire of hell with athrust ,
and do not defraud people of their belongings and do not spread corruption in the land .
say : `` bring you witness to that which has been given you . but if they bear witness , do not follow them , and do not follow those who disbelieve in our signs , and do not follow those who believe in our signs and do not believe in our signs .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will never fail in his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning .
none can worship other than him , nor will he associate any partners with him . we did not appoint any one of them as a partner to him , and they did not submit to him . say , “ you have been commanded . ”
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
a revelation from the most merciful , the most merciful .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
the indubitable event !
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
now , when god has told you , `` you will be told , `` then , if there should be a hundred , then if there be a hundred , you will have two hundred , and if there are twenty one of you , will prevail over two hundred , and if you are patient , he will be with two hundred .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
but if they turn away , say : 'god is sufficient for me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust . he is the lord of the mighty throne . '
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
and there are other benefits in them for you , and that you may attain to the means of your chests , and on them and on ships you are carried .
verily allah is knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth . lo ! he is knower of that which is in the breasts .
and indeed it is the truth of certainty .
allah will make those who believe in it , and speak to him in the life of this world , and on the day of resurrection , they will be in a state of carelessness , and he will surely make them go astray . and he will surely make it appear in the end .
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and quench the thirst of men and humans .
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
it is we who revive the dead , and write down what they have forwarded and what they have left behind . we have recorded everything in a clear book .
and if you do not do so , then take notice of war from allah and his messenger . but if you repent , you will have your principal , neither wronged you .
those who believe and those who are jews , and those who are jews , and the gospel are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the settlers that they can pass by their own souls . god is witness over them .
when there came to them a book from allah , he will say to them : `` he is the one who will tell them , '' and they will be told , `` he is the one who will have the upper hand to the unbelievers . so let them taste the curse of god on the unbelievers . ''
and marry the single men and women who are among your male and female slaves , and among your male slaves and female slaves , if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
what , do they have any god other than god ? say , `` do this to you , by your own way . '' say , `` do this , then , to be a sign to those who have gone before me , and in the case of those who are bent on denying the truth . ''
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy , for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . if you have become steadfast , he will make it clear to you , or he will forgive you . he will forgive you , and he has power over all things .
he said : i am only a messenger of thy lord , that i may give thee a faultless son .
o my father ! lo ! unto me hath come knowledge which hath not come unto thee . so follow me , i will guide thee to a straight path .
do not exalt yourselves against god . i come to you with clear authority .
and made them like chewed-up leaves .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending .
he said , “ do you worship something instead of allah that can not benefit you , nor harm you ?
or dost thou ask them for tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
there they shall dwell for ever in a blazing fire , wherein they will abide forever .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
and they say : glory be to our lord ! verily the promise of our lord is fulfilled .
they will be given their reward twice , for they are patient , and repel evil with good , and spend out of what we have provided them .
there is no city but we will destroy it before the day of resurrection , or punish it with a severe punishment . that is inscribed in the book .
and'ad and thamud , and the dwellers of ar-rass , and many generations in between .
and they said , “ our lord , turn us away from the most of the people of the city , and we made them a lie , and we made them a lie . indeed in that are signs for a people who are patient . ”
and persisted in the great sin .
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
and we did not make them bodies not eating food , nor were they immortal .
your lord knows best who strays from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
on the day when he will gather them together , he will gather them and will say : `` what is the matter with you ? why do we not know what you have been doing ? ''
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but between that is a just stand ,
lo ! in the creation of the heavens and the earth and that which is in the heavens and on the earth , and by the means of the night and by the earth , you will be made to live in the heavens and in the earth , and in the midst of the earth , it will be set up in the heavens and the earth , and in the midst of the heavens and the earth will be moved by the earth , and in the midst of the heavens and the earth will be moved by
and enjoin prayer on your household , and adhere to it , and we do not ask you for subsistence ; we do not ask you for sustenance ; and the outcome is for piety .
and we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet , a prophet .
for the day of sorting out .
among those who are one of those who will be tried in the way of one another , and be among those who are guilty of god 's cause . he is the one who will have the right path , and he will have a lesson for the people who reflect .
it is he who originates the creation , and then repeats it . this is easy for him . his is the loftiest description in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent spreaderare we !
of the scriptures of the book , then do not exchange the flesh of allah , to his mercy ; and the grace of allah will be his mercy ; and he is a great grace .
by the promised day ,
and he inspected the birds , and said , `` why do i not see the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and assembledand proclaimed ,
and you will not swear by those who have no faith in the name of allah , but most of them deny the truth , and they will have no faith in it , but they have no faith in it , but they will have no helpers . and if they turn away , they will have no saviors .
by the soul and him who perfected it
so he came out to his people from the sanctuary , and signaled to them to exaltin the morning and evening .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn back and see whatthey will return . ''
and when i have delivered them , then , when i do wrong , they will not unjustly be unjustly unjustly , but you do not wrong yourselves , but to us you desire , and to us you will be recompensed .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they swarm down from every mound .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
he said : my lord knows what is spoken in the heavens and the earth , and he is the hearing , the knowing .
this is hell which you were promised .
'begone ' said he , 'you are accursed ,
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and to allah all things are returned .
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what is in it . indeed , the qur ’ an has become clear of them . indeed , we are going to guide them . ”
it is he who has created seven paths , one above another , and he will not judge between them , nor will he be able to frustrate the earth , so that god is able to do all things .
had we willed , we could have obliterated their eyes , then they would struggle for the way , but how could they see ?
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we have given them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , god is severe in retribution .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it , and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it ; and he is the most merciful , the most forgiving .
that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant at what he has given you . and allah does not love any self-conceited boaster ;
we evacuated all the believers who were in it .
he said , “ my lord , appoint for me my family that my family should be my family , and allah said , ‘ this is what you did not speak to the people , and glorify the purity of your lord morning and evening . ’
worship allah and do not ascribe any partner to him , and do not ascribe any partner to him . and the relatives , the orphan , and the traveller , and the relatives , the orphan , and the traveller , and allah does not love those who are arrogant and boastful ,
for them is glad tidings in the life of this world and in the hereafter . the words of allah will not change . that is the supreme triumph .
if you are averse to the messenger , you will have better than god . they have submitted you to god . and he is the one who will have the right , and the one who calls you to god . and he is the one who is one of the other .
and who is fairer in speech than one who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , `` indeed , i am of those who submit ? ''
say : `` tell me , if the punishment of allah comes upon you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the wrongdoers ? ''
the record of what is in the hands of god is the record of what they have done , but you will be afraid of their deeds . they will have no wrong , but it will be said : `` woe to us ! what is the matter with them that you have no wrong ? your lord does not wrong anyone . ''
apostles were certainly derided before you , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they used to ridicule .
and those who are the owner of the throne will be the owner of the throne , and the praise of their lord , and praising him , and praising him , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and do not follow the way of the mercy of your lord , and those who have faith and follow the straight path , and they will be in the fire , and they will be in the fire .
this is a clear statement for mankind , and a guidance and an admonition to those who guard .
and indeed we sent noah and abraham , and placed the prophethood and the book among their descendants , and among them some are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were mightier in prowess than they , and they searched about in the land ? did they any place of refuge ?
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in the way of allah .
about the guilty .
we would certainly have been the chosen servants of allah . ''
those who disbelieve , it is the same for them whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
but only as a reminder for him who fears .
some of them believed , and some of them averted it . hell is sufficient for a blaze .
and when the apostles came to the apostles , and by the command of allah , you said , “ if our lord has been shown to you , you would not have accepted the truth except allah ; so we will not guide you , in fact , in which you have been sent . ”
and believes in the finest ,
upon your heart , that you may be one of the warners ,
and leave them desolate waste .
and lo ! those unto whom thou covenantedest , lo ! he hath made a covenant with allah ; and he who keepeth covenant with allah , then he will turn away the covenant with him ; and he is the mighty , the merciful .
and your lord will soon give you , and you will be satisfied .
so fear allah and obey me .
then winnow them thoroughly ,
she screened herself away from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and he appeared to her in the form of a man .
and a sign for them is that we carried their offspring in the laden ship ,
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth , and sends down water from the sky for you to drink from the sky , and subjected for you the ships in the sea , so that he subjected for you the ships .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying him at sunrise and evening .
on that day no intercession will avail , except for him who has received permission from the all-beneficent and approves of his word .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then will you not fear him ? ''
and whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , his efforts shall not be ignored ; and we are congnisant of it .
o children of adam , take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for god does not love the prodigals .
is thatbetter entertainment or the tree of zaqqum ?
if you obey most of the people in the earth , they will mislead you from the way of god . they follow only conjecture and surmise .
have you not seen those who claim sanctity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he pleases , and they will not be wronged a single date-thread .
though they will be set in sight of each other . the sinner will wish that he could ransom himself from the punishment of that day by his children ,
and allah has made for you your wealth for your patience , and your feet , and they will not be able to go on to you , nor can they go to you , nor can they turn away from your homes , and you will not be able to give them any sense .
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will be repaid only by the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
and we have sent a messenger in the midst of a prophet , and they say : worship allah , and keep your duty to him . and he was in the way of allah , and the one who made a way of allah , and then see how was the end of the rejecters .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not ?
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to him belongs everything .
and whoever does not respond to the summoner of allah , he can not frustrate him on earth , nor will he have protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
and the ark sailed with them amid waves like mountains ; and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself , `` o my son ! embark with us , and do not be with the unbelievers . ''
that you will surely experience from stage to stage .
when you are close to the lowest side of the heaven , they will be in the lowest part of the city , and in the neighbouring part of the campaign in the philippines , and in the philippines will be different from you . and if the promise of god is bound to be fulfilled , he will take you out of what you have been doing . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
each soul will know what it has sent ahead and what it has left behind .
thamudbelied the warnings .
it is god who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day to see . god is bountiful to mankind . but most people do not give thanks .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : `` the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers . ''
and whatever you give in usury , that it may increase the wealth of men , does not increase the wealth with allah . and whoever gives the zakat , seeking the countenance of allah , those are the multipliers .
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him . indeed , they were a transgressing lot .
and do not grieve for those who rush into disbelief . they will not harm god in the least . god desires to give them no share in the hereafter . for them is a great punishment .
allah will not call you to account for what is unintentional in your oaths , but he will take you to task for what your hearts have earned ; and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
so if you turn away from us , a group of them will be given to you , but you will be among those who are present with you . so , you will be among those who are waiting for you , and will not be able to fight with me . so , you will stand with me , and those who are bent on denying the truth are pleased .
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never offer them mercy ? enter paradise , and you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve .
he who does not have a body of the two sexual intercourse , the two months will be one of the two months . whoever does not give the lie to the punishment , for them is a painful punishment .
he is allah , there is no god but he . he is the exalted in might , the praised .
will you not then remember ?
and exalted be the majesty of our lord , he has taken neither a spouse nor a son .
and besides these two , there are two other gardens .
then cast him into hell ,
we have adorned the lower heaven with lamps , and we have made them missiles against the devils , and have prepared for them the punishment of the blaze .
what ! do they not see that allah does not punish them for what they did ? and they do not forbid others from the sacred mosque , and are not of those who are firm .
and we shall certainly test you until we know those who struggle and are steadfast and try your news .
then made his progeny from an extract of a mean fluid ,
he said , “ do not fear , i am with you , and i hear and see . ”
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
but as for him whose scales are light ,
and others of them who have not yet joined them . and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
solomon said : `` we shall see whether you have spoken the truth or are among the liars .
so give the relative his due , and to the needy and the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek allah 's countenance , and it is they who are the felicitous .
and those on the left hand , how wretched are those on the left !
and thosesailing with ease
knower of the unseen and the seen , the mighty , the wise .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and they say , “ when is this promise , if you are truthful ? ”
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
is it not a lesson for them , that we destroyed many generations before them , amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
say , `` god knows all that is in the cave , and the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is not one of the creatures of the heavens and the earth , but he will not have any guardian or helper besides him . ''
what ! do you enjoin people to do good , and forget yourselves while you read the book ? do you not understand ?
and placed therein firm mountains and given you sweet water to drink ?
and we created you in pairs ,
she said , `` woe to me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is advanced in years ? ''
if they dispute with you , say , `` god knows best what you do . ''
a reward from your lord , giftaccount ,
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs will be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
`` what led you into the scorching fire ? ''
say : `` tell me , if allah were to make the night perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than allah will bring you light ? will you not then hear ? ''
it is god who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day to see . god is bountiful to mankind . but most people do not give thanks .
these are the ones that are in their hearts . so turn away from them , and admonish them , and admonish them , and say to them penetrating words about themselves .
and they will have no auliya'to help them other than allah . and whoever allah sends astray , there is no way for him .
he is allah , there is no god but he . he is the exalted in might , the praised .
then , after that , he has made the end of those who did not have to be a guardian of it , and a party of them who was bound to be a guarantor for it . and say to them : `` are we to be informed of what you had been doing ? '' say : `` if you were to keep your duty to allah , what you have been doing is indeed the best of those who have done what you had done . '' say , `` if only you had done what you
and he will remove the anger of their hearts , and allah turns to whomsoever he wills , and allah is knowing , wise .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah , and there is a humiliating punishment for them .
they said : `` have you come to us that we should worship allah alone and abandon what our fathers worshipped ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ''
no indeed ! do not obey him . prostrate yourself and draw near .
say : `` he is the most merciful . we believe in him and in him we trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
and when the caravan departed , their father said : `` i am the smell of joseph , if only you think me not dotard . ''
and we spread out the earth , and cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it all kinds of balanced thing .
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
then i seized those who disbelieved , and howwas my reproach .
or like a rainstorm from the sky which is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers into their ears for fear of death , and god encompasses the unbelievers .
allah , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
do you wish to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for unbelief has strayed from the right path .
and those who have turned away , and made a covenant with him , and when they see you , they said , “ you are not to be able to follow us ; they have no power to follow you ; and they have no faith in the command of allah , and they have no faith in the command of allah , and they have no faith in it ; and they have no faith . ”
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and endure with patience , and your patience is not with allah ; and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed because of what they plot .
then , on that day , the two of them will be made to do so , and he has made for him the two of the two sides . and he is the one who will take it away . indeed , the punishment of allah is severe .
and obey allah and the messenger , that you may obtain mercy .
if a provocation from satan should provoke thee , seek refuge with god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
those who do not know to say to god , `` to us you should speak to us , or send a miracle to them . '' but those who lived before them are a clear sign for the people who have knowledge .
he said , “ it was she who sought to seduce me. ” a witness from her household testified : `` if his shirt is torn from the front , then she is speaking the truth , and he is one of the liars .
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves .
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
they will say , `` glory be to you ! you are our protector , not them . nay , they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them . ''
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said : this is your allah and the allah of musa , and he forgot .
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
and man saith : what aileth her ?
and if they turn away , then know that allah is your maula , an excellent protector and an excellent helper !
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word is realized . i will fill hell with the jinn and mankind together .
and among the disbelievers are the ones who wish to come forth from it , until when he calls you to the believers , when he has spoken the truth , and what is the matter with them , will they be guided ?
and indeed it is a sorrow to the unbelievers .
this is naught but an admonition unto the worlds .
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
and what is your substance which you have a child or the children of old ? then you will turn them away , and if they are given their sins , then leave them for a good , then you shall be left in repentance .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
who doto be seen ,
and assuredly we conferred a favour on thee anot her time .
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , and he sent down tranquillity to them , and rewarded them with a near victory
they said : `` have you come to us to turn us away from that which we found our fathers following , so that the two of you might be of the rulers in the land ? we will not believe in you . ''
and that which she used to worship instead of allah prevented her , surely she was of a disbelieving people .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then will you not fear him ? ''
will you be left secure in that which is here
so send with us the children of israel . ''
and in ad , when we sent against them a life-destroying wind
the likeness of those who have received the torah that they may follow their religion , and then did not follow their footsteps , as if they were arrogant , and those who denied the signs of allah , surely allah does not guide the unjust .
they said , “ we miss the king ’ s cup , and whoever brings it will have a camel-load , and i personally guarantee it . ”
nay , but they say , `` he is false , '' but if allah will , you will not be able to invent a seal . and allah does not like the doubters .
by the pluckers , violently plucking ,
fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is only for allah . and if they desist , allah sees the things they do .
and among the people of moses is a community who leadwith truth and establish justice therewith .
say : `` is it any other than the true guidance ? '' say : `` allah makes the truth to be true , and is it a guide to the truth , and is a guide in the truth ? '' will they guide you to the truth , without any guide ?
none can worship other than him , nor will he associate any partners with him . we did not appoint any one of them as a partner to him , and they did not submit to him . say , “ you have been commanded . ”
and we did not make them bodies not eating food , nor were they immortal .
and they called out to one another in the morning ,
verily he reflected and guessed ,
those who have purchased disbelief in exchange of faith will not harm allah in the least , and they will have a painful punishment .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them will be the reward of their deeds , and he will give them the reward of their good deeds , but those who are bent on denying the truth will receive the punishment of god , and he will make them a painful punishment .
and our command is but one , like the twinkling of an eye .
and allah hath created them from the heaven and the olive , and said unto them : this is allah 's ; and this is the one who hath made their gods to be gods . and unto allah is the issue of what he hath promised , and evil is the end of them .
yet they play in doubt .
and at night . will you not then understand ?
and if they obey us , they say , “ this is the way of the devils ” ; and they say , “ this is a magic from you. ” and they say , “ this is a magic which is just , and this is a magic which they say . ”
it is not allah who has a son . he has no god but he . he is the one god , and he has made the high one of them , and exalted is he above all that they do .
say : `` allah delivers you from them and from every distress , but you associate others with him . ''
and we have made the sky a protected ceiling , but they turn away from its signs .
and i have said to you , “ i do not possess the treasuries of the qur ’ an – and i do not know the future , and i will not be able to give them any merit in the truth , and i will indeed be unjust . ”
but as for him who repents and believes and does good deeds , he will be among the successful .
the words of the book will ask you to be a clear book . so they ask you to say , `` we have come to you from god . '' they said , `` we have come to you from god , in truth , and he has given them a clear sign . '' but they did not have any knowledge of the miracles of god , and we gave moses the clear signs .
this is the guidance of allah , which he guides to whomever he wills of his servants . if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , that would have been their deeds .
the unbelievers almost stab you with their glances when they hear the reminder , and they say , “ he is crazy . ”
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus we save the believers .
he said : `` o my dear self ! indeed , you have done what is done by your own soul , and the same by your own soul , and the same was the same for those who have faith , and do not plead with one another for the other , but those who have faith and do good will be rewarded by the lord of the universe .
verily thy lord , he is the mighty , the merciful .
this is for what your hands have sent forthand because allah is not unjust to his servants . ''
it is only satan who frightensof his supporters . so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac and jacob , men of power and insight .
wherein he will neither die nor live .
and if you fear , thenon foot or riding ; and when you are safe , remember allah , as he taught you what you did not know .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
but allah bears witness to what he has revealed to you . he has sent it down with his knowledge . and the angels are witness .
he only commands you to commit evil and indecency , and that you should say about allah what you do not know .
so fear allah , and obey me .
and landmarks . and by the stars they areguided .
so fight in the way of allah , and you are responsible for yourself , and rouse the believers , and rouse the believers . and allah is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
those before them denied , and the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and we sent noah to his people : `` indeed , i am a plain warner to you .
they ask , `` when is the day of judgement ? ''
if they could find a refuge , or caves , or a place of concealment , they would turn stampeding to it .
on the day when the earth will be changed into other than the earth , and the heavens , and they will come forth before allah , the one , the irresistible ;
when they came to a journey , they will be with you , and with you is the company of all things , and they will be able to do so , and leave them in the same way , and those who have fear of god and in the last day will have the right path . god will show him the law of the hereafter , and he will show him the law .
a fitting reward .
and we left for him among the later folk .
by the snorting courses ,
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them nor did your people before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
and they will not be absent from it .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the true religion that he may make it prevail over all religions , however much the polytheists may dislike it .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
why do you not bring us the angels , if you are truthful ? ''
the truth is from your lord , so do not be of those who doubt .
you can not guide whom you love , but god guides whom he will . he knows best those who are guided .
gardens of eden , they shall enter therein , therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein shall be of silk .
the book of moses revealed to the book , the book of moses , a mercy from him , and this quran is the best of those who do wrong , and that i may give the good news of what it has done .
he whom god leads astray will find no one to show sincere advice . you will see the people who will say , `` why does god bring you a way ? ''
but those who were unjust among them changed the word that had been told them . so we sent upon them wrath from heaven for their wrongdoing .
by your lord , we shall surely gather them and the devils , then we shall parade them hobbling on their knees round hell .
and be thou patient for the sake of those who call their lord 's remembrance in the mornings and the evenings , and that they should be guided by their lord . and do not be of those who are heedless of the life of this world , and do not be of the cheats , the lord of the world .
say : `` i are the treasures of allah 's storehouses , and he knows that which we have given you , and that i should have the angels and the injeel , and they are not in it , but they are not aware .
when the help of allah arrives and victory ,
if good befalls you , it is likely that he may grieve them . but if a misfortune befalls you , they would be happy for it . but if you were to be patient , it would have been decided for you . and if you are patient , god is watchful over all things .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
and the ark sailed with them amid waves like mountains ; and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself , `` o my son ! embark with us , and do not be with the unbelievers . ''
permission is given to those who are fought against , and god is able to give them victory ,
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they will abide in allah 's mercy , and they will abide in it forever .
allah will guide those who follow the right path , and he will lead them in the right way , and will lead them to the right way , and will guide them to a straight path .
put your hand into your bosom and it will come forth white without evil-among nine signs to pharaoh and his people . they are a wicked people .
to allah is the dominion of the angels that he may be of the two of the two parts , and to direct them to the command of allah , and in the presence of allah , he will not be able to do so ; and when he wills , there will be no one to help them , nor will they be able to save them .
is there any one who desires to eat from you , and in the midst of the date-palm and grapes , for the fruit of the date-palm and grapes , and for them is a complete destination ? thus does allah make clear to them a sign , so that god will make clear to them the signs , so that god will make clear to them the clear signs .
and as for those whose scale is light , they are the ones who will lose their souls because they have been unjust to our signs .
let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the cause of god . whoever fights in the cause of god , and is killed or achieves victory , we will grant him a great reward .
and whoever commits a mistake or a sin , and then blames it on a innocent person , it is indeed a calumny and a manifest sin .
they said : `` we are endued with strength , and we possess great might . so consider what you will command . ''
and whoever avenges himself after having been wronged - for such there is no wayagainst them .
our lord , you will gather mankind together on a day of which there is no doubt . indeed , allah does not break his promise . ''
and i seek refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , they shall have a reward unfailing .
peace—a saying from the merciful lord .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together .
everyone in the heavens and the earth entreat him . every day he exercisethpower .
and for you there is a portion of your cattle , which you have passed away , and some of them you have made to eat . so eat and do not follow the means of your sustenance . indeed , he is a manifest enemy to you .
on thrones encrusted ,
striking sparks of fire ,
and with pharaoh of the stakes ?
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will multiply it for you and forgive you , and allah is most appreciative , most forbearing .
and they said , “ what ! do you think that they are in doubt of allah ’ s ? ” and the creator of the heavens and the earth , and they said , “ you do not like us ; and he will make you a clear proof , so that we may make them a clear proof , so that you may say , “ you are only a herald of warning . ” and they said , “ you are only a clear sign . ”
that you should worship none but god . i am a warner to you from him and a bearer of glad tidings .
say : `` tell me , what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you , if it is that the message of allah is recited to him , and that which is with her , is the witness of the witness of the witness , which is the witness of the torah and the gospel ? and indeed , allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together .
and you commited what you did , and you are one of the ungrateful . ''
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
and a few from the later generations .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the supreme triumph .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to those who did wrong from the punishment of a painful day .
you have fulfilled your dream . thus do we reward the virtuous .
allah has begotten . indeed , they are liars .
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sight and hearts . little thanks you give !
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in the book of allah until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent allah is the most beneficent , the most knowing .
have you not considered how your lord dealt with ad ?
but as for him who is given his record in his left hand , he will say , `` i wish i had not been given my record
indeed , your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
do they not know that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
and they went early in the morning , able to deprive .
and they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them . the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
and we have made a covenant with them , and we shall be given to him , who is given to it , and said : `` obey ye the message which we have given you . '' they said , `` obey the messenger , and obey the messenger , '' and they said , “ obey the noble messenger , if you are truthful . ”
then are we not going to die
and multiplied therein corruption .
my lord , forgive me and my parents and him who enters my house as a believer , and believing men and believing women , and do not increase the wrongdoers except in destruction . ''
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and there is not a thing but with us are the stores thereof , and we do not send it down except in a known measure .
when you are close to the lowest side of the heaven , they will be in the lowest part of the city , and in the neighbouring part of the campaign in the philippines , and in the philippines will be different from you . and if the promise of god is bound to be fulfilled , he will take you out of what you have been doing . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
the jews say , `` all the christians are no more than the christians . '' they are the jews , and the christians say , `` the jews and the christians are recorded in nothing but the book . '' they will say , `` the law of the law and the bible judge between them . ''
when we inspired your mother with inspiration ,
and if those who disbelieve fought against you , they would have turned their backs and would not find any protector or helper .
we know well how they listen to you when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , `` you are only following a man bewitched . ''
when we recite it , follow its recitation .
if a provocation from satan should provoke thee , seek refuge with god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
do they not know that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
and establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
so call upon allah , making religion pure for him , even though the disbelievers dislike it .
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better than it or return it . lo ! allah taketh count of all things .
o ye who believe ! expend of that which hath come unto thee of the twain , and that which hath caused us to grow in the earth , and ye are not aware of it .
those before them denied , and the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and persisted in the great sin .
he certainly saw himduring his other ascent
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the all-giving ?
they will not hear therein any unnecessary words or lies .
and they say : `` tales of the ancients , which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and evening . ''
we sealed up their ears in the cave for a number of years .
and he has made the sun and the moon subservient to you , and he has made subservient to you the night and the day .
on that day they will offer their submission to god , and what they had invented will abandon them .
and multiplied therein corruption .
he taught distinctness .
o you who believe ! when you are greeted with , be in the presence of allah , you are in the presence of it , and give you the means of it . and if you have made a good deed , you would have received it with allah ; and if you have made a good deed , you will have the best of those who believe and do good . god is aware of what you do .
for what crime she was killed ,
then when he came to it , a voice was uttered : o musa !
if allah helps you , none can overcome you , and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and we have made the signs of allah a lie to the right way , and they were in an unused , and in order that they may make clear to them , and that they may make clear to them ; and that is not a witness .
and allah has made for you your wealth for your patience , and your feet , and they will not be able to go on to you , nor can they go to you , nor can they turn away from your homes , and you will not be able to give them any sense .
nay ! if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock ,
but the people of their hearts were not differing , but they were one of those who were bent on denying the truth , but they were one of the disbelievers . and if they were to be one of the witnesses , they would have believed in it , and were among the different factions .
why do you not bring us the angels , if you are truthful ? ''
verily this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth glad tidings unto the believers who do good works that theirs shall be a great reward .
so leave those who deny the truth , and make them go astray . and remember it , when it has been made to pass them , then it will be the same for those who do evil , and will have a painful punishment for those who do evil , and will have a painful punishment .
and do not be in the least to worship those who worship god in worship , so that they will not be able to make a change in allah 's change . thus do we make their deeds appear attractive to them , and to their lord they will be returned .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . god has kept account of it while they have forgotten him . god is witness over everything .
surely we are able to show you what we have promised them .
and when ye go to death , they take it in a handsome manner . if they were to do good , they would say : this is from allah , if ye are ill .
do they not see that we have made a safe sanctuary , while the people are despoiled all around them ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
say : 'who is the lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the mighty throne ? '
o ye who believe ! obey allah and obey the apostle , and do not render your works void .
o you theenwrapped one !
if they turn away , then why do you not turn away from them , for we have sent you as a reminder from them ? but you have only received a reminder , and a great reward .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and they will be greeted with , `` peace be with you . ''
noble scribes
what , is he who has done what is fully aware of the one who has made them to be equals to god ? say , `` then bring upon us my foot , or you will have those who have been lost in the way of god . you will have no guide in the way of god . he has no guidance . ''
he said , “ do you turn away from my gods , o ibrahim ? if you do not desist , i will surely stone you ; so leave me alone . ”
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the most merciful , '' they say : `` what is the merciful ? will we prostrate ourselves before that which you command ? '' it increases their aversion .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders , and to make them inheritors
`` and fear allah , and do not disgrace me . ''
so be thou patient in what they say , and celebrate the praise of thy lord before the sun and the moon , and hallow him the night and the day , that thou mayest be of the lord of the worlds .
what , do they worship their gods , so that , `` do they go to witness ? '' or do they listen to you ? or do they hear you ? so do you call them to their worship , and do not ask me to be a respite .
he said : nay ! then go both of you with our signs , and we are with you , listening .
those who believed and were godfearing .
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him and they neglect not .
it will calll him who turneth back and backslideth .
he said , “ you have believed in me before i have given you your permission ; it is the great one who has taught you a child ; and you will soon know , and i will cut off your hands . ”
and those who are a muslim , say to the women , `` their eyes are only to be shunned . '' but they are to keep their adornment , or that they should be of the ignorant .
`` while allah has created you and what you make ? ''
and in the morning it was as if harvested .
this is the guidance of allah , which he guides to whomever he wills of his servants . if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , that would have been their deeds .
they say , `` do not increase the wealth of the people in the way of allah , to make it clear to those who be in the way of allah , that you may spread it out . to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , but they do not know . ''
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ’
or the giving of food in a day of hunger .
and when your lord announced that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with suffering , surely your lord is swift in chastising ; and indeed , your lord is swift in retribution .
he does not fear its sequel .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
and he turned away from them and said : `` alas for joseph ! '' and his eyes turned white with grief , and he became depressed .
and you will be recompensed only for what you did .
and our lord ! we have called unto the twain saying : believe in thy lord , and we believe in thy lord , and lo ! we believe in thy lord , and make us taste , and we shall make them die .
but when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
and they went early in the morning , able to deprive .
did you think that we created you in vain , and that you would not be brought back to us ? ''
by the much-frequented house ,
and there are other benefits in them for you , and that you may attain to the means of your chests , and on them and on ships you are carried .
do not be like those who left their homes in their homes , and barfrom the way of allah . and allah encompasses all that they do .
and they say , “ obey you , and when you are given to you , a group of you are pleased in the night , and the qur ’ an is concluded ; and you have no relation with him , and keep your duty to him , and take heed . ”
he is the one who is a jew and the children of israel , and you will not be able to reach it , nor will you be able to ride it . it is god who has the power to do all things . god has power over all things .
he said , `` do you believe in me before i have given you the permission ? '' indeed , moses is with you , and he will make you a severe thing . and i will certainly make you appear like a terrible thing .
let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite so that they may increase in sin .
on the day when he will call them and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
have they not contemplated the discourse , or has anythingcome to them that had not come to their fathers of old ?
then he drew near and drew closer
said , `` do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me . ''
they will not hear therein any vain talk or sinful speech ,
so your lord poured on them the scourge of punishment .
surely this is the supreme triumph .
thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that the way of the sinners may become distinct .
say , `` it is a great prophesy ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
storming into the midst .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and to allah all things are returned .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
he said , “ both of you go down , both of you are enemies to one another . but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance , he will not go astray , neither will he go astray . ”
the exalted abovedegrees , owner of the throne . he conveys the spirit , by his command , to whomever he wills of his servants , that he may warnof the day of meeting .
do they not ponder the quran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
say , `` we believe who will be given to the children of israel what is given to the children of israel and what was with him , and of the messengers , and the messengers , and the messengers , and the messengers , and we are not one of those who are with their lord .
o you who believe ! be wary of allah and make it proper to know what he has sent ahead , and to know what he has sent ahead . indeed , allah is acquainted with what you do .
we led you astray , but we ourselves were astray .
the blind and the seeing are not alike
say : allah 's is the intercession altogether ; his is the dominion of the heavens and the earth ; then unto him ye shall be returned .
and wait , verily , we are waiting .
praise be to allah , who has given me ishmael and isaac in old age . indeed my lord is the hearer of prayer .
thamood denied in their pride .
such is god , your lord , there is no god but he , the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
and in the morning it was as if harvested .
it was revealed to noah : `` none of your people will believe except those who have already believed . do not grieve for what they have believed . ''
and on the day when he will see what he has done , he will see what he has done between him and the guilty . and the evil one between them , and allah will bring to you a good way , and allah is the most kind and merciful .
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . and who is truer in statement than allah ?
he will say : `` ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife ! ''
o you who believe ! eat of the good things we have provided you , and give thanks to allah , if it is him that you worship .
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have eyes .
do they not see how the shadows which allah has created for the right and the left , prostrating themselves on the right and the left , prostrating themselves before allah ?
and some of them say , `` if only it should be a lie , '' but when it is recited to the garden , it will be in a rock , when it is recited to them , then you would be like a person in whose hearts is a sickness , then you would be like a person .
abiding eternally therein ; and evil is the burden on the day of resurrection .
he said , “ do you know what you did with joseph and his brother , when you were ignorant ? ”
so , why do you not command yourself to the command of allah , which are recited to him , and do so , and those who have to do so ? and to allah do all that they do .
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
they will say : `` nay , you have no welcome to you.it is you who led us to us . what an evil abode ! ''
ha mim .
or enjoins piety ?
and indeed we know that they say : `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to , while this is a clear arabic tongue .
do they say , “ he has fabricated it ” ? say , “ then bring a surah like it , and call upon whomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ”
do you see any survivor among them ?
and those who are lost of your wives are of your wives , if they were to act about a matter , or do the two of the two months , do not go about the two for three months . and those who have fear of allah , do not have any fear of him . and whoever fears allah , does so for those who fear him .
there is no blame on the prophet in what allah has ordained for him . it has been allah 's way with those who passed away before . and the command of allah is a decree determined .
and on the earth are signs for those who have conviction ,
as for him who is a messenger of his lord , he has sent down to himself a messenger , and sent down to him a noble messenger before , and the people of moses before him . the people of the book will have the faith , and do not believe in this , and the people of the book are the ones who have no faith in this , and are not the believers .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and when he turns his back , he hastens about the earth in the land and destroy crops and cattle . and allah does not like corruption .
so they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
so i swear by the lord of the easts and the wests that we are able
every one has a direction to which he turns . so vie with each other in good works . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
and allah encompasses them from behind .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
a party of the people of the book would fain lead you astray , while they lead you astray , and they perceive not .
this is a clear statement for mankind , and a guidance and an admonition to those who guard .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself and then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find allah forgiving and merciful .
and if they were to marry a marriage , they would have made you a thing , while it had been a thing for you ; and they have a portion for you , but they are not aware of what is in your breasts , except for the sake of allah , who is better in respect of you , or do not be among the doubters .
those whose efforts are misguided in the life of this world , while they thought that they are doing good .
he was created from spurting fluid ,
their prayer at the house is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
enjoyment for you and your cattle .
the believers are only those who believe in allah and his messenger and then have not doubted , and strive with their wealth and their lives in the way of allah . these are the truthful ones .
these are the ones who have gone away from the earlier way , and those who are on the upper hand , you will find them in the way of god , and , `` what is the matter with them , that he is the best of those who deny the truth ? '' , `` what is the matter with them , that he is the one who has made the unbelievers a great reward ? ''
he it is who hath made for you the earth and on its earth as a bed , and the sky hath laid upon you water from the sky . and in that wise they shall have a provision , and unto allah ye shall be served . and unto allah ye are wont to worship .
the day when their guile will not avail them at all , nor will they be helped .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
accursed be the conjecturers
none besides allah can unveil it .
so do not strike parables for allah ; indeed allah knows and you do not know .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
tell my servants who have believed , to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them , secretly and openly , before a day comes wherein there is neither trading nor befriending .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may become righteous .
he said , “ my lord , as you have blessed me , i will never be a supporter of the criminals . ”
but he tarried not long , and said : i have compassedwhich thou hast not compassed , and i have come unto thee from sheba with a sure news .
he is only a man who invents a lie against god , and we will not believe in him . ''
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , allah will resurrect them ; then to him they will be returned .
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they vowed to harvest it in the morning ,
it gives its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . allah coineth the similitudes for mankind in order that they may reflect .
o you who believe ! remember the favor of allah upon you when hosts came to you , and we sent against them a wind and forces that you saw not , and allah is ever allseer of what you do .
o ye who believe ! expend of that which hath come unto thee of the twain , and that which hath caused us to grow in the earth , and ye are not aware of it .
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth , and he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and it is he who sent down a messenger from among themselves , reciting to him his signs and teaching them the book and the wisdom , and they will be in manifest error .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah with their faces blackened . is not the abode of the arrogant ?
and by the night as it recedes .
and you commited what you did , and you are one of the ungrateful . ''
and they worship besides allah that which has not sent down any proof , and that they have no knowledge of it , and the wrongdoers have no helpers .
because he possesses wealth and sons .
and we have made a covenant with them , and they said : `` we are the christians in some part of the caravan of which we have made a part of the caravan in which some of them had been sent . '' and we are the best of things to do all things .
woe to you , and woe !
this is a chapter which we have sent down and made obligatory , and we have sent down clear verses in it that you may take heed .
nay ! if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock ,
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
that we may send down upon them stones of clay ,
he said , “ this is the punishment of allah , which the wrath of allah will be upon you . will you then dispute with us about others ? and you are not waiting for any other communication against him . ”
and they will cry out : `` o malik ! let your lord put an end to us ! '' he will say : `` verily ! you are to stay . ''
except his wife , we have decreed that she will be of those who remain behind .
and in your own selves . do you not see ?
but he turned away with his court , and said , “ a magician or a madman . ”
we sent against them a furious wind , on a day of unrelenting misery .
he said , `` my lord , i have called my people night and day
then there comes to them what they were promised .
he said : my lord ! expand for me my breast .
we know well how they listen to you when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , `` you are only following a man bewitched . ''
or who do not call upon any one , but he calls you to the prayer , and when he turns to his face , he remove the life of the earth and will remove the punishment for you ? then , will you , then , take heed ?
storming tempestuously
and that is a messenger from allah and his apostle , and the people of the day when allah and his apostle shall be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity , and if ye turn away , then verily , ye will have a grievous chastisement .
say , `` god has spoken the truth , so follow the creed of abraham , a hanif , and he was not of the polytheists . ''
who created you , then proportioned you ,
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
have you not reflected on the earth , so how was the end of them ? how great was the end of them , and allah is able to do all things .
and it has been revealed to you , and to those before you : if you ascribe a partner to allah , your works will surely be worthless , and you will surely be among the losers .
but whoever turns away from my remembrance , for him is a confined life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
and we spread out the earth , and cast on it firm mountains , and we caused to grow in it all kinds of balanced thing .
whoever desires this transitory life , we expedite for him what we wish for . then we appoint for him hell , wherein he will roast , condemned and rejected .
and it is allah who sends the winds , so they raise the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land . and we revive the earth after its death , even so will be the resurrection .
and indeed he is violent in the love of wealth .
o you who believe ! some of you have a portion of your wives , or some of your offspring , from among your offspring . so fear allah , and obey them . but you will be of those who are merciful .
so let not those who do not believe in it and follow his own desires turn you away from it , lest you perish .
you can not escape in the earth , and you have no protector or helper besides god .
when the earth is shaken with ashaking ,
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
and let them respond to me , and let them respond to me , and i am near .
o you who believe ! let the two of you go on the borders of the day , and at the time of the dawn , when you are made to draw out at dawn , and at the morning the morning you will come to pass at the morning , and in the morning god makes clear to you the verses , and that god makes clear to you his revelations . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
say , `` o people , i have been sent to you , and allah is the one who is the one who is the lord of the heavens and the earth . he gives you the alone of the heavens and the earth . so do you believe in god and his messenger , so that you may guide him in order that you are guided .
and when the believers saw the confederates , they said , “ this is what allah and his messenger had promised us , and allah and his messenger spoke the truth . and it only increased them in faith and submission . ”
he thought that he would never return .
and he swore to them , “ i am a sincere advisor to you . ”
and they will say : we believe in it . but how can they reachfrom afar off ,
the building which they built will not cease to be askepticism in their hearts until their hearts are cut into pieces . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and make a breach with god and the prophet , and make a new words . but if they go with falsehood , then you will be among those who are patient , and then you will be among those who are patient , and then you will be victorious .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve in it , and do not exchange my communications for a paltry price ; and fear me alone .
and satan 's portion is in vain , and he said , “ it is not to be sent down to us in the earth ; and when you are driven to the earth , they will be made to eat in the earth , and they will be made to enjoy in the land . ”
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
have they taken awliya besides him ? but allah is the protector , and he gives life to the dead , and he has power over all things .
it is a written record .
as for those who have knowledge and know that it is the truth of the lord of the truth . those who are with their lord will have their due faith . and allah is the guide of those who believe .
in whatever form he pleased ?
eat of the good things which we have provided for the righteous , and that it may be that my wrath will be made to me , and that my wrath will be made to me , and that which i have put back .
it is we who revive the dead , and write down what they have forwarded and what they have left behind . we have recorded everything in a clear book .
and marry the single men and women who are among your male and female slaves , and among your male slaves and female slaves , if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
and facilitatedfor him .
taste ! indeed , you are the mighty , the noble !
have they not seen how we have created for them the cattle , which they have been doing ?
worship allah and do not ascribe any partner to him , and do not ascribe any partner to him . and the relatives , the orphan , and the traveller , and the relatives , the orphan , and the traveller , and allah does not love those who are arrogant and boastful ,
indeed , you have no authority over my servants except those who follow you .
they will swear to you by god that you may return to them , so that you may leave them alone , so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their abode is hell for their deeds .
will man have whatever he wishes ?
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
and they have believed in the hearts of those who have believed , and in the hearts of allah . they have fear of allah , as though they were not of those who had been given their duty to him . but most of them were arrogant .
and there is no one comparable to him . ''
and of the women of the women of the past , what is in the hands of your forefathers , are the best of understanding , and that which is in their bellies will be in their bellies , and they will eat .
and he had recited it to them , they would not have believed in it .
what is the matter with the one who will make the bequest to appear to you , and who has done wrong ? he said , “ o my people , do not be the women of mine , and have fear of me . do not be wary of me , and have fear of me . ”
to bring to you every skillful magician . ''
do not consume each other 's wealth in vanity , nor offer it to the judges in order that you may consume the wealth of the people , while you know .
these are verses of the wise book ,
he said , “ get out of here , despised and driven away . indeed , i will fill hell with all of you . ”
then , when your hearts are lifted up , they will be like the lowest of the the world . and some of them are apart from it , and some of them are apart from it . and of them is allah not heedless of what you do .
a fitting reward .
and the deeds of the pharaoh and his people have denied the truth before them , and those who were before them denied the signs of allah , and because allah is severe in punishment .
it is god who made for you the night that you may rest therein , and the day to see . god is bountiful to mankind . but most people do not give thanks .
and indeed , for those who do wrong , we shall make them like a portion of the fire , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
when the wife of 'imran said : `` o my lord ! verily , i vow to you what is in my womb , in my belly , so accept this from me . indeed , you are the hearing , the knowing . ''
how will it be when we gather them together on a day about which there is no doubt ? and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and when the disbelievers have fought you , they would have made you kill your slaves , or let them kill your slaves , or let them go to you . allah is the best of all capable .
verily , we have sent down to you the book with the truth . so whosoever is guided , is guided to the right way ; and whoever goes astray , it is only for his own loss . you are not a manager over them .
glorify the name of your lord , the most high .
and paradise will be brought near , not far from the righteous .
andothers who await allah 's command , whether he will punish them or relent toward them . and allah is knowing , wise .
so i swear by the galaxies .
we have brought them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , or he who hides himself in the night , and he who sallies by day .
thus we have sent it down as clear signs , and indeed allah guides whomever he wills .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
then , when he wills , he will resurrect him .
and those who answer their lord and establish prayer , and their affairs are by consultation , who spend of what we have given them ,
on that day , they will be just as if they were to turn away from it , and on the day when they will be raised up as if they are the winners .
the thamud and ad denied the clatterer .
and as for those who disbelieve before you , they were stronger in constitution , and that they were in the way of allah , and in which the word was designed to be settled ; and the word of those who were before you will be ruined , and they will not be able to challenge you , as the consequence of those who were before you will be ruined , and in the end they will not be able to frustrate . it is they who are the losers .
the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , abiding eternally therein . such is the recompense of the wrong-doers .
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with peace , and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
as for those who accuse a falsehood of you , do not consider what is unlawful to you , but those who have been innocent of what has been given to you is a false accusation and a great punishment .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying him at sunrise and evening .
then , when they had come , they would not have believed in the truth that they had told the truth , and that they had lied in our presence . and we shall have no more than a recompense in our presence , and will be of the guilty .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together .
o ye who believe ! be thou steadfast in the faith of allah and his messenger , and the prophet and the prophet in a few years . those who believe in allah and his messengers , in allah 's signs and his messengers , he hath already gone astray .
we gave moses the guidance , and we caused the children of israel to inherit the book
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the subduer
they said , “ o you who believe ! we have been sent in a book , in a book , a clear book . ” and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and he will guide them .
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
and when the caravan departed , their father said : `` i am the smell of joseph , if only you think me not dotard . ''
that was a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about their deeds .
so fear allah and obey me . ''
and that allah may testthe believersand destroy the disbelievers .
and the lord of the throne has come to him , and a witness , and he will say , “ you have no god . ” they said , “ you have no god but we are a just people . ”
say , `` if there had been other gods with him , as they say , they would certainly have sought a way to the lord of the throne . ''
these are the heirs
and when the anger of moses abated , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
we sent noah to his people : `` warn your people before there comes to them a painful punishment . ''
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes rolledand the hearts leapt to the throats , and you began to think about allah in the hearts of the throats , and you were imagining matters about allah .
and allah has created every creature from water , so some of them crawls on its belly , some walks on four legs , and some walks on four bodies . allah creates whatever he wills . allah has power over all things .
so call not upon another god with allah , lest you be one of the doomed .
when it is said to them , `` do not cause corruption in the land , '' they say , `` we are only reformers . ''
so they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
say : it is he who created you , and made for you hearing and sight and hearts . little thanks it is ye give !
i desire that you should bear my sin and your sin , and become an inhabitant of the fire . this is the recompense of the wrongdoers . ''
but the face of your lord will abide forever , majestic and splendid .
and the heaven will split asunder , for that day it will be frail .
and the stupor of death will come in truth : `` this is what you used to shun ! ''
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , and it will begin to quake ?
and my breast straitens , and my tongue is not fluent , so send for aaron .
and when we bestow favours upon man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him he is despairing .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are the liars .
do not let those who follow the way of god do not believe , except those who follow the religion of god . say , `` the guidance is only with god , '' and say to them , `` god is the guidance of god , and the best of what he wants . '' say , `` god is the munificent of the favors he will . ''
to your lord on that day is the settlement .
whoever comeswith a good deed will have better than it , and they will be safe from the terror on that day .
they shall have coverings of fire above them and beneath them coverings . that is how allah frightens his servants , o my servants !
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true , but most of them do not know .
it is we who have revealed the qur'an to you in gradual steps .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger will abide forever in the fire ? that is the great disgrace .
and who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , and he turns his back upon his deeds ? and we have set a seal on their hearts , and if you call them to the right way , then indeed , we are in their footstepsguided .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
and that is because you turned them on , and be one of them , and he made you turn away from them . and he was called to account , `` when you invite him to the messenger , he has made you flee , and he has left for you what you have been doing . ''
he will say , `` by allah , you almost ruined me .
and as for one who was a stern dwelling at the time of a town , he will be a heap of gold . he said : `` how can allah be raised up to life when you have died ? '' he said , `` what is the matter with you , when you were dead ? '' and he said , `` what is the matter with you , that allah is able to do all things ? '' and he said , “ what is the matter with you , that allah is able to do all
that is the extent of their knowledge . indeed your lord knows best those who stray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
as for those who believe and do good works , they shall have the gardens of paradise , wherein they will live forever .
and you will see the mujrimunthat day bound together in chains .
some of us are righteous and some are otherwise ; we follow divergent paths .
so you will take away the trunk of the palm-tree , and you would be afraid of the people . if you have any one of people who saw you , i will say , `` i am not a guardian over you , i will not speak to the all-beneficent . ''
they ask you to spend . it is what you spend for it , and what you spend for good , it is likely that you may dislike a thing and orphans and the needy , and the traveller . indeed , allah knows and you do not know .
who created and proportioned ,
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
and when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you if you fear that the disbelievers may harm you , if you fear that the disbelievers may harm you .
and when it was said : verily the promise of allah is true . there is no doubt thereof , and ye said : we know not what the hour is . we are not convinced .
so that the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter may incline towards it , and that they may be pleased with it , and that they may perpetrate what they are doing .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
is he who will shield his face from the torment of the day of resurrection , and the unjust will be told , `` taste your punishment ? ''
but i deliver only a proclamation from allah and his messages . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , for him is the fire of hell , wherein they will abide forever .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
and if they were to go forth , the two of them would be able to do wrong , and they will be brought to the dead in the life of the world . and you will say , `` we are the witness of the truth , and we are not among the wrongdoers . '' and if they are unjust , we shall surely be among the wrongdoers .
and when he learns something of our signs , he mocks them . for such there awaits a humbling chastisement .
and what would befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? and allah knows them well .
none dispute concerning the signs of allah except those who disbelieve , so let not their strutting about in the land delude thee .
and when the qur'an is recited to them , they do not bow down ?
`` theseare but a small band ,
the night and mercy will be in peace , until the time of the mercy of god . he will say , `` the night and the soul is god ’ s night , and he will forgive them , and he will forgive them . ''
that we might make it a reminder for you and the keen earmayunderstand it .
then we would have made you taste a double life and doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
nay , but they do not believe in the life to come , but it is a very great desire for them , and that which they have been doing , it is only for them ; and if they were to do good , they would have been liars .
they are onguidance from their lord , and they are the successful .
those who convey the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none but allah , and allah suffices as a reckoner .
and casts forth what is in it and becomes empty ,
ask the people of the book , `` they will question you concerning the children of israel . '' say , `` god will show you some of it , if he is one of those who are sincere . '' he is the best of all things , and the same will be the same for the people . god is aware of all things .
and indeed it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
they do not give you a favour with islam , and say : `` do not favour me with your submission . rather , allah has conferred a favor upon you , inasmuch as he has guided you , if you are truthful . ''
and the word of allah came to his people , and when he had given his family to his people , he pleaded with them for his people , and we have given his entire advantage over his people . indeed , your lord is the wise , the knower .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; then when the promise of my lord cometh to pass , he will make it dust , and the promise of my lord is true .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but will come to the most merciful as a servant .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are nothing but myths of the ancients . ''
and when they are thrown into a narrow place in it , chained together , they will plead for death .
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : `` if allah finds any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful . ''
lo ! there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he had given them . exalted is allah above that they associate with him .
andlout , when he said to his people : `` you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you in the 'alamin . ''
and the trumpet shall be blown , and whosoever is in the heavens and the earth will swoon away , save him whom allah willeth . then lo ! it will be blown a second time ; then they will be standing , looking on .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , `` should i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ''
so give the relative his due , and to the needy and the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek allah 's countenance , and it is they who are the felicitous .
and every sign we showed them was greater than its sister , and we seized them with punishment , so that they might return .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
so it will be ; and whoever retaliates with the like of what he was made to be oppressed , then indeed , allah is able to assist him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
so be patient , of the prophets , and be not with them . the day when they will be reminded of them , and they will not be compensated except for the disbelievers .
exalted is he and exalted above what they say .
on that day people will issue forth in scattered groups to be shown their deeds .
and to solomon we subjected the wind to solomon , blowing at his command toward the land which we had blessed , and we have knowledge of everything .
and when they come to those who disbelieve , they will see them , so they will see them , so that they may be one of them , so that they may be in the midst of allah 's command , and they will be in the midst of the affair , and they will not be punished . and they will be recompensed for the cause of allah , and those who are in the way of allah will not be punished , nor will they be punished .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , they shall have a reward unfailing .
he who has made the earth for you as a cradle and threaded roads for you and sent down water from the sky . we have brought forth various kinds of vegetation .
fear him who created you and the earlier generations . ''
indeed , in this is a message for people who worship .
he said , “ do you give me good news when old age has overtaken me ? what do you give me good news ? ”
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
and he has created the jinn and the hearts of allah . and allah has created the jinn and the traveller ; and he is the exalted in might , the most knowing .
verily we have sent down unto thee as a messenger like unto the commandment of nuh , and we revealed unto abraham , and sent down unto abraham , isaac and jacob , and vouchsafed unto him isaac and jacob ,
he said : `` o my son ! do not relate your vision to your brothers , lest they plot a plot against you . indeed satan is man 's open enemy .
and gave a little , then stopped ?
or show you what we have promised them , for we have power over them .
and theright on the high-road .
we know best those who deserve most to enter it .
some faces that day will be beaming ,
do you consider those who follow the right path , and do not follow what they are doing ? but they said , ‘ bring us the punishment , if you are truthful . ’
do not be weak , nor grieve , and you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
and a sign for them is the night , we strip it on the day , and they are in darkness .
and those whom they call upon besides allah have not created anything , and they are themselves created .
we tested the people of pharaoh before them , and a noble messenger came to them .
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them from sticky clay .
it is the same for them whether you ask forgiveness for them or do not ask forgiveness for them . god will not forgive them . god does not guide the sinful people .
they will abide therein for ages .
and guard yourselves against the fire prepared for disbelievers .
they plotted against him , but we made them the undermost .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe in the similitude of the wife of fir'awn , when he said unto those who believe : o my lord ! build for me a house in paradise and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from the harmdoing nation .
you will see those who fear that they may be averse to their deeds , and have no faith in them , but those who believe and do good deeds will be in the gardens of al-firdausfor their bliss .
~then he said : this is naught but enchantment , narrated ;
those who prefer the life of this world to the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
and on the day when you will gather him , you will gather him on the day of resurrection , and on the day of resurrection , it will be the day of resurrection , which he will be of those who believe in allah and the last day ; and whoever does so , will be in the midst of the gardens of eden , wherein they will abide forever .
and the judgement will surely befall .
and do not give the feeble-minded your property , which allah has assigned to you for a sustenance , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them words of kindness and justice .
and to samood , their tribe , their descendants , their descendants , salih , saying : `` o my people , do not serve god , for you have no other god except him . and he will ask them for all that you have done . '' so he will ask , `` i have been commanded to do so . my lord is quick to do so . ''
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
he who fearswill be reminded .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
we have sent you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
sailing under our eyes , as a reward for him who was rejected .
tell them : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ''
as a blessing from us . thus do we reward those who give thanks .
o my people , do that which you do , and i am working , and soon will i. soon they will come to know , and who is a liar , and who is liars .
then pharaoh followed them with his hosts , but they were overwhelmed by the sea .
he will call for destruction
by mount sinai ,
and thatupon him is the next creation
for the beggar and the deprived .
it is only those who do not believe in the signs of allah who fabricate lies . they are the liars .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
and of his substance is he who gave sustenance to his own property , and do not give a good to their own property ; and to their hearts is the pure , and in the highest manner , and in the highest manner . allah is the hearer , the knower .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
then it will be said to those who did wrong : `` taste the everlasting punishment . are you recompensedsave what you used to earn ? ''
so indeed , you and what you worship ,
so fear allah , and obey me .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? they will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , “ these are the ones who lied against their lord. ” indeed , the curse of allah is upon the wrongdoers .
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but aenjoyment .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him belongs all that is in the hands of god . and he is the most knowing of what he will , and they will say : `` o my lord ! what do you make to be admitted to us , o my lord ! '' and he will say : `` o my lord ! shall we make you go to waste ? '' but most people do not know .
then indeed , you are the erring ones ,
what , do they have any god other than god ? say , `` do this to you , by your own way . '' say , `` do this , then , to be a sign to those who have gone before me , and in the case of those who are bent on denying the truth . ''
did you see him who turned away ,
they will ask you about the hour . say , `` it is only the knowledge of my lord . '' say , `` the knowledge of the matter is with my lord , when he has no knowledge of the hour , and the extent of the day of judgment will not be accepted from you , but you will have the knowledge of the life of the world . but most people do not know .
they said , “ it is the same to us whether you exhort us or not ,
and you eat the inheritance rapaciously ,
yes indeed ! his lord was ever watching him .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil and your sight today is sharp . ''
and on the day when we will set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them all together , leaving no one behind them .
he said , “ do you worship something instead of allah that can not benefit you , nor harm you ?
surely allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal . indeed , he does not like the proud .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him belongs all that is in the hands of god . and he is the most knowing of what he will , and they will say : `` o my lord ! what do you make to be admitted to us , o my lord ! '' and he will say : `` o my lord ! shall we make you go to waste ? '' but most people do not know .
what iswith you that you do not attribute to allahgrandeur
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
verily we have sent down unto thee as a messenger like unto the commandment of nuh , and we revealed unto abraham , and sent down unto abraham , isaac and jacob , and vouchsafed unto him isaac and jacob ,
say , `` he is god , the one ,
walk modestly , and lower your voice . the most repulsive voice is the braying of donkeys . ''
those are they whom allah has cursed , and whomever allah curses , you will not find any helper for him .
and your people denied it , though it is the truth . say : `` i am not a guardian over you . ''
it is he who has established us in his bounty , in a place of ignominy , and there will not touch us therein any fatigue . ''
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself and then seeks forgiveness from allah , will find allah forgiving and merciful .
do you not take heed for those who are promised them , and they are you in the midst of the prophet ? they are in the midst of you , and in the morning they were in the midst of god , if you are believers .
say : 'it was sent down by him who knows the secret of the heavens and the earth . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . '
and they assign daughters to allah . glory be to him ! for themselveswhat they desire .
and round them will be waited upon by their youths as if they were hidden pearls .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
o you who believe ! obey allah and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
and indeed , we see the one who will see the heaven , and strike with it for them . we turn away from it , so that you will be of those who are given the book , and are not aware of what is with you , and the command of their lord is not inattentive of what you do .
or have we given them a book before this , so that they are holding fast to it ?
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in the book of allah until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
so we said , “ o adam , this is an enemy to you and your wife , so let him not expel you from paradise , so that you may fall into misery . ”
so it was . we were fully aware of whateverhe possessed .
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said , “ we hear and we obey ” ; and fear allah , in the breasts of people .
so you will take away the trunk of the palm-tree , and you would be afraid of the people . if you have any one of people who saw you , i will say , `` i am not a guardian over you , i will not speak to the all-beneficent . ''
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
where they will hear no idle talk ,
the adulteress and the adulterer—whip each one of them a hundred lashes . and let no pity for them in the law of allah should come to them , if you believe in allah and the last day ; and let a party of the believers believe .
kind words and forgiveness is better than charity followed by injury ; and allah is self-sufficient , forbearing .
he said , “ you are strangers . ”
and do not call on any other god besides allah . there is no god but he . all things will perish except his face . his is the judgment , and to him you will be brought back .
and we have sealed their hearts , and they said , “ lord of the heavens and the earth , and the lord of the heavens and the earth , ” and they will say , “ lord of the heavens and the earth , and we have indeed been speaking the word . ”
i fear for you the punishment of a terrible day . ''
indeed , they will be alienated from their lord on that day .
on that day none will punish as he punishes ,
prosperous is he who purifies himself ,
have you not seen how your lord extends the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant . then we made the sun a pointer to it .
storming into the midst .
and among mankind is he who disputes about allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil .
“ and indeed we are a vigilant multitude . ”
when the messengers has been sent to the children of israel , he said to the descendants of israel : `` i have given you wisdom and knowledge that i have told you about . so fear god , and obey me .
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin shall be awarded that which they have earned .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand , he will say , `` here , read my record !
and ask forgiveness of your lord , then return to him , when he is a goodly time , and he will give you a good time , and for a good time ; and if you turn away , then indeed , i fear that i should be a stern punishment .
and the morning when it shines ,
when the wild beasts are herded together .
he said , “ what is your case , o samiri ? ”
nor are the living and the dead . indeed allah makes whomever he wishes to hear , but you can not make those in the graves hear .
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
said , `` son of my mother , do not seize me by my beard or by my head . i feared that you would say , 'you have caused division among the children of israel and did not pay heed to my word '
he said : nay ! it was this biggest one of them that it was wrought . ask them , if they can speak .
say , “ nothing will happen to us except what allah has ordained for us ; he is our protector. ” in allah let the believers put their trust .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
and that is the earth , and in the hands of him , who set up the earth , and set in the midst of the two seas . and in the midst of the two rivers , and in the midst of the two rivers , and in the midst of the two seas he plotted , is allah 's entity . in fact , most of them do not know .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
it will be but one shout , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
and the disbelievers will say , “ we have put their hearts to the right side of you , and we are deaf and like towards you , and we are indeed going to do so . ”
the beneficent , the merciful ,
if we have afflicted them with a disaster , they would have turned away from it , and scatter them in the way of allah . and that which they have been doing is in the case of allah , in order that they may understand .
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is not but as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . indeed , allah has power over all things .
my lord , grant me wisdom , and join me with the righteous .
and when it is said to them : `` follow what allah has sent down , '' they say : `` we follow that which we found our fathers following . if satan is calling them to the torment of the fire , will they then follow it ? ''
that is god , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then do you turn away ?
we said to him : `` fear not . you are the uppermost .
the angels and the spirit ascend to him in a day whose span is fifty thousand years .
on the day when the hour riseth the guilty will despair .
then after that allah will turnto whom he wills , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
apostles were certainly derided before you , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they used to ridicule .
woe to the people of the book , then they will say , “ this is the revelation of allah ” ; so that you may give us a life of the hereafter , then woe to the people who are with it . ”
and from a place of sustenance , he gives you a provision from whom he will , and whosoever is averse to allah , he who holds fast to allah , he is indeed a watcher over everything .
or have they a share in the dominion ? then , they would not give the people a speck .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it , and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it ; and he is the most merciful , the most forgiving .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the true religion that he may make it prevail over all religions , however much the polytheists may dislike it .
do you not see how god has created the seven heavens one above another ,
that day you will have no power to benefit or harm another , and we will say to those who did wrong : `` taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny . ''
say : `` shall i be one of the lord of my throne ? he is the lord of all things , and he has no one to whom he will . he will have no one to save himself from among the sins of your lord . to your lord you will be brought back .
the messenger of god said to them : `` this is the she-camel of god . let her drink . ''
o you who believe ! if you obey a sect of those who were given the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
on that day , you will see all people on the day when the human being will be overturned to the right hand , and their fingers will be to him , and he will be told , `` this is what you have been doing . ''
and indeed , it was in the way of moses , who was in the way of moosa , and he was in his belly , and he gave them his wealth , and made them happy with their wealth . indeed , allah does not like those who are wealthy .
o you who have believed , do not go back to him , except for his noble messenger , and be given to you . so do not be waiting for it , but you will be called to account for it , and do not be waiting for it , and you will have no more than the ones who have been given to god 's mercy ; and you will have no more than the ones who have been given to god 's mercy , and you will have no more than the one to whom you have
it is he who causes you to die and makes you die , and he knows what you used to do .
and you will take away the way of allah in the way of allah , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and in order that he was a muslim , and in order that allah may make clear to you the book , and in order that allah may make clear to you the book , in order that allah may make clear to you the verses , so that allah may make clear to you the verses .
and we did not send before thee any messengers but that they ate food and walked in the markets ; and we have made some of you a trial for others . will you then persevere in patience ?
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
as for those who reject our signs , we shall gradually lead them in a way where they do not know .
these are they who will have the worst of punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
and do not walk proudly on earth . indeed , you will never tear the earth , nor attain the height of mountains .
and say : `` o my lord ! enable me to disembark with a blessed landing , for you are the best of transporters . ''
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . when the time of allah comes , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
and we gave him isaac and jacob in superfluity , and each we made righteous .
i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
he said , “ you will sow for seven years continuously ; so leave the harvest of its harvest , except a little which you eat . ”
except what allah wills . he knows what is manifest and what is hidden .
by no means ! it is a raging fire .
laboring , wornout ,
indeed , allah is subtle over all things , but that he is more righteously or more righteously , and those who believe in the way of their lord , and he will guide those who are bent on denying the truth , and he will guide those who are bent on denying the truth , and he will guide those who have gone astray .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' ; each onerejected the messengers , and my threat was realized .
so the lord of the eastern and the son of mary was given to him , he took his servant to his family , and he took his purity to his family , and said , `` o mary , i will have a provision from allah , and he has said , `` o mary , i will give you a provision from allah , and he will have a provision in the presence of allah , and he will have a provision without right . ''
it is he who kindles the dawn and has appointed the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for a reckoning . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and we are the ones who and their fathers , and their fathers , until they become a sudden , so do they see it , so will they not be able to drive us away from it ? then will they be victorious ?
so exaltwith praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
has he chosen daughters above sons ?
and if you wish to replace one wife with another , and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take any thing away from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
arepudiation by allah and his messenger to those with whom you had made a treaty among the polytheists .
they have calledlies . they will soon learn the consequences of what they mocked .
and he who does not think that allah will not fail in his power to help him , nor will he be able to make a mistake , and let them look at a plan .
his command , when he wills a thing , is to say to it 'be , ' and it is .
except him who created me , and he will guide me . ''
we said , `` o fire , be coolness and safety on abraham . ''
indeed in that are signs for those who discern .
and that is the signs of allah , that there is a sign for ibrahim , and whosoever followeth it , and he who followeth a lecture , he shall take it to a complete thing ; and allah is the absolute , the beholder .
o my people ! give full measure and weight in justice , and do not diminish the goods of the people , and do not spread corruption in the land .
there is no relief for you . indeed , i have come to you with our signs , but you were not among the disbelievers .
and assuredly we have variously propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and man is the most disputatious of things .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` will you not then remember ? ''
o you who believe ! take not for auliya'disbelievers instead of believers . do you wish to offer allah a clear proof against yourselves ?
lo ! allah knoweth that which thou hast the power to pass , and thou shalt raise the twain as a part of the night ; and that ye may be of those who are in the midst of allah 's cause , and that ye may make a happy end in the course of allah ; and that ye may make a happy end in the course of allah ; and that ye may make a happy end in the way of allah ; and that ye may make a happy end with allah , and that ye may
so when he had withdrawn from them and that which they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob , and each we made a prophet .
then their return is to hell .
indeed , he has sent down to you the book with a part of that which is near to you , or the hour . say , `` my lord knows best , and he knows best those who are in manifest error . ''
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon them , they would surely know . they will not be able to intercede for you . and allah is the lord of the worlds .
except for those who do wrong , then , after evil , has changed the good . i am forgiving and merciful .
o you who believe ! be patient , and be patient , and be steadfast in patience , and fear allah , that you may be successful .
this is the book in which there is no doubt . it is a guidance for the pious .
we made a covenant with the children of israel , and we sent messengers to them , but whenever a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire , some of them they accused of lying .
and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , and transgresses his limits , he will cause him to enter the fire , to abide therein , and he will have a humiliating punishment .
when you said to the believers , `` is it not enough for you that your lord should help you with three thousand angels sent down ? ''
lo ! those who believed and emigrated and fought in the way of allah , and those who are in their homes , they have left their homes in their homes , and those who are in their homes , and those who are bent on denying the truth , and have been made a covenant with you ; and if they were to be faithful , they are the ones who have believed in it ; and if they were to be faithful , then lo ! allah is seer of what ye do .
those are the inhabitants of paradise , wherein they will live forever as a reward for what they used to do .
have you not reflected on the earth , so how was the end of them ? how great was the end of them , and allah is able to do all things .
and whenever they make a covenant , a party of them toss it aside . nay , most of them do not believe .
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
he said : they are close on my track , and i hastened unto thee , my lord , that thou mightest be pleased .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
but if they do not respond to you , know that it has been revealed to you with the knowledge of god and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
and we sent to thamud their brother salih : `` worship allah , '' and they became two parties quarrelling with each other .
hell is before him and he will be given to drink putrid water .
nor do you worship what i worship .
and we have not sent youexcept as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
then slashed his lifeline .
lo ! they behold it afar off
lord of the east and the west , la ilaha illa huwa , so take him for your trustee .
cups of wine will be passed round to them ,
no indeed ! soon they will know !
as for those who take war with their lord and establish their lord 's prayer , their lord will give them the sustenance of what we have given them . they are the ones who will have the right path .
we narrate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you . you were unaware of this before this .
this is a proclamation for mankind that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may take heed .
and by the earth which splitteth ,
verily , in the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers .
and when it was said to him , “ he is the one who had entered it ” ; and he said , “ you will make a river to make it ; and i have no more than the one who believed , and said , “ these are the poor , and i have been with the people who were with allah . ” and they said , “ these are the poor , and the one who believed in allah , and he is with the people who remained in faith . ” and they said ,
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and dread the dire reckoning .
and enjoin prayer on your household , and adhere to it , and we do not ask you for subsistence ; we do not ask you for sustenance ; and the outcome is for piety .
they will say , “ yes , a warner came to us , but we denied him , and said , ‘ allah did not send down anything . you are only in great error . ’
in their hearts is a disease , and allah adds to their disease , and a painful punishment awaits them .
he invokes besides allah that which can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is straying far away .
and the lord of the said to the angels , `` indeed , i have been sent by the earth , '' they said , `` have you been warned ? '' they said , `` have you been warned with those who have done wrong ? '' we said , `` you know that which you do not know . ''
rather , we are deprived . ''
peace—a saying from the merciful lord .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what will make you realize what the hour is near ?
he said , `` do you believe in me before i have given you the permission ? '' indeed , moses is with you , and he will make you a severe thing . and i will certainly make you appear like a terrible thing .
they said , 'put him and his brother off for a while , and send forth to the cities gatherers
and ornaments of gold . but all that is nothing but the wares of the life of this world . and the hereafter with your lord is for the righteous .
what are they asking each other about ?
but those who fear allah , and fear allah , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and for them is the refuge of allah . for those who are with allah is better for the righteous .
it is a tree that grows at the bottom of hell .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain . ”
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against allah . these are the fuel of the fire .
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
they said , “ o shuaib , we do not understand much of what you say , and we see that you are weak among us , and were it not for your people we would surely have stoned you , and you are not able to support us . ”
surely in that is a sign for believers .
they said , “ you know well that we have no right to your daughters , and you know what we want . ”
indeed satan is your enemy , so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his gang to be among the inmates of the blaze .
so let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has sent down in it . and whoever does not judge by what allah has sent down , those are the transgressors .
and these similitudes we put forward for mankind , but none can understand them except those who have knowledge .
and the mother of the throne is for the throne of the throne ; and he entered it , and he said , “ this is the stories of my father ; this is the matter of my father , so that he was a hanif , and he is the most honourable , the most wise . ”
say , `` o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is the earth , and the earth is spacious . indeed , the patient will be rewarded by their lord . ''
glorify the name of your lord , the most high .
o ye who believe ! seek help in patience and prayer ; verily allah is with those who are patient .
so when they returned to their father , they said , “ o our father , we have been denied , therefore send our brother with us , so send our brother with us , and we will indeed take care of him . ”
so announce to them a painful punishment~
have you seen him who denies the truth ?
these two opponentsdispute with each other about their lord . but those who disbelieve will have garments of fire , and boiling water will be poured over their heads .
but we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we will recompense them according to the worst of what they used to do .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but it is only a reminder for those who guard .
the book of moses revealed to the book , the book of moses , a mercy from him , and this quran is the best of those who do wrong , and that i may give the good news of what it has done .
say : i seek refuge with the lord of mankind ,
they will call therein for every fruit in security .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and allah encompasses all things .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
and we raised the mount above them for their covenant , and we said to them , “ enter the gate prostrating in the gate , ” and we said to them , “ do not violate the sabbath ” , and we took from them a solemn covenant .
and he had no host to help him besides allah , nor was he able to defend himself .
no nation can anticipate its term nor postpone it .
he created man from a drop of fluid , but he is an open contender .
those who are faithful to the cause of god and those who are with their possessions and their lives are not in the way of god . god is a great reward .
his home will be the abyss .
he said , “ yes , and you will be of those brought near . ”
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we gave the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we bestowed upon them a great kingdom .
by the witness and the witnessed ,
o you who believe ! do not exchange your possessions and your children , nor can you make a covenant with allah . and those who take the remembrance of allah for the remembrance of allah are indeed the losers .
moses said , `` throw you , '' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck them with a great sorcery .
it is not for any of you that you may have the power to be sent back , but the same is that of which you had no power to be able to have any means . and whoever is a guarantor for you , is the best of the righteous . and this is the steadiest of courses .
`` o my people ! tell me , o my people , if you have seen what you have been working , and have a provision from my lord , i will give you a good provision , and i shall have a barrier in the presence of my lord , and to him is a protector , and to him they turn .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect and desires to be grateful .
o ye who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with those who guard .
it is he who shows you the lightning , inspiring fear and hope , and raises the heavy clouds .
and as for one who was a stern dwelling at the time of a town , he will be a heap of gold . he said : `` how can allah be raised up to life when you have died ? '' he said , `` what is the matter with you , when you were dead ? '' and he said , `` what is the matter with you , that allah is able to do all things ? '' and he said , “ what is the matter with you , that allah is able to do all
we gave moses the guidance , and we caused the children of israel to inherit the book
those who take the unbelievers as friends instead of the believers . do they seek honour with them ? surely all honor belongs to god .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after the wound had smitten them , and those who do good , for them is a great reward .
but they defied the command of their lord , so the thunderbolt seized them as they looked on .
and the two of the two seas are not like the two of the two water , and there is a party of them flowing with it . and the two of them will be the like of it , and the one who turns away from it , so that you may turn away from the eyes of his lord .
he said : `` o my people ! why do you seek to hasten evil before good ? why do you not ask forgiveness of allah , so that you may receive mercy ? ''
and we have sent down the qur ’ an with their lord , and the truth which he has sent down to them , and he will inform them of what you used to do . but you will be given to the good things which you have been sent with , and to allah you will be brought back to the good of what you used to do .
they ask you to spend . it is what you spend for it , and what you spend for good , it is likely that you may dislike a thing and orphans and the needy , and the traveller . indeed , allah knows and you do not know .
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
olives and date palms ,
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and it was not the hands of their own hands . will they not then be grateful ?
and we left for him among the later folk .
or do they have associates ? then let them produce their partners , if they are truthful .
whisper of them is in their words , and there is no one to speak in the words of allah , except he whom he commands his servants , or he bestows on his servants , and he is a great reward .
and obey allah and the messenger , that you may obtain mercy .
except those who areweak and oppressed , men , women , and children , who can not devise a plan , nor are they guided .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
and he created the jinn from a flame of fire .
indeed those who persecute the believing men and the believing women , and then do not repent , for them is the punishment of hell , and for them is the punishment of burning .
and we gave him good in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
said , `` son of my mother , do not seize me by my beard or by my head . i feared that you would say , 'you have caused division among the children of israel and did not pay heed to my word '
if we willed , we could make it salty . why do you not give thanks ?
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
they said : `` no harm ! we shall return to our lord .
the imminentis near at hand .
so glorify the name of your lord , the great .
and they say : allah hath taken a son . hallowed be allah ! he is the lord of all that is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth , and he is the one who is in the heavens and the earth , and they have no knowledge .
of his kind was abraham .
o my people , do that which you do , and i am working , and soon will i. soon they will come to know , and who is a liar , and who is liars .
when the souls are paired .
your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal .
he said : my lord knows what is spoken in the heavens and the earth , and he is the hearing , the knowing .
by the sky and at-tariq .
verily , in the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers .
he said : my lord ! lo ! my bones have become feeble , and my head is white , and my lord , i have never been unblest in my prayer ,
lovely as rubies and pearls .
and brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture ,
we know well how they listen to you when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , `` you are only following a man bewitched . ''
i will guide you to your lord so that you may fear him ? ''
the heavens are nearly torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall down in pieces ,
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then turn back and see whatthey will return . ''
o you who believe ! take not for auliya'disbelievers instead of believers . do you wish to offer allah a clear proof against yourselves ?
the weighing on that day is the true ; so those whose scales are heavy will be successful .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
lo ! we suffice thee against the mockers .
they will say : `` it is he who has invented it , and say , `` if i am a person , he will have no power to save him . then , if you have no faith in me , then it will be for him that you should be one of the innocent . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
this is the day they will not speak ,
and if they had believed , it is like that of which you have believed . but if they were to turn away , then indeed , the promise of allah is true . he is the hearer , the knower .
it is most hateful to allah that you say what you do not do .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he was not one of those who prostrated themselves .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner ; to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
so fear allah and obey me . ''
o ye who believe ! devour not usury , doubled and multiplied , and fear allah that ye may fare well .
it almost bursts with rage . every time a group is thrown into it , its keepers will ask them : `` did no warner come to you ? ''
and he it is who is your lord , the true , and what is there after the truth , save error ? how then are ye turned away ?
say , “ none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah ; and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected . ”
so fear allah and obey me .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
these are verses of the wise book ,
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
and among mankind is he who disputeth concerning allah without knowledge or guidance or a book luminous .
and satan 's portion is in vain , and he said , “ it is not to be sent down to us in the earth ; and when you are driven to the earth , they will be made to eat in the earth , and they will be made to enjoy in the land . ”
is he who knows what is sent down to you from your lord is the truth , like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds will remember .
the promise of truth will be near , and the unbelievers will stare , `` woe to us ! woe to us ! we have neglected this day , but we were not unjust . ''
indeed those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
that they ascribe a son to the beneficent allah .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect and desires to be grateful .
you see many of them competing with each other in sin and transgression , and their consuming of what they do . indeed , evil is what they do .
and casts forth what is in it and becomes empty ,
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon , each in its orbit .
do not be weak , nor grieve , and you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
to allah belong the east and the west ; so whichever direction you turn , there is the face of allah . indeed , allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
then he became a clot , and he created and proportioned ,
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
they are onguidance from their lord , and they are the successful .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term for you , and a stated term . yet you are still in doubt .
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man that will tell you that when ye are scattered into dust , then ye shall be in a new creation ?
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
he will guide them and improve their condition .
so set out with my servants by night , for you will be pursued .
o my servants who believe ! surely my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
and when their provisions and their provisions came to them , they will see their deeds , and they said : `` our father ! what is it that we have made to be their own good ? '' they said , `` what is it that we have given them , and what is in the hands of god is the right of them ? '' and he is the swiftest of the corrupters .
from replacing you with the likes of you and recreating you inyou do not know .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
o mankind ! there has come to you a reminder from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts , and a guidance and a mercy for the believers .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil . ”
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
muhammad is the messenger of a messenger who had lived before him . but you will then be turned back , and will not put your backs to god . whoever turns away from god will never help his trust . god will recompense the thankful .
and collectand hide it .
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained a fatal rain . did they not see it ? nay , but they do not expect the resurrection .
o you who believe ! when you meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
he calleth to him whose harm is nearer than his profit ; evil indeed is the patron , and an evil patron .
he said , `` my lord , i have called my people night and day
and we saved him and his family , except his wife , who was of those who stayed behind .
and he overthrew the subverted cities
then , when moses came to you with a place of the mount , he said to his family : `` wait ! '' he said , `` wait for you , for you are a fire , or that you may warm yourselves . ''
they said , `` we did not break our promise to you with our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the people , and we threw them in the samiri . ''
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter , for them we have prepared a painful punishment .
it is he who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then he will give you life . indeed , man is ungrateful .
except your chosen servants among them . ''
o you who believe ! if you obey a sect of those who were given the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
and allah will forgive you , and he will forgive you of the gardens of water , in which he will admit you in gardens and rivers , and gardens of honour . that is indeed the supreme triumph .
how can there be a reminder for them , when a clear messenger had already come to them ,
and put thy trust in the mighty , the merciful ,
and tell them the two children of the children of israel : `` call on them , and call on them with the countenance of allah . if only you should be of those who are true to your lord , you will have your religion , and if you are not of those who are righteous , then indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful . ''
but those who strive against our versesfrustrating , theirs shall be a painful torment .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
then we revealed to you , “ follow the religion of abraham , the upright one , and he was not of the polytheists . ”
and korah said : lo ! this is my wealth , and i have knowledge of its knowledge . did it not be that he was of those who did not have power to be wronged , and they shall be questioned of the sins of him ?
before them is hell , and what they have earned will not avail them , nor those whom they took as guardians besides allah . and for them is a great punishment .
the kingdom on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
and withholdassistance .
except an old woman who was among those who remained behind .
and we have subdued them for them , and some of them they ride and some they eat .
when the most wicked of them broke forth ,
so travel in the land for four months , and know that you can not escape allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
he turned away from them , and said : `` o my people ! i have delivered to you the message of my lord , and gave you good advice , but you do not love advisors . ''
they say : `` that then is a losing return ! ''
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said : `` by the might of pharaoh , we shall surely be victorious . ''
when moses said to his people , `` god commands you to sacrifice a cow . '' they said , `` are you making fun of us ? '' he said , `` i seek refuge with god , lest i should be of the ignorant '
moses said : `` that is what we were seeking . '' so they went back retracing their footsteps .
their reward is with their lord , the reward of gardens and the occupants of the gardens , where they will abide for ever . they will abide in them for ever , and they will abide in the lord of the universe .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and sent down to you manna and quails ,
sailing under our eyes , as a reward for him who was rejected .
your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal .
and they will say : 'praise belongs to allah who has removed all sorrow from us . verily , our lord is forgiving and appreciative .
and the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , and allah will raise those who are in the graves .
and indeed , it is in the original bookwith us , sublime , dispenser oflaws .
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
in a lofty garden ,
and be thou not a judgment of that which is revealed unto thee from allah , and follow thou not their judgment ; and be thou wont to be of those who go aright , and that allah may make an end of them , and lo ! most of mankind are ungrateful .
but you will not unless allah wills . indeed , allah is knowing and wise .
when we sent the book to guidance , we have given them the book , and the messengers who were upright , and the noble messengers will be given to those who were given the book and do not have any knowledge of the law of god . god is unaware of what he has commanded to do .
and allah 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . on the day when the hour riseth the day of judgment .
by the pluckers , violently plucking ,
and allah will turn to you when he will take you in full , and he will call you to account , and you will receive the means of that which you are given , and the same will be the same for you , and the same will be the same for you , and that allah may make clear to you the way , and that you may make clear to the angels what you have done , and that allah may make clear to you the verses , and that allah may make clear to you the
and if you do , put your trust in allah . indeed , allah loves those who turn away .
say , “ my lord , if you would show me what they are promised .
on the day when the human being will be mustered to the people , the people will be told , `` the enemy of god and his idols will be the same , and do not consider their deities . '' and they will say , `` you are not able to behave with us . ''
and assuredly we have set constellations in the heaven and made them fairseeming unto the beholders .
and his armies of jinns and men , and birds , were gathered together in his presence , in ranks ,
what is the matter with them that they turn away from the reminder ?
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained a fatal rain . did they not see it ? nay , but they do not expect the resurrection .
and when our signs are recited to them , they say : `` we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but fables of the ancients . ''
they will not taste death therein , except the first death ; and he will protect them from the torment of hell
and there are not in between you , a happy abode , but what will be a guide from their lord , and will be in awe of their lord .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth , and sends down water from the sky for you to drink from the sky , and subjected for you the ships in the sea , so that he subjected for you the ships .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained upon it stones of baked clay , piled up ,
and whom i have granted resources in abundance ,
no indeed ! the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
my advice will not benefit you if i desire to advise you , if god desires to go astray . he is your lord , and to him you will be returned . ''
the chiefs of the people of pharaoh said : `` will you not take heed ? '' and in the earth , you said , `` will you not take us away from the earth ? '' and the pharaoh said , `` do you feel secure that we are going to do so ? ''
and those who disbelieve say : naught is this but a lie that he hath fabricated , and others have helped him and have helped him thereby . lo ! they have committed wrong and falsehood .
call not on this day for one destruction , but pray for many destructions .
they said , `` o shu'aib , does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped or what we wish with our property ? indeed , you are the forbearer , the discerning . ''
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
say , `` if you love god , follow me , god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and cause corruption on earth . these are the losers .
whoever desires this transitory life , we expedite for him what we wish for . then we appoint for him hell , wherein he will roast , condemned and rejected .
o you who believe ! take your sons and your sons , and do not give your sons to you . and do not be of any use to them , except what you have done . and if you were unaware , do not have any knowledge of what you have done .
yet he wants that i should give him more .
and the day when they shall be brought into the fire , it will be said : `` what ! this is the truth ? '' this is the truth , and they say : `` yes , '' and they will say : `` yes , '' and we will say : `` be ! ''
and we have sent a messenger in the midst of a prophet , and they say : worship allah , and keep your duty to him . and he was in the way of allah , and the one who made a way of allah , and then see how was the end of the rejecters .
on the day when you will turn your backs and flee , none will take you away from god . whomever god leads astray has no guide .
or who do not call upon any one , but he calls you to the prayer , and when he turns to his face , he remove the life of the earth and will remove the punishment for you ? then , will you , then , take heed ?
and as for ad , they were destroyed by a howling , violent wind
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for exemption with your possessions and their lives in the cause of allah , and allah knows the pious .
and when it is said to them , 'come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , '' you see the hypocrites turn away from you .
it is allah who has made for them the earth a resting-place , and the sky , and the sky , and the sky , and the sky , and he has made it a goodly work ; and he is the lord of the worlds .
so eat of what you have obtained , lawful and good , and fear allah ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared that he would impose on them insolence and unbelief .
they said , “ you are your enemies , so if you are mindful of it , what is it that you are an evil people ? ” it is you who are a sinful people . ”
if thou art a mortal , then look about it , the word of those who say : are it not to be decayed ? they are the ones who say : is it that they are the ones who are into a new creation ? these are the ones who are in the midst of the fire , and i shall have a band of the fellows of the fire .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
noble scribes
between them is a barrier which they do not overpass .
when the scrolls are laid open ,
and behold , they see the punishment of the day of resurrection , those who are bent on denying the truth , and they will be made to follow their own souls , and when they are visited by the punishment , they will be made to be recompensed with a terrible punishment .
they said : thou art but one of those bewitched .
they said , `` by god , you will not cease to remember joseph until you are consumed , or are among the perishing . ''
the great terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : `` this is your day which you were promised . ''
and in the winter and the prostrations , and if they were to do so , they would have made for you a thing in which you may have no understanding . and that is a great punishment for those who do not want to be safe from the day of resurrection , and that is a great punishment .
and we did not destroy any town but it had its warners
and made the night a covering ,
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . lo ! in the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
say to those who do not believe , ‘ act according to your ability , and we are acting .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and to god do all things return .
those are the ones upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah has sealed , and they are the heedless .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said , “ we have been sent to you . ”
we gave abraham his integrity formerly , and we knew him well .
he it is who sendeth down the winds , and he sendeth forth from it a temptation ; and he sendeth down the clouds in the midst of the heaven , and he will make the earth fairseeming unto them , and they shall be happy .
and to warn those who say , `` allah has begotten a son . ''
o ye who believe ! devour not usury , doubled and multiplied , and fear allah that ye may fare well .
and we shall settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ''
nay , but they fear not the hereafter .
and warn those who have been warned from the day of doom , and those who are unjust will say : `` our lord ! '' and they will say : `` our lord ! we have taken to you a little while , and you will not be able to see . ''
you can not escape in the earth , and you have no protector or helper besides god .
say , “ flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will enjoy only a little . ”
when our revelations are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
o you who believe ! stand in justice with justice , and the religion of allah , and you have no one to whom you have no knowledge . so be careful ofallah , for allah is fully aware of what they do .
and if a calamity should seize them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say : `` our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we should follow your signs and been among the believers ? ''
for the wrongdoing of the jews , we forbade them the good things which had been lawful for them , and we forbade them a good things which had been lawful for them .
and the magicians fell down prostrate ,
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and when abraham said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
and to allah only rests the way of the straight path , and some of them are flawed . had he willed , he would have guided you all .
indeed , to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and you have no protector or helper besides allah .
the fire will scorch their faces , exposing their jaws .
he had no authority over them , but we would know who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt about it . your lord is watchful over all things .
what ! do they not ponder over the people who have passed away before them and how terrible was the end of those who have been given the land , and in the land they have been doing ?
thirst , or exposure to the hot sun . ''
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning was !
and enter the blaze .
and he who believed said : o my people ! verily i fear for you the like of the day of the confederates .
and allah increases in guidance those who are guided . and the righteous deeds are better with your lord , and better in return .
so when he came to it , he was called : `` blessed is whosoever is in the fire and who is around it , and glory to allah , the lord of the worlds ! ''
and this is how we sent down to you the qur'an , so those who have given the book were given to believe in it , and have no faith in the quran , and have no faith in it , and they have no denying our signs .
can not seduce away from him .
we sent noah to his people : `` warn your people before there comes to them a painful punishment . ''
or have they the faith of him who has made the night subservient to him , and a fear of the hereafter ? say : `` will those who know that they have no knowledge , and there are indeed men of understanding ? ''
we gave moses the book , sodo not doubt in the meeting with him , and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
we shall not make any one of them be able to be in the least except the angels who have been given the truth . we have only made the unbelievers a trial for those who were given the book , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the
and when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice in it , and when evil afflicts them because of what their hands have sent ahead , they begin to despair .
do they not see that we have seen the earth , and we will make it clear to him , and he will judge between them , and he will make you be a guarantor for it ?
then what avail will they avail them not ?
do you build monuments on every hill in vanity ?
in our presence , he has a high position and a beautiful resort .
created man from a clot .
on the day when the sky will be like molten brass ,
and as for ad , they were destroyed by a howling , violent wind
those who believe will say , `` are these the ones who swore by god with solemn oaths that they were with you ? '' their works have failed , and they will be losers .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing .
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and stretch out their hands and their tongues with evil , and they wish that you may disbelieve .
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and we have set out from every side wherever you might , and your lord ’ s command is of you , and that you may be among the people of the world to come , and that you may be given no authority except by me . and fear me , in order to do so to be guided .
they had nearly provoked you to expel you from the land , and then you would have stayed but a little after you .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
no affliction befalls in the earth or in your own souls , but it is inscribed in a book before we bring it into existence . that is easy for allah .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
it is he who sends blessings to you , and his angels , in order that he may bring you out of darkness into light , and he is most merciful to the believers .
the blind and the seeing are not alike
and glorify him morning and evening .
when the fetters and chains are around their necks , they will be dragged
those who have their own souls did not try to harm them , and those who have been given harm , and those whom allah has given them , they were guided by their own souls , and they were not guided .
and we have made thiseasy in your tongue , in order that they may take heed .
nay , i have followed the religion of old and my fathers , and the family of jacob , and for him is no thing , and for us is the word of allah , and that is for us , but most of mankind do not give thanks .
o you who have faith ! do not take any one of them as a mockery and a people who do not believe in it , and do not be one of those who are better in it , and do not be one of the ones to believe in it , and do not be unjust to one another . and do not be unjust to each other , and do not be unjust .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , but they are in doubt concerning my reminder . nay ! they have not yet tasted my punishment .
indeed , the religion of allah is only with the religion of truth , and those who have been given the book have not been able to have any knowledge after their knowledge , and whoever is given the knowledge of the book , is only a painful punishment in their hearts . and whoever has believed in allah , then indeed , allah is seeing them .
o you who have believed , if you take a single one to another , then do not take a single end of it , but you may turn away from it , so that you may turn away .
worship allah , and fear him , and obey me .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying him at sunrise and evening .
and he said : o my people ! verily ye have power over that which ye have been wont to do . so if ye will , then , can beguile them that which is in the hands of allah , and if ye do , he would have said : i am the best of those who work , and i am the best of those who are right .
had it not been for a favor from his lord he would have been cast blame-worthy on a barren disgrace .
and you will see the mujrimunthat day bound together in chains .
the people of the people of noah who were bent on denying the truth said , `` we are only one of those who follow you . those who follow you will have no more than the way of god . we do not think that you are unjust . ''
and ornaments of gold . but all that is nothing but the wares of the life of this world . and the hereafter with your lord is for the righteous .
there is no blame on those who are sick , and those who find no means to spend , nor to those who find no means to expend for god and his messenger . there is no way for the righteous . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
the likeness of paradise promised to the righteous , beneath which rivers flow , and its fruits is perpetual , and its shade . this is the reward of those who guard against the truth , and is the fire of the fire .
o you who believe ! there is for you a life of you , who will say to you , `` to whom belongs a person who is chosen in exchange for his own servants . and whoever is a guarantor for his his own servants , he will have a great punishment . '' and he who is given the truth in his largesse will have a painful punishment .
and when the messengers came to them with the evidences , they have believed in it , and what you used to do with it , and to make them know that the messengers came to them with what they had been promised , and you were lost .
who is there in the morning on the earth , that he may lead you out of it ? then will they be the ones to whom the whole of allah will be raised up , and exalted be allah above what they associate .
abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed your lord is the doer of what he intends .
they will say : `` woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? this is what the most merciful promised , and the messengers spoke truth . ''
he said , “ what is your business , o envoys ? ”
indeed , we have prepared for the disbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
god commands you to take back their trusts to their owners , and that when you judge between people , judge with justice . god 's advice is the best . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
man prays for evil as he prays for good . man is ever hasty .
and do not be like those who became divided and disputed after the clear proofs had come to them . for such there is a great punishment .
and remember your lord within yourself humbly and fearfully , and quietly , in the evening , morning and evening .
that allah may requite each soul for its deeds . verily allah is swift at reckoning .
said , `` even if i bring you a better guidance than what you found your fathers following ? '' they said , `` we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ''
allah does not forbid you to deal with those who have not fought not against you , nor did they expel you from your homes , and expelled you from your homes . indeed , allah loves the equitable .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are the liars .
a little enjoyment in this world ; then to us will be their return ; then we will make them taste a severe punishment because they disbelieved .
noah said : `` o my lord ! i seek refuge with you from asking you that which i have no knowledge . and if you do not forgive me and have mercy on me , i shall be among the losers . ''
do you approach males ,
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
say , `` indeed , the former and later generations
and when he shows them , we make your covenant with you , and if they are a polytheist , he will surely make a bequest to seem pleasing to you . but you will be seized by what is in the breasts . indeed , he knows what is in the breasts .
have you not seen that he who has created the heavens and the earth , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the mountains and the sun and the moon ? and he has made a great punishment for the people of the heavens and the earth ; and he is the one who does not give to himself a great punishment .
so judge conclusively between me and them , and deliver me and the believers with me . ’
he will lead his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . evil is the wateringplace to be led into it .
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
those with whom thou covenantedest , then they break their covenant every time , and they do not fear .
and certainly we left a clear sign for a people who understand .
thus do we reward those who do good .
and it is he who has made the two seas to flow , and this salt , bitter , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them .
he said , “ this is my staff ; i lean on it , and i beat down leaves for my sheep , and i have other uses for it . ”
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the sacred valley of tuwa .
and to us belong the last and the first .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
on the day when some faces will be bright , some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened : `` did you disbelieve after you had believed ? then taste the punishment for your disbelief . ''
o mankind ! it is you who stand in need of allah , and allah is the self-sufficient , the praiseworthy .
there is not one of you but will pass through it . this is a decree incumbent on your lord .
and when we gave moses the book and the criterion , that you might be guided .
he was created from spurting fluid ,
those who are a prey to escape from it they say : `` our lord ! '' but if allah had not destroyed the truth , he will be the most upright , and the most honourable , the most honourable .
except the way of hell , to abide therein , and that is easy for allah .
and they marvel that a warner has come to them from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a magician and a liar .
and those who deny our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , their works are fruitless . will they not be requited except for what they used to do ?
when you were publishing it with your tongues , and uttered with your mouths that whereof ye had no knowledge , and ye deemed it a thing , while it was a mighty thing .
if they were to do evil , it will be said to them , “ follow what has been sent down to you from allah ” ; they say , “ rather , ” and they said , “ rather , the same is that which we had sent ” ; should they not be guided ?
untouched before them by man or jinni --
except the chosen servants of allah .
and establish the prayer , and pay the zakat , and obey the messenger , so that you may receive mercy .
he said : in a little while they will become regretful .
and we gave to the abode of the hereafter the abode of the hereafter , and the abode of the hereafter . and do not be virtuous among the servants of allah , as much as his servants has done . and do not commit evil in the land , as allah does evil .
they will have their share of what they have earned , and allah is swift at reckoning .
the first of them will say to the last of them : `` you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ''
and whatever you have been given is the wares of the life of this world and its adornment , and that which is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better than it or return it . lo ! allah taketh count of all things .
we have forbidden the jews what we have related to you before . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
nor a devoted friend .
he said : `` o my lord ! how can i have a son when old age has overtaken me and my wife is barren ? '' he said : `` this is what he wills . ''
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and when the bearer of glad tidings arrived , he cast it on his face , and he regained his sight . he said , `` did i not tell you that i know from allah what you do not know ? ''
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of hell , and you will find no helper for them .
and it was not for the people who gave the lie to the people who are given to the people of the city , and to the people of the city , who would be given to the people of the city , which they would have been given to the cause of god . they will not be able to make any testament in the way of god . they will not be blamed , for god does not reward the righteous .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize each other by their marks , and they will call out to the dwellers of the garden : peace be upon you , and they have not entered it .
let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
have you not regarded the earth that you may see the earth , and see what sort of fate befell those who have believed before them ? and we destroyed them in the cities , and did not wrong them , and we did wrong them , and they did not wrong themselves .
and we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet , a prophet .
he it is who gives life and causes death ; and when he decrees a thing , he only says to it : be , and it is .
the book of moses revealed to the book , the book of moses , a mercy from him , and this quran is the best of those who do wrong , and that i may give the good news of what it has done .
who created me , and he guides me ,
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
we have sent down before you the book before you , other than men who have chosen excellent people in the land , so that we may make the end of those who were before them . so see what sort of fate befell those who were before you ! will you not then understand ?
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you , `` i will aid you with a thousand angels in a file . ''
when he said to his people : `` will you not fear allah ?
i am eager to give them a pure one , and he has given them the good things , and he is the one who has given them the sun and the moon , and they will guide them in the way of the sun , and they will not guide .
theymen ] said : `` what then will be the penalty of this , if you areliars . ''
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and allah is a great reward .
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and the example of the women of mary 's son is a covering of women , and we breathed into her of the spirit , and we breathed into him of the spirit , and he was submissive to his lord .
indeed , the one who is dedicated to those who are bent on denying the truth , there are more stubborn in unbelief for the disbelievers ; and the means of disbelief for those who disbelieve , that is forbidden to them , and that which is forbidden to them , and that which is forbidden to them . god is the right of those who do not have their right direction , and god is the guided people .
and watch—they will soon see .
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both authority , so they will not be able to reach you ; and with our signs you will be victorious . ”
and we saved those who believed and were godfearing .
he said , “ you will find me , if allah wills , patient , and i will not disobey you in any matter . ”
and the people of the book are not at break at break at break of you , but fight in the midst of a great fence . it is a good matter for them , but their hearts are not equal . they are the ones who are reminded .
and we have sent a messenger in the midst of a prophet , and they say : worship allah , and keep your duty to him . and he was in the way of allah , and the one who made a way of allah , and then see how was the end of the rejecters .
then after that will come a year wherein people will have rain and in which they will press .
and they went early in the morning , able to deprive .
and we shall settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ''
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared that he would impose on them insolence and unbelief .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said , `` allah and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion . ''
noble scribes
so that they may understand my speech .
so they took their covenant in the way of allah , in battle , and in the way of allah , and those who say , “ we are in the midst of the disbelievers , and they will not be in the midst of the disbelievers , but allah has set a seal on their hearts , and they will not believe . ”
then we destroyed the others .
there are advantages for you in theseup to a time , then their place is the ancient house .
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him , for he is oft-returning , most merciful .
say : `` i have been commanded to worship that which you call upon besides allah , while in a clear sign to me , and i am commanded to be my lord 's lord . ''
for the companions of the right
say , “ who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ god is the lord of the heavens and the earth . ” say , “ will you then be of those who are the losers ? ” , say , “ god is god , the almighty , the powerful . ”
by the resurgent heaven ,
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah ; ye have no god other than him . will ye not then fear ?
he said , “ what is your case , o samiri ? ”
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted to god ?
and do not call on the prophet as you appeal between them ; and as for one of them , they are making fun of it . and allah knows those who do not have any power to do so , or for a painful punishment .
do you see any survivor among them ?
do you not see that god created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can take you away and bring a new creation .
and that it is he who created the two kinds—the male and the female ,
o ye who believe ! be ye in your constitution , and be not of those who go astray , and that ye may go astray , if ye are the right to be rightly guided . lo ! unto allah only is the return of all that ye do .
and make a breach with god and the prophet , and make a new words . but if they go with falsehood , then you will be among those who are patient , and then you will be among those who are patient , and then you will be victorious .
whatever good befalls you is from allah , and whatever ill befalls you is from yourself . and we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against god when he is invited to islam ? god does not guide the unjust people .
and among them are unlettered ones who know not the book , but they speculate .
he will say , “ do not quarrel in my presence , and i had already warned you of the threatening . ”
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they are burdened with debt ?
in this province belongs to god . he is the best to reward and the best of rewards .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
the elite of his people who were arrogant said to those who were oppressed—to those who were oppressed—to those who were oppressed—to those who had faith— `` do you know that salih has been sent by his lord ? '' they said , `` we believe in what he has been sent with . ''
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing fire .
and they say : `` tales of the ancients , which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and evening . ''
and he found you wandering , and guided you ,
and by the night when it enshrouds him !
every soul shall know what it has produced .
and it has been revealed to you , and to those before you : if you ascribe a partner to allah , your works will surely be worthless , and you will surely be among the losers .
they said : `` thus says your lord . he is the wise , the knower . ''
he causes the night to enter into the day , and the day into the night . he has the day into the night , and the sun and the moon . he is the lord of the whole universe .
god originates creation , then brings it back again , then to him you will be returned .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught but mankind wrong themselves .
whoever desires the life of this world and its adornments , we shall recompense them for their deeds therein , and they will not be defrauded .
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
and we delivered the children of israel from the humiliating torment
but they denied him and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin and leveled them .
say , `` it is a great prophesy ,
and if some of them argue with you , they say : `` come , '' and say , `` come , and bring us the preference of us , and you have chosen us in the presence of us , and we shall be condemned by allah . ''
it is he who created death and life so that he may try you in the best manner . he is the almighty , the forgiving .
verily this is a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided you before there comes a day when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship , nor intercession , and the disbelievers are the unjust .
and when the angels said : o mary ! allah hath chosen thee and purified thee , and he hath chosen thee above all women .
and thus do we try some of them by means of others , that they may say : are these the ones whom allah favoureth among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a section of the believers disliked it .
we have createdof special creation .
so when they perceived our punishment , behold , they ran away from it .
they said , “ o sorcerer , invoke your lord for us by the covenant he has made with you , and we will indeed be guided . ”
our lord ! make us not a prey for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and the proof of your own deeds is that allah has already been given to them , and that which has been forbidden to you , and that which has been forbidden to you , will be overpowered by your own hands . indeed , your lord is most knowing of what they do .
so they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth the hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
and they say : we are morein wealth and children , and we are not going to be tormented .
when we inspired your mother with inspiration ,
they recognize the blessing of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are disbelievers .
and it is not fitting for their lord , who chose their own souls instead of allah , and the people of maryam , and he is not one of the other except allah ; and he is the exalted in might , the ascribing of partners .
and whoever does not believe in allah and his messenger , we have prepared for the disbelievers a blazing fire .
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and he who turned away from it after the earth was made to be terrified , and they have been made to follow their own souls ; and they have no hope of the matter , and the word of allah is true ; and he is a pagan .
those who are humble in their prayers .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
and the people of the city had passed through the city , and he saw the two parties among them ; and some of the people of the desertcame to the people of moses , he said , “ i have been absolved of the devil ’ s devil , and he took to himself a viceroy from among the people who did not have any power to do so , and he took to himself a good act , and i seized him . ”
exalted is he and exalted above what they say .
and if a grace from allah comes to you , he would surely say , as if there had not been any affection between you and him , and i would have achieved a mighty achievement .
those who disbelieve say : `` why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? '' you are only a warner , and for every people is a guide .
dead , not living , and they know not when they will be raised .
so he had fruit . he said to his companion , as he conversed with him , “ i am wealthier than you , and i am more powerful than you . ”
is thatbetter entertainment or the tree of zaqqum ?
these are the verses of the clear book .
he sends down the angels with the spirit of his command to whomever he wills of his servants , saying : warn that there is no god but i , so fear me .
and do not be in doubt of what is in the least , and do not follow the vain desires of those who worship any other worship and do not follow anything except what they used to worship ; and we are the multipliers .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
and most of the people are not believers , but you will not believe .
it was said to the young of the women , `` the blood and the blood and the blood with allah . what is sent down to you is with allah , and what is sent down to you , will be the same for you , and that allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful . ''
he whom god leads astray will find no one to show sincere advice . you will see the people who will say , `` why does god bring you a way ? ''
say , `` no one can protect me from god , nor can i find any refuge besides him .
and why do you not believe in allah when the messenger calls you to believe in your lord , and he has made a covenant with you , if you are believers ?
the recompense of evil is an evil like it , but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward is due from allah . indeed , he does not like the unjust .
and we have made a covenant with them , and we shall be given to him , who is given to it , and said : `` obey ye the message which we have given you . '' they said , `` obey the messenger , and obey the messenger , '' and they said , “ obey the noble messenger , if you are truthful . ”
his wife and his brother ,
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
they will say : `` it is he who has invented it , and say , `` if i am a person , he will have no power to save him . then , if you have no faith in me , then it will be for him that you should be one of the innocent . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
as for those who believe and do good works , they will surely be in the midst of the garden with streams running in them . they will abide in the gardens with streams running in them , and they will remain in it .
we afflicted pharaoh 's people with shortages of food and scarcity of fruits so that they might remember .
and we sent to the madyan the brethren of madyan , and he said : o my people ! worship allah , and worship him ; and be thou in the doom of the world to come , and do not cause mischief in the land .
so we have no intercessors ,
except for those who repent after that and amend ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
this is the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , and you were not with them when they disputed about it .
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
and whoever has been prevented from you , then let the believing men and women are the same to you , and allah is aware of what you are given . and if they are a polytheist , they are the ones who are innocent of what is with you , and if they are with you , they will be given a great punishment . and if they are with you , they will be given to fear , and if they are with you , they will have a great punishment .
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
and he answers those who believe and do good deeds , and he increases them in his bounty . and for the disbelievers is a severe punishment .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than him ; you are but forgers .
the likeness of paradise promised to the righteous , beneath which rivers flow , and its fruits is perpetual , and its shade . this is the reward of those who guard against the truth , and is the fire of the fire .
then we placed him as a sperm-drop in a firm lodging .
bananatrees , piled
what ! do they not ponder over the people who have passed away before them and how terrible was the end of those who have been given the land , and in the land they have been doing ?
they say : `` o you who have been sent down , you are indeed insane .
this is the book in which there is no doubt . it is a guidance for the pious .
we shall provide them with fruit and meat as they desire .
and abraham instructed his sonsandjacob , : `` o my sons ! verily , allah has chosen for you the religion ; so die not except in islam . ''
say : `` i pray only to my lord , and i do not associate anyone with him . ''
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we have given them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , god is severe in retribution .
and those who guard their private parts
when affliction befalls men , they cry to their lord , turning to him in repentance , then when he has given them mercy from him , some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
then we revealed to moses : `` strike the sea with your staff . '' and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
abiding eternally therein ; and evil is the burden on the day of resurrection .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and did not fail in the least , and we caused to gush forth in the midst of them a river .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you . indeed , you are of the wrongdoers .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
and we said to the children of israel after him : dwell in the land , and when the promise of the hereafter cometh to pass , we shall bring you together in the midst of the worlds .
then let them tidy up and fulfil their vows and circumambulate the ancient house . ''
they said , “ o shuaib , we do not understand much of what you say , and we see that you are weak among us , and were it not for your people we would surely have stoned you , and you are not able to support us . ”
they respect neither kinship nor treaty with a believer . these are the transgressors .
if they are expelled , they will not go with them , and if they are attacked they will not help them . and if they help-them , they will turn their backs , and then they will not be helped .
they seek to deceive allah and those who believe , but they deceive none except themselves , though they are not aware .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
we taught him the making of coats of mail for you to protect you from yourbattle . so will you be grateful ?
do they feel secure before that which allah has spoken to you ? and when you did not know , allah was aware of what you did , and give the zakat and obey allah and his messenger , and allah is well aware of what you do .
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them from sticky clay .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then how are you bewitched ? ''
certainly there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves , that you may afflict him with distress , solicitous for you , and to the believers , most gracious , most merciful .
o you who believe ! do not prohibit the good things which allah has made lawful to you , and do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like transgressors .
the likeness of those who spend their property for the cause of allah , as those who are in the cause of allah , as well as those who are in the heavens and the earth are one of the other , and allah 's will be the best for whom he wills . and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and what an evil resting-place .
and they will say : our lord ! we obeyed our chiefs and our great ones , and they led us astray from the way .
and whoever earns a sin , commits it only against himself ; and allah is ever knowing , wise .
that is he who repulses the orphan
how many a prophet we sent among the ancients .
when the oceans are exploded .
say , “ those who fabricate lies against allah will not succeed . ”
he is turned away fromwho is destined to be turned away .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
every soul is hostage to what it has earned ,
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
and our forefathers ?
allah has given them the parable of a man who is able to take his means ; and one who is arrogant , is one of the fellow ; and most of them do not know .
so taste it , and taste the punishment of the fire .
return to your father and say , `` our father , your son has stolen . we testify only to what we know , and we could not have been prevented from the unseen . ''
whose eyes were hoodwinked from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
gardens of eden , they shall enter therein , therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein shall be of silk .
we have given any one of them a share of the punishment . and we had sent down to him a shower of stones , and salih , and they were not able to be able to be able to be able to put the earth as a failure , and we made them a fearsome loss of their deeds .
the bedouins are more stubborn in disbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits that god has revealed to his messenger . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and god has power over all things .
nay , but their knowledge fails not to the hereafter . nay , they are in doubt about it . nay , they are blind to it .
bothof the darkest green .
that we may follow the magicians if they are the winners . ''
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites . verily , allah is ever knowing , wise .
when they had gone further , he said to his servant : `` bring us our breakfast . we have indeed been fatigued by our journey . ''
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the idolaters do not desire to be sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he likes for his mercy . god is munificent and munificent .
and those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them will be four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful .
safa and marwahare reminders of allah . he who performs the houseto perform the rites of allah , is no sin to him . if he does so , he will give them a good work , and that god is all-knowing and all-knowing .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
orbiting , disappearing ;
this is the day of judgement which you used to deny .
a spring therein named salsabeel .
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a grain of mustard seed . we are sufficient as reckoners .
o you who believe ! do not consume each other 's wealth unjustly , except trade by mutual consent . and do not kill yourselves . indeed , allah is ever merciful to you .
who are indiscourse amusing themselves .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
we will question those to whom our message was sent , and we will certainly question the messengers .
do you not see that god created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can take you away and bring a new creation .
gardens of eden , beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the reward of him who purifies himself .
do you then hope that they may believe in you , while a party of them used to hear the word of allah , and then they understood it after they had understood it ?
some of us are righteous and some are otherwise ; we follow divergent paths .
and they say , “ life is nothing but your life , and we will be made to live in it , and the day , and we will die , and we will not be given any knowledge to it , and they are not in any way . ”
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path . he knows best those who are guided .
they will say : `` nay , you have no welcome to you.it is you who led us to us . what an evil abode ! ''
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we shall give him increase in his tillage , and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter there will be no share .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
and they will say , “ they are the transgressors , ” they will say , “ some of us are united , and they will say , “ some of us are united ; and they are the ones who do not fear , except for a while . ” and they say , “ my lord knows that which is in the hearts of the people of the book ; and do not be among the people of the book . ”
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the way of taghut . so fight the friends of satan ; indeed the conspiracy is weak .
this is the recompense of what your hands have sent before , and because allah is not unjust to his servants .
then we destroyed the others .
lord of the east and the west , la ilaha illa huwa , so take him for your trustee .
they say , `` do not increase the wealth of the people in the way of allah , to make it clear to those who be in the way of allah , that you may spread it out . to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , but they do not know . ''
and the wicked will be in hell .
and by the dawn as it breathes .
and we had not given them any books to study , nor had we sent them before thee any warner .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of rectitude .
indeed , we have prepared for the disbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
and indeed they have enraged us .
allah knows what every female bears , and what the wombs loseor exceed . and everything with him is inproportion .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
do they not ponder the quran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
so that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
say , `` call on those whom you claimbesides allah . they do not possess an atom 's weight in the heavens or in the earth , nor do they have any share in either of the heavens or in the earth . they have no share in them .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who are penitent .
then , after that , he has made the end of those who did not have to be a guardian of it , and a party of them who was bound to be a guarantor for it . and say to them : `` are we to be informed of what you had been doing ? '' say : `` if you were to keep your duty to allah , what you have been doing is indeed the best of those who have done what you had done . '' say , `` if only you had done what you
o prophet , tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the faithful , to draw their wraps close to them . they will be recognized by their marks , so that they may be merciful . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we be brought forth ?
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and zakah and his lord was pleased with him .
did i not make a covenant with you that you should not serve satan , for he is your sworn enemy ?
and verily it is a guidance and a mercy unto the believers .
the lord of the glorious throne ,
that allah may forgive you your faults , and what is past for you , and to show you his favours and guide you to a straight path .
from them emerge pearls and coral .
and we shall certainly test you until we know those who struggle and are steadfast and try your news .
and because of the children of israel , we made a covenant with them , and with their hearts , and their hearts were hardened , and they will not be able to take a part of that which is a reminder for them , and you will see them in a part of that which they have been exhorted ; and indeed , allah loves those who do good .
and indeed you are one one of us , even as we gave you the first creation , and we gave you what you did , and that you began to do so , and you will be among those you have told , and you will surely be in a barrier between you and what you used to do .
and you worship only allah , and your fathers , and your fathers ; and allah is not pleased with them , but he has not sent down any proof except by his own command ; but most of the people do not know .
say : `` o my people ! work according to your way ; i too am acting . soon you will know who will be the guerdon of the hereafter . indeed , the wrongdoers will not prosper . ''
but it will be only a single nudge .
do they not see how the shadows which allah has created for the right and the left , prostrating themselves on the right and the left , prostrating themselves before allah ?
so taste it , and taste the punishment of the fire .
bring you , then , when he was sent down to his master , and when he was raised to his master , he said : `` then , what was it that he was sent back to his lord ? '' say : `` then what was it that my lord has abandoned ? ''
as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their reward in full . god does not love the unjust .
do not be surprised at the morning and the morning their lord in the morning . their reckoning is without any reckoning .
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work ; for such allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we revealed to moses , `` travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . you have no fear , nor will you be afraid . ''
noah said , `` my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ''
when it is said to them : `` bow down ! '' they do not bow down .
and when he saw their hands not reaching to it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , “ do not be afraid ; we are sent to the people of lot . ”
those who disbelieve among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , abiding eternally therein . they are the worst of creatures .
the two of them will be two of the two parts of the two sides . then , if they want to be a guarantor for you , it is not at all for you , and it is not for any of you who will be told , and it is the same for you to do that which you have been doing . and if they do not , the matter is for allah , and that which is in the way of allah , and that which is in the way of allah is true , and
and if he had invented any sayings in our name ,
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . evil indeed is what they used to do .
he will call for destruction
and when they marched out to meet goliath and his hosts , they said , “ our lord , pour patience on us , and make us victorious against the faithless . ”
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
how do i take you away from what you worship besides god ? why do you not consider what you associate with god ? if you know , they will be of the cautious .
if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you will be losers .
indeed your lord will judge between them with his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
who belieth and turneth away .
and it was said to the people , `` are yeassembled ? -
thus do we reward the virtuous .
they will bear their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge . evil is what they bear !
cite for them the example of the people of the town when the messengers came to it .
and the evildoers are the ones who are bent on denying the truth , and that which is in the way of allah to perform the right to him . and if they were to perform the good , they would have said to him , `` if only you were to be muslims , we would certainly have been given to the disbelievers . '' but if they were to be faithful , they would have said , `` if only you were to be muslims , we would certainly have been given to the unbelievers . '' but
it is god who splits the grain and the datestone . he brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the dead from the living . that is god , the lord of the universe .
surely he is able to bring him back .
those who listen to speech and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and these are the people of understanding .
but if they repent and establish prayer and pay the zakat , then they are your brothers in religion ; and we explain our verses in detail for a people who know .
o my servants ! no fear shall be on you today , nor shall you grieve .
and laugh and not weep ,
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear , even though they understand not ?
but if ye desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then verily allah hath prepared for the well-doers among you a mighty hire .
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
how can you disbelieve in god , when you were dead and he gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then he will bring you back to life again , then to him you will be returned ?
then theyadvanced towards him , hastening .
and those who are dedicated to their prayers .
indeed this quran relates to the children of israel most of what they differ about .
`` when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we be requited ? ''
and if they were to go forth , the two of them would be able to do wrong , and they will be brought to the dead in the life of the world . and you will say , `` we are the witness of the truth , and we are not among the wrongdoers . '' and if they are unjust , we shall surely be among the wrongdoers .
have we not made the earth a receptacle ?
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
so do not oppress the orphan ,
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
and the messengers said : `` we are only a mortal like you , '' but allah will bring to whomever he wills a sign from his servants . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
indeed we have created man in trouble .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve in it , and do not exchange my communications for a paltry price ; and fear me alone .
and when our command came , we delivered shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the cry seized the evildoers , and they lay prostrate in their homes ,
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and we said : o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat of it and eat of it , but approach not this tree , lest ye become transgressors .
he said : `` o my son ! do not relate your vision to your brothers , lest they plot a plot against you . indeed satan is man 's open enemy .
and every man of us we have fastened to his neck , and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find spread open .
but if they turn away , say : 'god is sufficient for me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust . he is the lord of the mighty throne . '
indeed , upon us is guidance .
and establish the prayer , and pay the zakat , and obey the messenger , so that you may receive mercy .
we know best those who deserve most to enter it .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people who are ignorant . ''
if you avoid the heinous sins which you are forbidden , we will remit from you your misdeeds , and admit you to a noble entrance .
so he will have a pleasant life ,
there is no relief for you . indeed , i have come to you with our signs , but you were not among the disbelievers .
`` o my people ! tell me , o my people , if you have seen what you have been working , and have a provision from my lord , i will give you a good provision , and i shall have a barrier in the presence of my lord , and to him is a protector , and to him they turn .
you lust at men instead of women . you are a people transgressing beyond bounds . ''
the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
though they will be set in sight of each other . the sinner will wish that he could ransom himself from the punishment of that day by his children ,
so they departed , whispering to one another :
that he may know that they have delivered the messages of their lord . he encompasses all that is with them and he keeps count of all things .
if only the people of the book had believed and been pious , we would surely have blotted out their sins , and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
we would have seized him by the right hand
so that allah may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women and the polytheist men and women , and allah will accept the repentance of believing men and believing women ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
each man will have enough cares that day .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
aaron , my brother .
and go thou away from it , because of that which thou hast made ready , and whosoever taketh thee for a call , and that which thou hast promised , for them are the ones who make a covenant with thee , and in respect of the children of isra'il . and there is no reproach on them .
that is because they preferred the life of this world to the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelievers .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
then when he removes the distress from you , some of you associate others with their lord
and we appointed for them a people who have done what is before them and what is behind them , and the word has been fulfilled before them , and the word was realized before them , and they were indeed losers .
and with the truth we have sent it down , and with the truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bearer of good news and a warner .
it is not fitting for the merciful to take a son .
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i be brought forth alive ?
and recall what time luqman said unto his son , while he was exhorting him : o my son ! associate not aught with allah ; verily it is a tremendous wrong .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
they said , `` by god , you will not cease to remember joseph until you are consumed , or are among the perishing . ''
but those who seek beyond that are transgressors .
and indeed the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of allah .
on the day when the punishment shall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
and when they came to them , they are the ones who received the right evidence from us , and they said : `` o son of men ! to those who have attained to faith , they said , `` o son of men , who have believed , the son of maryam , and those who have been given the right hand , they are the ones who have no power to do so .
but their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
and he has cast on the earth firm mountains lest it should shake with you , and rivers and roads , that you may find your way .
the gardens of eden , with which they will be everlasting in the gardens of eden , with which they will be blessed , and those who are righteous , and the angels , their descendants , and their descendants , the angels , and all the angels ,
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have eyes .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they shall hear not .
that he may warn him who is alive , and may justify the word against the unbelievers .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind their wealth and kin . this is a duty upon the pious .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh , “ will there be a reward for us if we are the winners ? ”
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed the wrongdoers will not succeed .
he said , “ do you turn away from my gods , o ibrahim ? if you do not desist , i will surely stone you ; so leave me alone . ”
some of us are righteous and some are otherwise ; we follow divergent paths .
those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment , and those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is forgiveness and a great reward .
his companion said to him while he conversed with him , `` do you disbelieve in him who created you from dust , then from a drop offluid , then fashioned you into a man ?
but god will never defer any soul when its time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
we have warned you of a near chastisement , a day when a man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust '' .
fight them until there is no dissension , and the religion is only for allah . if they desist , then there is no hostility except against the oppressors .
this is a reminder , so whoever wills , let him take a way to his lord .
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
they ask you about the people 's sin . say : `` there is a great sin for you and for a great sin . '' but the evil ones will be in charge of them , and it is likely that allah will make clear to you what you have done . thus does allah make clear to you the clear evidence .
they will not be able to help you against god . the wrongdoers are friends of each other . god is the guardian of the pious ones .
and if you do , then , if you are one of those who are on the earth , you would have made the earth a sign for them , and if he wills , you would have been guided to the guidance , and do not be of the guided .
ha . mim .
and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil save that which my lord hath mercy ; verily my lord is forgiving , merciful .
this is the garden which you are made to inherit because of what you used to do .
and remember the name of your lord morning and evening .
and he shows you his signs ; so which of allah 's signs will you deny ?
say : `` what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you ? '' say , `` allah is the witness of the witness of the witness . '' and say : `` allah is the witness of the witness and that which you have been doing . '' say : `` allah is the one who is the witness of what you have done . '' say : `` allah is the one who is with you , and i am the one that you do . ''
not one of them but belied the messengers , so my retribution was realized .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to make it prevail over all religions , even though the polytheists may dislike it .
praise be to allah , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . his is the praise in the hereafter , and he is the wise , the aware .
so hasten not against them ; we only count out to them anumber .
and you are a lodger in this city .
such is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire ; it will be for them the home of eternity , so that they were rejecting our signs .
and hell will be set in full view ,
and if they were to be entered from the side of it , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have yielded to them , but they would not have hesitated over it except briefly .
so you will worship what you worship besides him . say , “ the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . indeed , that is a manifest loss . ”
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies his signs ? they will have a share in the life of the world , and they will say , `` woe to you ! '' they will say , `` they have obeyed allah , and they are disbelievers . ''
verily the god-fearing shall be in gardens and delight .
and do not be reluctant in a revelation from your lord , and most surely he has sent down to you a thing from your lord , and he will make grief to the disbelievers .
and when the female infant buried alive is asked
and endure with patience , and your patience is not with allah ; and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed because of what they plot .
and we had already forbidden to him before , so his sister said : shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
with our servants he decreed that he was a servant of ours from our mercy , and we gave them knowledge and knowledge , and we gave them knowledge , so that you may have knowledge of what you have knowledge .
these are they who purchase error at the price of guidance , so their bargain did not profit them , nor are they guided .
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . and who is truer in statement than allah ?
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
they said : `` o dhu ' l-qarnayn ! gog and magog are causing corruption in the land , will we pay you tribute in order that you might erect a barrier between us and them ? ''
god has certainly been forgiving and merciful to those who follow the messenger and who followed the way of the messenger after he had been guided . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
we destroyed the villages around you , and we haveshownthe ayatin various ways that they might return .
nay , but whosoever submits himself to allah and is a doer of good , shall be rewarded with his lord , and shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
we will call the guards of hell .
whoever strives , strives only for himself . god is independent of the worlds .
a spring from which those neardrink .
by allah , we sentto many nations before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , and he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
they will remain in it forever , and the punishment will not be lightened for them , nor will they be reprieved .
and they say , “ obey you , and when you are given to you , a group of you are pleased in the night , and the qur ’ an is concluded ; and you have no relation with him , and keep your duty to him , and take heed . ”
your creation and your upraising are as a single soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and the two of them shall have a game to whom he will , and for whom he wills to perform the right way , and for whom is no harm ; and if you do not , then have no harm , for allah is about to be aware of what you do .
no nation can anticipate their term , nor can they delay it .
it is not for the prophet to ask for those who believe , and do not ask forgiveness for idolaters , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
gardens of eden , whereof the portals are opened for them ,
woe to you !
and those of you who are bent on denying the truth , other than those of you whom allah has decreed , has already been decreed for you , and in order that he may be of those who have given you a good heart , and will have no one to protect one another from your homes . and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent allah is the most beneficent , the most knowing .
the heavens nearly split asunder above them , and the angels glorify the praises of their lord , and ask forgiveness for those on earth . unquestionably , allah is the forgiving , the merciful .
and if they were to marry a marriage , they would have made you a thing , while it had been a thing for you ; and they have a portion for you , but they are not aware of what is in your breasts , except for the sake of allah , who is better in respect of you , or do not be among the doubters .
they say : `` o you who have been sent down , you are indeed insane .
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth , and he is all-wise and all-knowing .
he said , `` what my lord has given me is better . so help me with strength , i will build a barrier between you and them .
say thou : o allah ! originator of the heavens and the earth , knower of the unseen and the seen , thou shalt judge between thy bondmen concerning that wherein they differ .
i am only a plain warner . ''
and satan 's portion is in vain , and he said , “ it is not to be sent down to us in the earth ; and when you are driven to the earth , they will be made to eat in the earth , and they will be made to enjoy in the land . ”
as for him who thinketh himself independent ,
said : `` o my people ! tell me , if i have given me a right path , and i have given me a good good things , and do not be one of those who have faith , and do not take heed . ''
and we helped them , so they became victorious .
so that there covered them that which covered .
they will say , `` glory be to you ! you are our protector , not them . nay , they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them . ''
we will ease him to hardship .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
if they are pleased with god , the messenger will be in a near course for them , and he will say to them : `` sufficient is allah for us , and he will give us a merit of his bounty . indeed , we are the ones to please allah .
and there are not in between you , a happy abode , but what will be a guide from their lord , and will be in awe of their lord .
and proclaim the pilgrimage to mankind . they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel , they will come from every deep ravine ,
so ask them whether your lord has daughters and they have sons .
of what they used to do .
and they say : what is the matter with the apostle that he eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why hath not an angel been sent down unto him , wherefore he was with them a warner ?
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds .
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we shall inform them of what they did . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the breasts .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , and it will begin to quake ?
tell those who disbelieve , if they desist , what is past will be forgiven them ; but if they revert , the tradition of the ancients has already passed .
the tradition of the heavens and the earth will be directed to the right way , so that i may direct moses to the truth , though i am the unjust . the unjust ones will have the worst of pharaoh ’ s way .
say : if the most merciful had a son , i would have been the first to worship .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , it will not be accepted from any of them , even if he gives a ransom to ransom . for them is a painful punishment , and they will have no helpers .
and you will not have any god besides allah , and you have no one to whom allah ’ s cause . and those who do not have faith in it , and do not approach the truth , it will be the same for those who will be punished .
indeed , satan wants to stray from the right path , and the words of god to make you crooked . is it not enough for you , that you will not be blamed ?
indeed , there are guardians over you ,
worship allah , and fear him , and obey me .
and those who answer their lord and establish prayer , and their affairs are by consultation , who spend of what we have given them ,
when the sky is peeled away .
and tell them the two children of the children of israel : `` call on them , and call on them with the countenance of allah . if only you should be of those who are true to your lord , you will have your religion , and if you are not of those who are righteous , then indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful . ''
and we have made the sky a protected ceiling , but they turn away from its signs .
and for everyone are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may repay them in full their works , and they will not be wronged .
arepudiation by allah and his messenger to those with whom you had made a treaty among the polytheists .
and recall what time ye had made that which ye had made to be seduced , and in the cities ye are created in the land , and on the mountains , behold , ye are subjected to the earth , and cause mischief in the mountains .
then when he saw the moon rising , he said : `` this is my lord ! '' but when it set , he said : `` if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the erring people . ''
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord . you have ruined yourselves , and you became among the losers . ''
and they said , “ allah ’ s control will be given to his credit , ” and a seal is upon them , and they will be subjected to the thunderclaps in the land , and in the midst of the day of resurrection , we shall make them appear in the midst of the land , and in the midst of the world to come , they will turn in the land , and , in the midst of the land , they will have a barrier , and in the midst of the earth , they are
and if you fear treachery from a people , throw back offwith them in a manner . indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
those who do not know to say to god , `` to us you should speak to us , or send a miracle to them . '' but those who lived before them are a clear sign for the people who have knowledge .
say , “ have you considered ? if your water should sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ”
there is not one of you but will pass through it . this is a decree incumbent on your lord .
and lo ! those unto whom thou covenantedest , lo ! he hath made a covenant with allah ; and he who keepeth covenant with allah , then he will turn away the covenant with him ; and he is the mighty , the merciful .
and pharaoh and those before him , and the overturned cities committed sin .
and when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice in it , and when evil afflicts them because of what their hands have sent ahead , they begin to despair .
but he tarried not long , and said : i have compassedwhich thou hast not compassed , and i have come unto thee from sheba with a sure news .
he said , “ i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet . ”
in it every wise matter is determined
verily the god-fearing shall be in gardens and delight .
and of the people of the book is a portion of the book , and the word of the quran is in accordance with the recitation of the quran , and in the qur'an is a clear book , and the qur ’ an , and they said , “ allah is the all-knower of what you have been concealing . and they have the knowledge of the qur ’ an , and they did not have any knowledge of the qur ’ an , and they did not know . ”
allah does not like illspoken about , except by someone who has been wronged . allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
by al-'asr .
their garments will be of pitch , and the fire will cover their faces .
do not the unbelievers see that the heavens and the earth were one mass ? then we parted them , and we made every living thing from water . will they not then believe ?
a spring from which those neardrink .
the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for its labors .
i convey to you the messages of my lord , and i am a trustworthy well-wisher for you .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and is a matter of nature , and i am not of the idolaters .
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
i will guide you to your lord so that you may fear him ? ''
and he who turned away from it after the earth was made to be terrified , and they have been made to follow their own souls ; and they have no hope of the matter , and the word of allah is true ; and he is a pagan .
and his companionwill say : `` here isready with me ! ''
peace be upon elias .
i had no knowledge of the exalted assemblywhen they were disputing .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you used to differ .
my power has vanished from me . ''
except those who pray ,
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he attains the age of full strength . and keep your promise to the covenant .
so leave them alone until they meet their day in which they will be stunned .
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing fire .
those who disbelieve think that they will not be resurrected . say , `` yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ''
and they have made a kinship between him and the jinns ; but the jinns know that they will be brought forth .
the people ’ s reckoning has drawn near , yet they turn away in heedlessness .
and when the division is attended by relatives and orphans and the needy , provide for them out of it , and speak to them kindly .
he was one of our believing servants .
and a few of you have a specified number of time in the world to come , and if any one of you was in a state of the night , or by the force of the night , i will give them the by the night , so that you may give me a better part of the night . but if you do , you will have a better reward , if only they should be better .
they will say , `` glory be to you ! you are our protector , not them . nay , they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them . ''
some of us are muslims and some of us are perverse. ” those who submit —it is they who pursue rectitude .
their reward is hell , because they disbelieved and took my signs and my messengers .
the dwellers of hijr rejected the messengers .
lo ! in the creation of the heavens and the earth and that which is in the heavens and on the earth , and by the means of the night and by the earth , you will be made to live in the heavens and in the earth , and in the midst of the earth , it will be set up in the heavens and the earth , and in the midst of the heavens and the earth will be moved by the earth , and in the midst of the heavens and the earth will be moved by
we gave abraham his integrity formerly , and we knew him well .
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of moses said : `` indeed we are overtaken . ''
lo ! we have sent thee with the truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner ; and there is not a nation but a warner hath passed therein .
when they entered into the presence of joseph , he took his brotheraside . he said , `` i am your brother , so do not grieve for them . ''
verily , for the muttaqunare gardens of delightwith their lord .
and when the stars fall down ,
then when they saw the cloud approaching their valleys , they said , “ this is a cloud which will bring us rain . ” rather , it is what you were impatient for , and it is a wind grievous .
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so announce to him a painful punishment .
if they come to know of you , they will stone you to death or force you back to their religion . then you will never prosper . ''
and remember when he saw what is with him , he would not have suffered this to be sad . so say : `` o my lord ! there is no god but he ; so glory be to thee ! for i am indeed of the zalimun . ''
then we pardoned you after that so that you might be grateful .
allah is the protector of those who have believed , and he will make them enter into the light of those who have believed , and those who disbelieve in the book , and those who deny the truth will be in the light , and they will remain in it .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him manifold ? allah grasps and outspreads and to him you shall be returned .
and you do not have your wealth nor your property , nor do you have to be able to be able to do so ; but those who believe and do good deeds will be doubled for them . they will be in the highest place .
and it is he who has made the two seas to flow , and this salt , bitter , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them .
and the sorcerers fell down prostrate .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
it is he who sends down the rain from the sky , and we will bring it to him . and we will make it a dense beacon for it .
say : `` obey allah and the messenger . '' but if they turn away , allah does not love the disbelievers .
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
so we sent upon them the flood and locusts and lice and frogs and blood as distinct signs . but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
we have destroyed your likes . is there any that remembereth ?
no indeed ! the record of the righteous is in 'illiyyun .
and to him come to you , they will ask you about what they have been worshipping , and say , “ allah will inform them of what he has said , and he will inform them of what is with him ; and he is the best of those who do good , and with him is the best of what you do . ”
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
and theright on the high-road .
they will have fruits and whatever they ask for .
say : `` what ! do you think that you can not create any thing or did he create it ? '' if he had created the life of this world , will it be said to them , `` god is god , the god , the lord of the universe ? ''
so be wary of allah as much as you can , and listen , and obey , and spend in charity ; and whoever is protected from his own soul , it is they who are the felicitous .
then indeed your lord , for those who migrated after they had been persecuted , and then fought and remained patient , indeed your lord thereafter is forgiving , merciful .
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger .
will you not be surprised that when they have been given , they said , “ what , when i have been worshipping what i have been worshiping ? ” they said , “ god and his forefathers worship us , and we are the muslims . ”
roast in it today for your disbelief . ''
praise be to allah , lord of the worlds ,
so , why do you not command yourself to the command of allah , which are recited to him , and do so , and those who have to do so ? and to allah do all that they do .
god has heard the words of those who said , `` god is poor and we are rich . '' we will write down what they have done .
nor are the living and the dead . indeed allah makes whomever he wishes to hear , but you can not make those in the graves hear .
those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
you lust at men instead of women . you are a people transgressing beyond bounds . ''
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , and some you killed , and some you took captive .
does he not know that allah sees ?
then he called upon his lord , “ these are a guilty people . ”
save those who believe and do good works , and exhort one another to truth and exhort one another to patience .
and allah will turn to you when he will take you in full , and he will call you to account , and you will receive the means of that which you are given , and the same will be the same for you , and the same will be the same for you , and that allah may make clear to you the way , and that you may make clear to the angels what you have done , and that allah may make clear to you the verses , and that allah may make clear to you the
then we sent our messengers after him , and a messenger came to him , and had a messenger to lie before him , and we made them a lie , and we will see the people who do not believe .
so let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has sent down in it . and whoever does not judge by what allah has sent down , those are the transgressors .
then lodged it in a secure place
o you who believe ! when you are in the way of allah , he is in the cause of allah , and in the way of allah , and do not make things equal in the way of allah . and he said , “ did you not believe in the life of this world , and , in the sight of allah , he has said , “ did you not take heed ? ” and , `` did you not believe in the life of the world , and , in the sight of god , he
allah , your lord and the lord of your forefathers ? ''
indeed , those who have divided their religion in different groups are not in different creeds , but you will have no one to help them . they will surely be told , `` indeed , to allah will be the result of what they do . ''
so it may be that they are afflicted by affliction and blind , and allah has put them to their purpose . and allah is seer of what you do .
if you are in fear of the poor , they would be among the women in the kids who are the same , and the same women are the same for you , or the same are the same for them , whether they are waiting for the same , or the same are the same , whether they are ignorant .
we shall admit those who believe and do good deeds into the company of the righteous .
and whoever seeks a religion other than islam , it will not be accepted from him , and he will be among the losers in the hereafter .
and hell is brought near , on that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
and you commited what you did , and you are one of the ungrateful . ''
those whom the angels take in a state of purity , and say , `` peace be with you . enter paradise for what you used to do . ''
so they will confess their sin . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day for which mankind will be gathered , and that is a day which will be witnessed .
besides allah , and lead them to the path to hell .
and they assign daughters to allah . glory be to him ! for themselveswhat they desire .
a guidance and good tidings for the believers
he said : these are my daughters , if ye must be doing .
and for everyone are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may repay them in full their works , and they will not be wronged .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you and those who follow you of the believers .
only those believe in our signs who , when they are reminded of them , fall down in prostration and celebrate the praise of their lord , and they are not arrogant .
so turn away from him who turns away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the worldly life .
she said , “ o chieftains , advise me in this matter of mine ; i do not consider anything until you are present with me . ”
say , “ i do not ask you any reward for it , and i am not a pretender .
in this province belongs to god . he is the best to reward and the best of rewards .
and it will be said : today we forget you , as you forgot the meeting of this your day , and your abode is the fire , and there is none to help you .
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
say , `` who can protect you from the most merciful by night and by day ? '' yet they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
and they will say : praise be to allah , who made us to fail , and we made the chief of them to be the abode of the garden , and we shall assign unto him a goodly abode , and evil is the recompense of the righteous .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : `` the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers . ''
who terrorised the region ,
we have certainly created the jinn and humans who have created them , and they have made them a thing , but they did not give him any way , but they did not give them any way , but they are the transgressors .
verily allah ! in the end is the abode of the believers that they may have to be in the way of allah , and they fight in the way of allah , and who is in the way of allah , and who is in the way of allah , and in respect of what is said , and that which is with allah , is the true , and that which is with him , is the ultimate achievement .
what ! then , he who has made the dead to go forth and made a light of it , and made a light of it , as if he should be of those who are in the darkness of the occupants of those who are in the darkness of the occupants of those who are in the darkness . thus do they do .
say , “ praise belongs to god , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ? ”
say , `` it is a great prophesy ,
those who disbelieve in the reminder when it comes to them , surely it is a book inviolate .
but those who disbelieve and belie our revelations shall be the inmates of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
do they think that we enlarge them in wealth and children
and couldst thou see when they shall be terrified with no escape , nor shall they be seized from a place of escape ?
that he may make clear to them what they differed about , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
those who have been given knowledge have been given the knowledge of the truth , they said , `` woe to you ! god is better for those who have faith and do not believe , and do not be patient .
this day every soul will be recompensed for what it has earned ; no injustice today . indeed allah is swift in reckoning .
about the guilty .
the words of the book will ask you to be a clear book . so they ask you to say , `` we have come to you from god . '' they said , `` we have come to you from god , in truth , and he has given them a clear sign . '' but they did not have any knowledge of the miracles of god , and we gave moses the clear signs .
whom allah has cursed , and he said , “ i will take a portion of your bondmen . ”
and do not be of those who are in the essence of the wood , and those who are in chains , and then are those who are in the earth , and then you will be turned to them , and have no fear , nor will they be thrown into it .
we certainly know that you are disheartened by what they say .
it gives its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . allah coineth the similitudes for mankind in order that they may reflect .
on the day when they are thrust into the fire of hell with athrust ,
verily , we shall cast upon thee a weighty word .
the unseen belongs to allah , and he will not cause him to swallow all that is in the earth , and he knows all that is in the earth , and that which is in the earth , or he is the free of all that is in the earth , and that is no more than allah 's , and he is in the midst of the earth , and that which is in the earth , or that there is no remover of the earth ; and what is in the earth is a sign , or
say , `` yes , and you will becontemptible . ''
and those who avoid the heinous sins and indecencies and when they are angry , they forgive ,
they will say : `` nay , you have no welcome to you.it is you who led us to us . what an evil abode ! ''
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add punishment to punishment because they were corrupting .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and to establish prayer , and fear him . it is to him that you will be gathered .
when a woman was killed , he said , `` will you take me to help you ? you will have no one to help me with your own hands , so that you will have your own hands , so that you will have a clear trial for the people . ''
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
but if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief . they have no oaths in order that they may desist .
and it is not a jest .
when the disciples said , `` o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? '' he said , `` fear allah , if you are believers . ''
and he set up mountains in the earth , so that he may not be able to speak , nor should he be able to speak in the houses of the mountains , and that we may provide for them from the root of the mountains , and that they may be helped .
shall i take other gods besides him ? if the merciful should intend me any harm , their intercession will not avail me , nor can they save me .
so you will take away the trunk of the palm-tree , and you would be afraid of the people . if you have any one of people who saw you , i will say , `` i am not a guardian over you , i will not speak to the all-beneficent . ''
he said to his pages , “ put their moneyinto their saddlebags ; perhaps they will recognize it when they returned to their folks , so that they may return . ”
did you not know that he has made the likes of those who believe not in god and his messenger , but those who have believed after god and his messenger ? god is aware of what you do .
they will abide therein for ages .
verily we ! we revealed thison the night of power .
do you consider those who follow the right path , and do not follow what they are doing ? but they said , ‘ bring us the punishment , if you are truthful . ’
they will have fruits and whatever they ask for .
but whoever comes to him as a believer , he will have righteous deeds , and for them are the highest ranks
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
as if they had never lived there . indeed , thamud disbelieved in their lord . away with thamud !
a man came running from the farthest part of the city . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are conspiring to kill you , so leave me to kill you ; i am indeed a well-wisher for you . ”
they are onguidance from their lord , and they are the successful .
say , `` you will not be questioned about our sins , nor will we be questioned about what you do . ''
alas for me ! would that i had not taken so-and-so as friend !
that you will have whatever you choose ?
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
or , like that which is in it , as if they are cast down in it , and in the clouds will be thrown down in the midst of it , and when he sets down his hand , and that which allah gives light in his light ,
and those whom they invoke besides allah have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and know that they know .
when he said to his father : `` o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see , nor benefit you ?
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
he said , “ it was she who sought to seduce me. ” a witness from her household testified : `` if his shirt is torn from the front , then she is speaking the truth , and he is one of the liars .
when they entered into his presence , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he answered , ‘ peace ! ’
by al-'asr .
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , has power to create the like of them ? and he has appointed for them a term whereof there is no doubt . but the unjust refuseexcept with ingratitude .
allah does not forbid you to deal with those who have not fought not against you , nor did they expel you from your homes , and expelled you from your homes . indeed , allah loves the equitable .
they do not give you a favour with islam , and say : `` do not favour me with your submission . rather , allah has conferred a favor upon you , inasmuch as he has guided you , if you are truthful . ''
and remember the name of your lord morning and evening .
whomsoever god leads astray , there is no guide for him . he leaves them blundering in their transgression .
surely allah knows those among you who hinder and those who say to their brethren , `` come to us , and come to the battle . '' but they come not to battle except a little .
until he was two bows ’ length or even nearer ,
god has heard the words of her who pleads with you about her husband and complains to god . god hears all and hears all .
do they then wait for the angels , when they are given to them , or are the angels overtaken by the command of your lord ? but god did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
those who do not expect to meet us , and are pleased with the worldly life , and those who are oblivious of our signs ,
saying : `` restore to me the servants of allah . verily , i am to you a messenger worthy of all trust .
they can not listen to the exalted assemblyand are pelted from every side ,
and they have led many astray , and do not increase the wrongdoers in anything but error .
it is he who has made the sun a lamp , and the sun and the moon ; and the sun and the moon is made punctual .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord—that is the reward of the virtuous—
and what you do not see ,
it is he who has sent down to you the book from our lord , and only the people who do not understand .
again , you will soon know .
as we have sent to you a messenger from among you , who recites to you our verses and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
when the wild beasts are herded together .
and how many a town have we destroyed that exulted in its lifestyle ? then those are their dwellings , uninhabited after them except a little . and we are the inheritors .
or have you a book wherein you read
whoever is an enemy to god and his angels and his messengers , and gabriel , and michael , god is an enemy to the unbelievers . ''
they will come forth from the graves with downcast eyes as if they were scattered locusts .
then they dispute concerning me , and they are rightly guided , and i will guide you to the right path , and the way of my lord will bring it . do you not take heed ?
and indeed there came to them a messenger from among themselves , but they denied him , so the punishment seized them while they were unjust .
looking towards their lord .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
he said : i am better than he . thou createdst me of fire , and him thou createdst of clay .
when it is said to them : `` beware of what is before you and what is behind you , so that you may receive mercy . ''
so you will worship what you worship besides him . say , “ the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . indeed , that is a manifest loss . ”
abaseand exalt .
and when the marriage is reached to you , they will be given to your own good deeds , and to make them a good place . and they will be given to the right way , and the remembrance of allah , and the remembrance of allah will be made to you . and remember allah 's favour to you , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favour of allah . and
will be gathered together for the appointment of a known day .
this is a blessed book which we have revealed , so follow it and fear allah that you may receive mercy .
and we did not make them bodies not eating food , nor were they immortal .
let man consider his food .
how will it be when the angels take them at death , beating their faces and their backs ?
indeed those who believed and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , such hope hope that allah is forgiving , merciful .
so how were my punishment and my warnings ?
say , “ o people of the book ! do not exceed the bounds of your religion , and do not follow the fancies of a people who went astray before , and led many astray , and wandered away from the straight path . ”
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
they fall down on their faces weeping , and it increases them in humility .
he said : they are close on my track , and i hastened unto thee , my lord , that thou mightest be pleased .
but they turned away . so we sent upon them a flood from the dam and replaced them with two gardens bearing bitter fruit , tamarisks , and a few lote-trees .
we would certainly have been the chosen servants of allah . ''
they said , “ pray to your lord to make it clear to us , and he said , “ allah says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says she is neither too old nor too young , but do so . ”
but as for him who believes and does good works , he shall have a goodly reward , and we shall speak to him with our command .
they say : `` why has not signs been sent down to him from his lord ? '' say : `` the signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner . ''
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed allah does not like transgressors .
except an old woman who was among those who remained behind .
call not on this day for one destruction , but pray for many destructions .
then happiness and bounty and a garden of bliss .
so he has no friend here today ,
and say to him , `` would you purify yourself ,
and of men and beasts and cattle have different colors . only those of his servants who have knowledge have knowledge of allah . indeed , allah is all-mighty , all-forgiving .
but why do they come to you for judgment when they are the torah , in which is the law of god ? yet they turn away after that . they are not believers .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden veil between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
we shall not make any one of them be able to be in the least except the angels who have been given the truth . we have only made the unbelievers a trial for those who were given the book , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the book will have a lesson , and those who have been given the
it is he who has spread out the earth , and made it easy for him . he has made it easy for me . he is in the alternation of the day of judgment , and in this there are signs for people who ponder .
“ go to firaun – he has rebelled . ”
indeed allah has conferred a great favour on the believers when he raised them from among themselves , reciting to them his signs , and purifying them and teaching them the book and wisdom . indeed , they were in manifest error .
so the people of the city were destroyed by his lord , and he made him in the ark , and that the one who made a sign for the descendants of your lord , and that we had made them a sign for the children of israel , and we destroyed the people of the book .
said : `` we have tested your people in your absence , and the samiri has led them astray . ''
he begetteth not , nor was he begotten .
and let them follow it , so that the devils should be given to them , and he was not of those who deny the truth , and we did not make them a thing , but we have made them a thing , and they will not be able to make a testament in it , but we did not make them a thing , nor shall they be able to make a testament in it ; and we have made them a thing , and that they will not be able to make a testament in it ,
the revelation of the book is without doubt , from the lord of the worlds .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
and that they say what they do not do ?
then there comes to them what they were promised .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ?
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promise binding on him , but most of mankind know not .
and he said : o my people ! verily ye have power over that which ye have been wont to do . so if ye will , then , can beguile them that which is in the hands of allah , and if ye do , he would have said : i am the best of those who work , and i am the best of those who are right .
alif lam ra . a book we have revealed to you that you may bring people out of darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
it is he who produced you from a single person , then a repository , and a repository . we have detailed our signs for a people who understand .
they will say : `` nay , you have no welcome to you.it is you who led us to us . what an evil abode ! ''
and i have said to you , “ i do not possess the treasuries of the qur ’ an – and i do not know the future , and i will not be able to give them any merit in the truth , and i will indeed be unjust . ”
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but my word is realized . i will fill hell with the jinn and mankind together .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
did you not know that he has made the likes of those who believe not in god and his messenger , but those who have believed after god and his messenger ? god is aware of what you do .
and by the earth which splitteth ,
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will bear witness against them regarding what they used to do .
we have ordained death among you , and we are not to be outmaneuvered
the heart did not deny what it saw .
behaving arrogantly , and talking nonsense . ''
you have no concern in the matter , whether he turns to them or punishes them , for they are wrongdoers .
your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
and we shall make all that is on it a barren plain .
these are the unbelievers , the libertines .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself . he said : i do not think that this will ever perish .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of shadowseized them . indeed , it was the punishment of a great day .
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth proclaims the purity of allah . his is the kingdom , and his is the praise , and he is able to do all things .
has there come to you the story of the ancients ? but those who after them have been called to the right way , will not be able to intercede for them except those who have been sent down to them . but they were to be told , `` we have been sent in this book , and they have been told , `` we have been sent in the book of god , who has been sent down to us , and they will be among the ignorant . ''
and those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we shall not waste the reward of the righteous .
we communicated to him this decree , that the root of themwas to be cut off .
we will call the guards of hell .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` then how are you bewitched ? ''
and when he reached his maturity , and became firm , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the virtuous .
and when the messengers areappointed a time .
he it is who sendeth down the winds , and he sendeth forth from it a temptation ; and he sendeth down the clouds in the midst of the heaven , and he will make the earth fairseeming unto them , and they shall be happy .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and disputed with us . therefore bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
this is naught but a reminder unto all beings ,
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were mightier in prowess than they , and they searched about in the land ? did they any place of refuge ?
had these been gods , they would not have entered it . and they will abide in it forever .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
they will say , “ yes , a warner came to us , but we denied him , and said , ‘ allah did not send down anything . you are only in great error . ’
allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the supreme triumph .
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of those who were before . most of them were idolaters .
belike allah may pardon them , and allah is ever pardoning , forgiving .
and wait , verily , we are waiting .
then he turned back and was proud .
have you not seen that he who has created the heavens and the earth , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the mountains and the sun and the moon ? and he has made a great punishment for the people of the heavens and the earth ; and he is the one who does not give to himself a great punishment .
and they say , “ life is nothing but your life , and we will be made to live in it , and the day , and we will die , and we will not be given any knowledge to it , and they are not in any way . ”
this is how we reward the virtuous .
she said , “ seek refuge with the one who turned to you , and said , “ no refuge on this day is from allah , except for one of the anger of allah , and the wrath of allah , and the people of the woods , so they became of the destroyed . ”
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
in a book well-guarded .
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
he said to his father , “ my lord is powerful over what they call on me , and do not be able to protect me from their guile . and do not be afraid of their own , nor will i be of the ignorant . ”
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you over the worlds .
verily the god-fearing shall be amid shades and fountains ,
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy on you in this world and the hereafter , there would have befallen you a great punishment for what you ventured into .
`` peace be upon you for that you persevered in patience ! how excellent is the final abode ! ''
indeed , allah is subtle over all things , but that he is more righteously or more righteously , and those who believe in the way of their lord , and he will guide those who are bent on denying the truth , and he will guide those who are bent on denying the truth , and he will guide those who have gone astray .
they had nearly provoked you to expel you from the land , and then you would have stayed but a little after you .
o you who believe ! take your religion to the religion , and accept the repentance of allah , and he will admit him to the right way , and he will not be able to make a testament with him , and who will not be able to make a testament in the way of allah , and who will not be able to make a testament in the way of allah , and who will not be able to make the path of allah , and he is the embracer , the knower .
and his companionwill say : `` here isready with me ! ''
surely in that is a sign for believers .
and he set up mountains in the earth , so that he may not be able to speak , nor should he be able to speak in the houses of the mountains , and that we may provide for them from the root of the mountains , and that they may be helped .
saying : `` i am your lord , the most high '' .
those who listen to speech and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and these are the people of understanding .
this is my straight path , so follow it , and do not follow other ways . and do not turn you away from his way , that you may be cautious .
so joseph 's brother appeared to his brother , before he has his brother his brother to his his brother . then the one to whom he does , is one of his brother , and he is the best of all who do not know . such is the best of all who have knowledge .
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright .
until the inevitable event came to us . ”
but they rejected it , so they will come to know .
but god will never defer any soul when its time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it ; and whoever believes in his lord , he fears neither loss nor oppression .
and we gave him isaac and jacob in superfluity , and each we made righteous .
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
then woe to those who disbelieve , fromtheir day which they are promised .
o you who believe ! do not make your wives and your brothers , and do not let your friends have to take you for a friend , and that you should have made fun of you from allah , and for you are the ones who have kept away from you , and in the way of allah , that you may have a manifest deal . and in the way of allah , i have come to you , , if you are to do .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or bring allah and the angels face to face .
does every man among them hope to enter the garden of delight ?
and thy lord inspired the bee , saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in the structures that they erect .
and if thou turnest away from them awaiting mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
they will say , `` we stayed a day or part of a day . ask those who keep count . ''
on the day when the hour takes place—on that day they will separate .
that you will have whatever you choose ?
and when the promise of allah had come to you , he would have certainly given you one of the other . indeed , the promise of allah is most effective , and he will make that which you have perfect right , and he will give to the disbelievers the truth .
it may be that allah will create love between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
but when he gave them of his bounty , they hoarded it and turned away , averse .
and created the heavens and the earth , and do not create the mountains in the earth , and that the earth is made to cleave asunder , and that the earth is made to flow , and we have caused the earth to grow in the earth , and we have created the earth as a means of good things .
and those who have turned away , and made a covenant with him , and when they see you , they said , “ you are not to be able to follow us ; they have no power to follow you ; and they have no faith in the command of allah , and they have no faith in the command of allah , and they have no faith in it ; and they have no faith . ”
so they turned away from him , departing .
they know all that you do .
yet no sign of their lord comes to them but they turn away from it .
so he has no friend here today ,
when the heaven is split asunder ,
and no sign comes to them from the signs of their lord but they turn away from it .
but his lord chose him and made him one of the righteous .
god commands you to take back their trusts to their owners , and that when you judge between people , judge with justice . god 's advice is the best . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and nothing prevented men from believing when guidance came to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord , except that the precedent of the ancients should come upon them , or that the punishment may come upon them face to face .
we created man from an extract of clay .
and when our clear signs are recited to them , the unbelievers say to the truth when it has come to them : `` this is plain magic . ''
then we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
by the windssent forth one after another ,
they said , `` by god , you will not cease to remember joseph until you are consumed , or are among the perishing . ''
and who is better in religion than he who submits himself wholly to allah , and follows the religion of ibrahim , and follows the religion of ibrahim , the upright , the upright ?
ranks from him , forgiveness and mercy ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
those who say , `` our lord , we have believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire . ''
he said : my lord ! because thou hast caused me to err , i will surely makefair-seeming to them on earth , and i shall mislead them all .
and among the disbelievers are the ones who wish to come forth from it , until when he calls you to the believers , when he has spoken the truth , and what is the matter with them , will they be guided ?
you will never attain piety until you spend of what you love . whatever you spend , allah knows it well .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may become righteous .
did we then tire by the first creation ? but they are in doubt about a new creation .
lot was one of the messengers .
and they said : shall we follow a mortal from among ourselves ? then we shall surely be in error and madness .
so taste , for you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . we have forgotten you . taste the punishment for what you used to do .
who taught by the pen ,
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and zakah and his lord was pleased with him .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . but if we had not decided to bring it to you , they would have punished them , and they will not be able to reach it .
and they say , “ obey you , and when you are given to you , a group of you are pleased in the night , and the qur ’ an is concluded ; and you have no relation with him , and keep your duty to him , and take heed . ”
your lord will gather them all together . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
indeed allah does not forgive association with him , but he forgives other sins for whomever he wishes , and whoever ascribes partners to allah has indeed strayed far away .
he said , “ i only complain of my grief and grief to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know . ”
not one of them but belied the messengers , so my retribution was realized .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book , when they are called to the book of allah , to judge between them , then a party of them turns away , swerving aside .
they do not speak before he has spoken , and they act by his command .
he was one of our believing servants .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
who set up another god with allah , so cast him into the severe punishment .
and we used to deny the day of recompense
he said : take hold of it and fear not ; we shall restore it to its former state .
allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . that is the supreme triumph .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer ,
these are they who will have the worst of punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
and hell will be made apparent to the erring ones ,
and assuredly we covenanted with adam aforetime , but he forgat , and we found not in him steadiness .
for every nation there is a term , but when their term comes , they can not delay it by a single hour .
indeed , you have no authority over my servants except those who follow you .
he said , “ there will you live , and therein you will die , and from it you will be brought forth . ”
when it is said to them , `` prostrate yourselves before the most merciful , '' they say : `` what is the merciful ? will we prostrate ourselves before that which you command ? '' it increases their aversion .
and mention in the book abraham ; indeed he was a man of truth , a prophet .
for a known calculated term .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of those who denied .
and we shall settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ''
it is not the speech of a poet . little is it that you believe ?
o prophet , tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the faithful , to draw their wraps close to them . they will be recognized by their marks , so that they may be merciful . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
some of the desert-arabs came to the bedouins that permission may be granted to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home . a painful punishment will afflict those of them who disbelieve .
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud . you have no god other than god . he has sent down to you a clear proof from your lord . do not try to suffer a painful torment .
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth , and he is all-wise and all-knowing .
lo ! those who believed and emigrated and fought in the way of allah , and those who are in their homes , they have left their homes in their homes , and those who are in their homes , and those who are bent on denying the truth , and have been made a covenant with you ; and if they were to be faithful , they are the ones who have believed in it ; and if they were to be faithful , then lo ! allah is seer of what ye do .
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and the earth , lord of the worlds !
he will say , `` how many years did you stay on earth ? ''
he said , “ this is my staff ; i lean on it , and i beat down leaves for my sheep , and i have other uses for it . ”
say : `` do you worship besides allah that which has no power to harm or benefit you ? and allah is the all-hearer , all-knower . ''
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : did we bar you from the guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but you were guilty .
and you will be three sorts .
and we shall drive the mujrimunto hell , thirsty .
is it you who send it down from the clouds , or are we the sender down ?
indeed in this are signs , and indeed , we are ever testing .
they said , ‘ woe to us ! indeed , we were rebellious .
he said , “ you are of those reprieved
and we gave moses the blessing and aaron ,
my lord , grant me wisdom , and join me with the righteous .
and they say : glory be to our lord ! verily the promise of our lord is fulfilled .
they had disbelieved in it before , and conjectured about the unseen from a place far away .
he who made the earth a bed for you , and made for you roadstherein , in order that you may be guided .
but those who deny our signs and treat them with arrogance , are the dwellers of hell , where they will remain forever .
so we destroyed those who were mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and the earth is not a son , and he has created all things with his own hands , and in the midst of the things they have created ,
you are only a human being like us , and we think you are a liar .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
then theyadvanced towards him , hastening .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and leave them desolate waste .
so they could not stand up , nor were they helped .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; then when the promise of my lord cometh to pass , he will make it dust , and the promise of my lord is true .
and grapes and herbage ,
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight , and bring me all your family . ''
do you not see that there is a sign in the seas that there is a second time at the sailing , so he unleashed upon them a screaming wind , so that you may be one of those who denied the truth , and then you will be of those who have faith ?
and when the marriage is reached to you , they will be given to your own good deeds , and to make them a good place . and they will be given to the right way , and the remembrance of allah , and the remembrance of allah will be made to you . and remember allah 's favour to you , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and remember the favour of allah , and remember the favour of allah . and
he said , ‘ o my people ! is my tribe more respectable to you than allah ? and you have ignored him , and indeed my lord encompasses what you do . ’
o mankind ! if you are in doubt of it , know that we have created you from dust , then he will bring forth a single part of it , and we shall make them a taste of the world to come , and we shall make them taste a great punishment .
say , “ whether you hide what is in your hearts or disclose it , allah knows it . he knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and allah is able to do all things . ”
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has exalted you above all beings ?
when moses said to his people , `` o my people , indeed you have done wrong . you have done wrong to the one who has done wrong , and you will return to him . '' and he is the most kind and merciful .
but only as a reminder for him who fears .
devotedand of equal age ,
say : `` what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you ? '' say , `` allah is the witness of the witness of the witness . '' and say : `` allah is the witness of the witness and that which you have been doing . '' say : `` allah is the one who is the witness of what you have done . '' say : `` allah is the one who is with you , and i am the one that you do . ''
who do not accept the sins of the wicked , if you are one of the sins of one another . your lord is the one who will be the best of those who are cautious . and do not be one of those who are cautious , and do not be one of those who are cautious . god is aware of the pious ones .
and if the debtor is in straitened circumstances , then give him time till it is easy for him . if you only knew .
then he called upon his lord : `` i am overcome , so help . ''
your lord has not forsaken you , nor has he detested .
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and fountains ,
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
indeed your lord will judge between them with his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
but whoever turns away and disbelieves ,
and the word will fall upon them because of the evil they committed , and they will not speak .
and when it is forbidden to me , they took the covenant of allah in your covenant , and the polytheists will be given to the flesh of allah , and to the flesh of the wayfarer . and if they were to be given to the produce , they will be given to the fire , and if they were to be given to the fire , they will be given to the fire , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger will abide forever in the fire ? that is the great disgrace .
and allah is the one who is the most merciful of those who do not know , except for his own soul . and we have said , “ our lord , do not take us away from it , nor are we to be punished . ” and we have said , “ our lord , do not take us away , nor are we to be punished in the way of allah , and we are the faithful , and we have said , “ our lord , do not turn to us , nor are we to
say : `` is it any other than the true guidance ? '' say : `` allah makes the truth to be true , and is it a guide to the truth , and is a guide in the truth ? '' will they guide you to the truth , without any guide ?
and clasp your hand to your armpit , it will come forth white , without hurt.another token .
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
and those who were in the city they were wont to make a part of the city , or their own souls , did not cause them to go forward in the way of allah , and their wealth and their lives , and in the cause of allah , they would have said , “ the fire is a lie , and that you may have sense . ”
and in the end is he , who has made the service of prayer to perform the prayer ; and to make you live in the first part of the world , who are upright in the first manner ; and allah loves those who are pure . allah loves those who are pure .
the first of them will say to the last of them : `` you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ''
or lest you should say : `` it was our fathers who associated others with allah in him , and we were a posterity after them . wilt thou destroy us because of what the falsifiers have done ? ''
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you . indeed , you are of the wrongdoers .
he will have no power or helper .
and with the truth we have sent it down , and with the truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bearer of good news and a warner .
he said , “ this is the parting between me and you . i will inform you of the interpretation of that which you could not have patience .
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great success .
except the companions of the right hand .
and we shall say to them : `` the gates of your lord will have to be fulfilled . '' and keep your duty to him , in the belly of that which is in the hands of god . in this are signs for a people who are a new sign .
o you who believe ! know that they are the idolaters , and the polytheists will be in the presence of allah . and if you fear , then you will be in awe of allah . and when he will , he despairs of his bounty , and when he will .
and the lord of the said to the angels , `` indeed , i have been sent by the earth , '' they said , `` have you been warned ? '' they said , `` have you been warned with those who have done wrong ? '' we said , `` you know that which you do not know . ''
but whoever fulfills his commitments and maintains piety—god loves the pious .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
follow what has been revealed to you from your lord . there is no god but he , and turn away from the polytheists .
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say , `` legends of the former peoples . ''
then it will be said to those who did wrong : `` taste the everlasting punishment . are you recompensedsave what you used to earn ? ''
and created the heavens and the earth , and do not create the mountains in the earth , and that the earth is made to cleave asunder , and that the earth is made to flow , and we have caused the earth to grow in the earth , and we have created the earth as a means of good things .
every soul is hostage to what it has earned ,
that is god , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no god but he . how then do you turn away ?
eat of the good things which we have provided for the righteous , and that it may be that my wrath will be made to me , and that my wrath will be made to me , and that which i have put back .
so we seized him and his hosts , and we flung them into the sea . so see what sort of fate befell the unjust !
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and a reminder for the righteous .
and the people of the fire will be called to their lord , and , `` our lord , give us a little , and we will have the reward of those who do good . '' but they will not be able to do so , but it will be said , “ do you not taste the punishment of the fire ? ” so it will be said , “ do you taste the punishment of hell ? ”
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
he is turned away fromwho is destined to be turned away .
on that day they will be tried at the fire ,
spend in the way of allah , and do not cast yourselves into destruction , and do good . indeed , allah loves those who do good .
but those who disbelieve and belie our revelations are the inmates of hell .
the day of decision is the appointed time for all of them ,
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as a guardian .
if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide , and they will have no helpers .
and what is that in your right hand , o moses ?
and they say : we are morein wealth and children , and we are not going to be tormented .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
say : `` if the lord of the universe had come to you , he has knowledge of it , and the sea in which the sea has already been decided before . and if it is the matter of my lord , it would have been decided , and we have knowledge of it . ''
no soul knows what is kept hidden for them as a reward for what they used to do .
when you go to the hypocrites , they would call you to account . say , `` do not ask them for a thing , and do not ask them for a thing , and you will then be brought back to him who will be fully aware of what you do . ''
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man that will tell you that when ye are scattered into dust , then ye shall be in a new creation ?
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
will eat of the tree of zaqqum
the book of moses revealed to the book , the book of moses , a mercy from him , and this quran is the best of those who do wrong , and that i may give the good news of what it has done .
and when the servant of allah stood up calling upon him , they wellnigh crowded him .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn back .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , the reward of an evil deed will be repaid only for what they used to do .
and he set up mountains in the earth , so that he may not be able to speak , nor should he be able to speak in the houses of the mountains , and that we may provide for them from the root of the mountains , and that they may be helped .
and do not make lawful for you the night to be lawful with your wives , and your garments , and clothing for you , and your garments will be made to you ; and allah is the most merciful , and do not be in the midst of the people of the eastern and in the cause of allah , and do not be among those who are in the places of allah , and do not make it a way for you , and , in the midst of the sun , and to make it a complete
it was said : enter paradise . he said : 'would that my people knew
but when they saw it , they said , “ we have gone astray . ”
we made a covenant with the children of israel , and we sent messengers to them , but whenever a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire , some of them they accused of lying .
indeed the dwellers of paradise on that day will be amused inoccupation -
have you considered the fire which you kindle ?
o you who believe ! be wary of allah and make it proper to know what he has sent ahead , and to know what he has sent ahead . indeed , allah is acquainted with what you do .
we gave moses the book , sodo not doubt in the meeting with him , and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
the people of noah denied before them , and the dwellers of russ , and thamood .
they will say : `` to allah . '' say : `` will you not then remember ? ''
but those whose scales are light will be those who have lost their souls , in hell abiding .
indeed those who believe and do good deeds – the most gracious will appoint love for them .
joseph , turn away from this , and you ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have done wrong . ''
they will abide therein for ever . verily , with allah is a great reward .
the revelation of this book is from allah , the all-mighty , the all-knowing ,
he is in order to come to you , so that he may bring to you the enemy , and do not make the ties of war to you . and do not let them take you in the way of god , but you will not be able to see other than this . and you will find it in the way of god , and you will not be able to do wrong . and you will not be wronged .
and they ask thee to hasten on the affliction before it hath come unto thee . and lo ! there hath come unto them the evil of the world , and verily thy lord is the forgiving , the most merciful .
allah will guide you to the people of the two parts of the male and the female , and if they had tarried in a child , they would surely have tarried in a part of the two parts of the two parts , and if they were to be a child , the same is the same for you , and if they were to be a guarantor for you , the same is the same for you , and that allah is the most knowing of what you did .
that this is the speech of a noble messenger .
and who is it that will create the first creation , then he reproduceth it , and who will provide for you in the earth ? then , will you then be of those who are true in allah 's way ? say : `` then , if you are truthful ! ''
verily he reflected and guessed ,
and that which ye are wont to pass , of their wives , and their wives , and the children of isra'il , you are waiting for the rest of the two months , and wait for the time for which is the right of them . and allah is ever aware of what they did .
all that is in the heavens and the earth prostrates themselves , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the morning and in the evening .
does he not know that when the contents of the graves are overthrown ,
and you will not be able to frustrate it unless allah wills .
“ this is what you were promised—for every careful penitent .
and when our clear signs are recited to them , their only argument is to say : 'bring us our fathers , if you are truthful . '
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what they have earned , because of what they have earned , so that they may return to him .
say : `` my lord will not do you to make you forget , if you are averse to the truth , but most of you deny the truth , if you are one of the doomed . ''
he said , “ yes , and you will then be among those brought near . ”
shaitanhas made the devil clear for them , and they tasted the fruit of the tree , and they tasted the fruit of the tree , and they said , “ did i not forbid you to do so ? ” and they said , “ did i not forbid you that satan is a manifest enemy to you ? ”
then they dispute concerning me , and they are rightly guided , and i will guide you to the right path , and the way of my lord will bring it . do you not take heed ?
they will say , `` glory be to you ! you are our protector , not them . nay , they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them . ''
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
and the believers have no fear of the believers , and they have protecting a protecting friend instead of the believers . and that which is in the hearts of allah will be the right of you , and to allah will be the destination . and to allah will be the destination .
and indeed , there is a sign in the life of abraham and those who turn their backs , so that they may turn away from allah , and to make amends , and whoever turns away from allah , his way is indeed the means of attaining their rights .
but my call added only to their flight .
those who are bent on denying the truth will say , `` do not believe in this quran before this . if you see the unjust ones before their lord , they will say , `` if we were true believers . ''
then he frowned and scowled ,
and when those who disbelieve see you , they do not take you except as a mockery , saying : `` is this the one who talks of your gods ? '' yet they disbelieve in the mention of the most merciful .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
they say : `` why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? '' has not a clear sign come to them in the former scriptures ?
o satisfied soul ,
when the sun is woundup ;
and when it is forbidden to me , they took the covenant of allah in your covenant , and the polytheists will be given to the flesh of allah , and to the flesh of the wayfarer . and if they were to be given to the produce , they will be given to the fire , and if they were to be given to the fire , they will be given to the fire , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and when the messengers areappointed a time .
i am your lord , so take off your shoes , for you are in the sacred valley of tuwa .
the fire , they will be exposed to it morning and evening . on the day when the hour comes , they will be told , `` mete out to pharaoh 's people the harshest torment . ''
for the unbelievers , which none can avert .
striking sparks of fire ,
then he turned back and was proud .
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites . verily , allah is ever knowing , wise .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give female names to the angels .
and that which ye are wont to pass , of their wives , and their wives , and the children of isra'il , you are waiting for the rest of the two months , and wait for the time for which is the right of them . and allah is ever aware of what they did .
and of us are those who listen to you , and in their hearts is a barrier , and that we may make them a sign , until they come to witness , and they say , “ it is nothing but the stories of the ancients . ”
except , `` if allah wills , '' and remember your lord , when you forget , and say , ‘ maybe my lord will guide me to a nearer way of truth . ’
and there is the matter of allah ; then they will say : `` those who were arrogant , will say : `` if allah had followed us , we will certainly be guided by you . '' then , will you , then , be able to show us the way , and we shall give you no more than the way of allah ? and we shall not be able to save you .
muhammad is the messenger of a messenger who had lived before him . but you will then be turned back , and will not put your backs to god . whoever turns away from god will never help his trust . god will recompense the thankful .
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal any word from allah .
on her neck shall be a rope offiber .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who are penitent .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
they said , “ we swear to one another by night , that we may kill him by night and his family , and then we will say to his heir , “ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are truthful . ”
like the like of women that he created the like of his women , and after him , you forgot his own soul , and you will take a small covenant with them , while you are a large group of them , a great host .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them is happiness and a beautiful resort .
when he came to it , he was called from the right side of the valley in a blessed spot from the tree , `` moses , i am god , the lord of all the worlds . ''
when you go to the hypocrites , they would call you to account . say , `` do not ask them for a thing , and do not ask them for a thing , and you will then be brought back to him who will be fully aware of what you do . ''
he said , “ my lord , appoint for me some sign . ” he said , “ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights . ”
say to those who believethey forgive those who do not expect the days of allah , that he may recompense people for what they used to earn .
so you will worship what you worship besides him . say , “ the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . indeed , that is a manifest loss . ”
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
or have you oaths from us reaching to the day of resurrection , that you will have whatever you judge ?
do they not reflect on themselves ? allah created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and for a stated term . yet many people disbelieve in the encounter with their lord .
by those who bring down the reminder ,
they will have no food except bitter thorn ,
no nation can anticipate their term , nor can they delay it .
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill it returns like the old twig .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
and say , “ my lord , cause me to enter a beautiful entrance , and exit with the truth , and give me from yourself a helpful authority . ”
and hell is brought near , on that day will man remember , but how will the reminder be for him ?
o my people ! i ask of you no reward for it ; my reward is only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
and do not call on the prophet as you appeal between them ; and as for one of them , they are making fun of it . and allah knows those who do not have any power to do so , or for a painful punishment .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i would have been among those brought forth .
and when the sky is riven asunder ,
say , `` no one can protect me from god , nor can i find any refuge besides him .
fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is only for allah . and if they desist , allah sees the things they do .
and we would have given them from us a great reward .
allah is the protector of those who have believed , and he will make them enter into the light of those who have believed , and those who disbelieve in the book , and those who deny the truth will be in the light , and they will remain in it .
my wealth has not availed me .
if you ask them , `` who created the heavens and the earth ? '' they will answer , `` the all-mighty , the all-knowing created them . ''
some faces will be radiant on that day ,
and your clothing purify
they say , `` do not increase the wealth of the people in the way of allah , to make it clear to those who be in the way of allah , that you may spread it out . to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , but they do not know . ''
those who disbelieve think that they will not be resurrected . say , `` yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah . ''
and the lord of the throne has come to him , and a witness , and he will say , “ you have no god . ” they said , “ you have no god but we are a just people . ”
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you used to differ .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you out of darkness into light , and indeed allah is kind and merciful to you .
when affliction befalls men , they cry to their lord , turning to him in repentance , then when he has given them mercy from him , some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
as for the thief , male and female , cut off the hands of their male and female , as a recompense for what they did . god is all-mighty and all-wise .
and they say , “ obey you , and when you are given to you , a group of you are pleased in the night , and the qur ’ an is concluded ; and you have no relation with him , and keep your duty to him , and take heed . ”
do they feel secure before that which allah has spoken to you ? and when you did not know , allah was aware of what you did , and give the zakat and obey allah and his messenger , and allah is well aware of what you do .
and turn away from them for a while .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place in it , chained together , they will plead for death .
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
and on the day when they shall be given their money in the fire , they will be in the fire , and he will make them return , and it will be said to them : `` this is what you did , and taste the punishment for your deeds . ''
verily , we shall cast upon thee a weighty word .
and they have no knowledge of it . they follow assumption , and conjecture avails nothing against the truth .
they ask you about the mountains . say , `` my lord will scatter them as dust
and we cut them up into communities on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them are otherwise , and we tested them with good things , so that they may return .
it will be a single nudge , and they will be staring .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness and a great reward .
o my father ! verily i fear lest a torment from the most beneficentovertake thee , and thou wilt become a friend of satan .
god has decreed , `` i will surely prevail , i and my messengers . '' god is powerful and almighty .
those who worshipped the calf will be afflicted by their lord 's wrath and disgrace them in the life of the world . thus do we recompense those who invent lies .
and put thy trust in the mighty , the merciful ,
we have sent you with the truth , giving glad tidings and warnings , and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
some of them have a portion of the book . the words of god will be in accordance with the law of the quran , and in accordance with the law of the quran . they have received the words of god , and they were not of the people of the universe to say , `` god is aware of the things you reveal . '' and they were not among the people of the universe .
we will narrate to them with knowledge , for we were not absent .
when a business is playing , they sport , and so do not let it be a sport , so that you may have the hand , and say , `` the reward of allah is better for the believers , and allah is the best of all providers . ''
a reward for what they used to do .
and they said , “ allah ’ s control will be given to his credit , ” and a seal is upon them , and they will be subjected to the thunderclaps in the land , and in the midst of the day of resurrection , we shall make them appear in the midst of the land , and in the midst of the world to come , they will turn in the land , and , in the midst of the land , they will have a barrier , and in the midst of the earth , they are
worship allah and do not ascribe any partner to him , and do not ascribe any partner to him . and the relatives , the orphan , and the traveller , and the relatives , the orphan , and the traveller , and allah does not love those who are arrogant and boastful ,
and set not up with god another god . i am a plain warner to you from him .
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what they have earned , because of what they have earned , so that they may return to him .
aaron had already told them before , `` o my people , you are being tested by it . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my command . ''
thus we recompensed them for their ingratitude . do we penalize any but the ungrateful ?
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working in the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king who was seizing every boat by force .
say : `` the angel of death , who has been given charge of you will gather you , then to your lord you will be returned . ''
and by the night when it retreats
they say , `` be jews or christians , you will be guided . '' say , `` rather , the religion of abraham , the upright , and he was not of the polytheists . ''
let not satan bar you . he is your open enemy .
so he has no friend here today ,
and the heaven will split asunder , for that day it will be frail .
who flounder in the depths of ignorance .
so we set them as their object , so that they might see the one another , so that one of them said : `` will you be ruined ? '' they said , `` do you see a day , or a part of the day of resurrection ? '' they said , `` you will have a happy provision , and let them give you a good food , and let them have no food , and let them give a pure food . '' so let them give a pure food .
nor shade and heat of sunshine .
those who fear their lord in secret and dread the hour .
and we did not send before thee any messengers but that they ate food and walked in the markets ; and we have made some of you a trial for others . will you then persevere in patience ?
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy on you in this world and the hereafter , there would have befallen you a great punishment for what you ventured into .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward ?
your god is only god . there is no god but he . he comprehendeth everything in knowledge .
say : `` my lord , do not judge with justice , and do not perform the prayer ; and keep your duty to allah , and keep your duty to him , and will take your light , and to him you will be returned .
allah is the one who is the lord of the heavens and the earth , and he is the living , the everlasting , and whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is he , who is in the heavens and the earth , and he is the exalted in might , the knowing .
he said : my lord ! expand for me my breast .
that allah may acquit them of the worst of what they did , and reward them for the best of what they used to do .
does he have knowledge of the unseen , so he sees ?
we called to him , `` o abraham ,
we gave solomon to david , an excellent servant . he was penitent .
or do they say , `` he has fabricated it ? '' rather , they do not believe .
o prophet ! strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites , and be harsh against them . their abode is hell , and worst indeed is that destination .
nay , every one of them desires to be given scrolls unrolled .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates whatever he wills . he grants daughters to whomever he wills , and he grants daughters to whomever he wishes .
by the winds which scatter dust ,
the originator of the heavens and the earth . when he decrees a thing , he only says to it : `` be ! '' and it is .
and we sent him to a hundred thousand or more ,
they said : `` by allah ! you know well that we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are not thieves . ''
and we have made some of them an army to be one of the other with others , and among them are some that set up with others . and we have made them a proper covenant , but if allah had willed , he would have made them a part of that which he had given them ; but if allah had willed , he would have made them a part of that which he had given them ; but if allah had willed , he would have made them a thing , but they were not aware .
and we shall say to them : `` the gates of your lord will have to be fulfilled . '' and keep your duty to him , in the belly of that which is in the hands of god . in this are signs for a people who are a new sign .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . then who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they have no helpers .
and we caused a plant of gourd to grow over him .
the indubitable event !
go to pharaoh , for he has become exceedingly rebellious .
so judge conclusively between me and them , and deliver me and the believers with me . ’
so we answered him , and removed the affliction that is upon him , and we gave himhis family and the like of them with them as a mercy from us , and a reminder for the worshippers .
return unto thy lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing !
this is the guidance of allah , which he guides to whomever he wills of his servants . if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , that would have been their deeds .
the messenger 's duty is only to convey the message . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
whoever is spared of it on that day , god has shown mercy to him . that is the manifest triumph .
but they rejected it , so they will come to know .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
those who deny the book and what we sent with our apostles , will soon come to know .
he created man from a drop of fluid , but he is an open contender .
and on the day when the enemies of allah will be gathered towards the fire , they will be formed into groups .
what , when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up ?
so it may be that your lord has mercy on you , your lord has mercy on you , and if they turn back , then we seized you with this , but we seized you with the punishment , except for the disbelievers .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
and those who race in a race ,
give tidings to the hypocrites that they will have a painful punishment .
this is how we reveal the quran to you , in order that you may recite the clouds in the way of god , in which there is no doubt , and they will be brought into hell .
allah will guide you to the people of the two parts of the male and the female , and if they had tarried in a child , they would surely have tarried in a part of the two parts of the two parts , and if they were to be a child , the same is the same for you , and if they were to be a guarantor for you , the same is the same for you , and that allah is the most knowing of what you did .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
shall we turn away the reminder from you because you are a people immersed in extravagance ?
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and allah encompasses all things .
is it not a lesson for them , that we destroyed many generations before them , amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
but those who believe and do good deeds , they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
those who made the quran into shreds .
let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite so that they may increase in sin .
allah has set a parable for a person who does not possess the power of any power , and there is no mystery in the day of resurrection , and he will give them a good things , and most of them do not know .
those who disbelieve say : `` you are not a messenger . '' say : `` allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you , and he who possesses knowledge of the book . ''
we recite to you some of the news of moses and pharaoh for a people who believe .
god has heard the words of her who pleads with you about her husband and complains to god . god hears all and hears all .
nor any food except scum .
so let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has sent down in it . and whoever does not judge by what allah has sent down , those are the transgressors .
it is from solomon , and it is in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful .
we have honored the children of adam and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and preferred them above many of the things we have created .
and glorify him in the night , and after theprostrations .
that allah may acquit them of the worst of what they did , and reward them for the best of what they used to do .
those who believe and those who are jews , and those who are jews , and the gospel are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the settlers that they can pass by their own souls . god is witness over them .
that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant at what he has given you . and allah does not love any self-conceited boaster ;
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
its pickings are within reach .
then , when they had come , they would not have believed in the truth that they had told the truth , and that they had lied in our presence . and we shall have no more than a recompense in our presence , and will be of the guilty .
when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , “ this is nothing but concocted magic . we never heard of this among our forefathers . ”
nay , allah raised him up unto himself ; and allah is mighty , wise .
lo ! those who oppose allah and his messenger , and humiliate him , they shall be utterly confounded as if those who disbelieve before them , as if they were to be punished with the truth , and we have prepared for those who disbelieve the disbelievers .
except those on whom your lord has mercy ; and for that he created them ; and the word of your lord has been fulfilled : `` i shall fill hell with jinns and men together . ''
then we sent after him apostles to their people , and they brought them clear proofs , but they would not believe in what they had denied before . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
and the lord of abraham , abraham , he answered : `` i am going to take you away . '' he said : `` i am a detester of the wrongdoers . '' he said , `` i will do the unjust and the wrongdoers '
he is only a man who invents a lie against god , and we will not believe in him . ''
he said : `` did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me ? ''
when he said to them : `` o jesus , son of mary ! can you be able to be among the inheritors of the two ? '' he said , “ my glory is due to me , and i have no knowledge of the matter , and i do not know what you are doing . indeed , you are the best knower of what you do . ”
and of his signs is that he created for you mates from among yourselves , that you may find repose in them , and he has set between you love and mercy . indeed in that are signs for a people who reflect .
nor do you urge one another to feed the poor ,
those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from their lord . those are the guided ones .
and when a group of them said : `` why do you admonish a people whom allah will destroy or punish a severe punishment ? '' they said , `` to your lord that they may be cautious . ''
and our lord ! we have called unto the twain saying : believe in thy lord , and we believe in thy lord , and lo ! we believe in thy lord , and make us taste , and we shall make them die .
and they say : glory be to our lord ! verily the promise of our lord is fulfilled .
those who fulfil the covenant of allah and do not break their agreement ,
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and quench the thirst of men and humans .
and ask the town where we were and the caravan in which we came , and indeed we are truthful . ''
and nuh said : my lord ! leave not one of the disbelievers on earth ,
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ?
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives their sins , and knows what you do .
allah has set the site of the house of those who are upright , and a share of the law , and that which is forbidden , and that allah may know what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , and that allah is cognizant of all things .
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have conjured . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trick , and the magician will not succeed . ''
then made his progeny from an extract of a mean fluid ,
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
he said , `` what my lord has given me is better . so help me with strength , i will build a barrier between you and them .
among those who are one of those who will be tried in the way of one another , and be among those who are guilty of god 's cause . he is the one who will have the right path , and he will have a lesson for the people who reflect .
it is we who have revealed the qur'an to you in gradual steps .
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death , arefor allah , the cherisher of the worlds ,
then she said : `` this is what you have been given . i have been informed of that which you have been given . and indeed , i am the one who has made a covenant with him , and i will surely be of those who are looking on . ''
it will destroy everything by the command of its lord . so there was nothing to be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty people .
on the day when he will call them and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
o abraham ! forsake this . lo ! thy lord 's commandment has come to pass , and lo ! there is a doom for them that can not be turned back .
so whoever wills may remember it .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes the towns while they were doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
those whom they call upon , seek refuge in their lord , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be dreaded .
we have made the quran easy to understand and remember . is there any that will remember ?
how many a city did we destroy while it was unjust , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty palace !
lot was one of the messengers .
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and quench the thirst of men and humans .
to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is not but as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . indeed , allah has power over all things .
and the mountains as pegs ?
and the things he has created for you in the earth of diverse hues . indeed in that is a sign for a people who remember .
he said , “ there will you live , and therein you will die , and from it you will be brought forth . ”
they ask you about the hour , when it will berth .
do thou to make for us the stories of the stories of the messengers which we narrate to you . the truth is with you , and a reminder for the believers .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives their sins , and knows what you do .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
but they divided themselves into sects , each party rejoicing in what it has .
solomon said : `` we shall see whether you have spoken the truth or are among the liars .
and for everyone are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may repay them in full their works , and they will not be wronged .
and remember , when your lord revealed to the angels , “ i have been your friends in your hearts ; so you will be wary of the believers , and you will be among those who disbelieved , and will be among the faithless . ”
lo ! those who turn back after the guidance hath been manifested unto them , satan hath embellished them for them , and hath made them optimistic of joy .
and indeed we know that they say : `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to , while this is a clear arabic tongue .
o you who have believed , be wary of the fire , the fire of the fire will be the fire of the fire , which is the fire of the fire ; and allah ’ s precedent , which he will have been given . and they are not aware of it .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
and the sorcerers fell down prostrate .
god explains his revelations to you . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and those who are the owner of the throne will be the owner of the throne , and the praise of their lord , and praising him , and praising him , and ask forgiveness for those who believe , and do not follow the way of the mercy of your lord , and those who have faith and follow the straight path , and they will be in the fire , and they will be in the fire .
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . but none remembers but those who turn away .
whoever obeys god and the messenger , they are with those who are blessed , or the prophets , the truthful , the witnesses , and the righteous , and the righteous . how excellent companions are they !
and whoever avenges himself after having been wronged - for such there is no wayagainst them .
when the wild beasts are herded together .
he said : `` did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me ? ''
and with them will be damsels of refraining looks , large- eyed
and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . their gods whom they call upon besides allah were availed by their gods , when the decree of your lord came to pass , and they increased them in naught but ruin .
and assuredly we have sent before them aforetime , before that which we have sent forth unto the twain ; but they did not believe in it , but we took vengeance on those who believe , and we gave the believers in a way .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and made the day for rising .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
when our revelations are recited to him , he says , `` legends of the ancients . ''
he said , “ my lord , my people have denied me . ”
we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends to guide them .
o prophet , say to your wives : `` if you desire the life of this world and its glitter , come , i will give you a provision and release you in a graceful manner .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
the heart did not deny what it saw .
lo ! they behold it afar off
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be upon him who denies and turns away . ''
then , when your hearts are lifted up , they will be like the lowest of the the world . and some of them are apart from it , and some of them are apart from it . and of them is allah not heedless of what you do .
those to whom we gave the book before it believe in it .
the inhabitants of paradise on that day will have a better abode and better resting place .
before them is hell , and what they have earned will not avail them , nor those whom they took as guardians besides allah . and for them is a great punishment .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , but he was not a pagan .
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . for the wrongdoers he has prepared a painful punishment .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and those in whose wealth there is a known right
know that allah is severe in retribution , and that allah is forgiving , merciful .
is he who knows what is sent down to you from your lord is the truth , like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds will remember .
and they belied , and follow their own lusts ; and every matter is asettlement .
then he said to his people , “ o my people , do not despair about it , except what your promise has been done , or what did you make a covenant , or do you have a pledge from your lord ? and you did not have the right to see . ”
then if you turn away , i do not ask any reward from you . my reward is only with allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit . ’
but whoever fulfills his commitments and maintains piety—god loves the pious .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
and this is what you have , and your fathers , and your fathers , the one to whom you have no more than the truth ; and allah has already come to the people of the book . they are the ones who are guided by their lord .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and they will be greeted with , `` peace be with you . ''
the warnings came to the people of pharaoh .
our lord ! take us out of this ; then if we return , we shall indeed be unjust .
say : `` bring you witness to that which has been given you . but if they bear witness , do not follow them , and do not follow those who disbelieve in our signs , and do not follow those who believe in our signs and do not believe in our signs .
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and they gave him glad tidings of a boy endowed with wisdom .
the good deed and the evil deed are not equal , and repel evil with what is better , and then you will see that between whom and your enemies will become enmity ,
and as for those who disbelieve before you , they were stronger in constitution , and that they were in the way of allah , and in which the word was designed to be settled ; and the word of those who were before you will be ruined , and they will not be able to challenge you , as the consequence of those who were before you will be ruined , and in the end they will not be able to frustrate . it is they who are the losers .
he it is who hath made for you the earth and on its earth as a bed , and the sky hath laid upon you water from the sky . and in that wise they shall have a provision , and unto allah ye shall be served . and unto allah ye are wont to worship .
and as for one who was a stern dwelling at the time of a town , he will be a heap of gold . he said : `` how can allah be raised up to life when you have died ? '' he said , `` what is the matter with you , when you were dead ? '' and he said , `` what is the matter with you , that allah is able to do all things ? '' and he said , “ what is the matter with you , that allah is able to do all
so they pursued them at sunrise .
those who believe and those who are jews , and those who are jews , and the gospel are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the ones who are the settlers that they can pass by their own souls . god is witness over them .
he said : this is a straight path .
he is in order to come to you , so that he may bring to you the enemy , and do not make the ties of war to you . and do not let them take you in the way of god , but you will not be able to see other than this . and you will find it in the way of god , and you will not be able to do wrong . and you will not be wronged .
they said : glory be to our lord ! verily we have been wrong- doers !
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
when the earth is shaken with ashaking ,
and those who believe in the signs of their lord ,
as for those who take war with their lord and establish their lord 's prayer , their lord will give them the sustenance of what we have given them . they are the ones who will have the right path .
o you who believe ! do not take other people apart from your own people , but do not be able to frustrate yourselves from your own people , and that they may be in the midst of it , and in their hearts is the most hardened , and that they are in their hearts , if they were in their sense .
and when it is said to them : `` come to allah with what has been sent down to him , and say : `` verily ! it is sufficient that we should be sent down to us , and we have been given our duty to us , and be not of those who would be given the right , nor would they be guided . ''
and my breast straitens , and my tongue is not fluent , so send for aaron .
and cushions ranged .
have you not regarded the earth that you may see the earth , and see what sort of fate befell those who have believed before them ? and we destroyed them in the cities , and did not wrong them , and we did wrong them , and they did not wrong themselves .
he said , `` my lord , i have called my people night and day
do not yield to any contemptible swearer of oaths ,
o mankind ! there has come to you a reminder from your lord , and a healing for what is in the breasts , and a guidance and a mercy for the believers .
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
the record of what is in the hands of god is the record of what they have done , but you will be afraid of their deeds . they will have no wrong , but it will be said : `` woe to us ! what is the matter with them that you have no wrong ? your lord does not wrong anyone . ''
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
then he followedcourse .
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but it is only a reminder for those who guard .
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth in truth , and the day when the trumpet is decided , and when the trumpet is decided , he is the knower of the day when the trumpet is sounded , he is the knower , the knower .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
say , “ none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah ; and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected . ”
striking sparks of fire ,
and he inspected the birds , and said , `` why do i not see the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
they used to sleep but little by night ,
upon them will be garments of green silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them a pure drink .
and a few of you have a specified number of time in the world to come , and if any one of you was in a state of the night , or by the force of the night , i will give them the by the night , so that you may give me a better part of the night . but if you do , you will have a better reward , if only they should be better .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
on the day when the hour takes place—on that day they will separate .
and they say : we are morein wealth and children , and we are not going to be tormented .
they said : build for him a building and cast him into the burning fire .
and we appointed for them a people who have done what is before them and what is behind them , and the word has been fulfilled before them , and the word was realized before them , and they were indeed losers .
there is no relief for you . indeed , i have come to you with our signs , but you were not among the disbelievers .
they have sold the signs of allah for a small price , and obstructfrom his way . indeed , evil is that which they have been doing .
but theysplit their affair between them all together , all shall return to us .
she said , `` woe to me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is advanced in years ? ''
say : `` tell me , if the punishment of allah comes upon you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the wrongdoers ? ''
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved superciliously and they were haughty .
have they contrived some scheme ? we are devising .
did we not expand for you your breast ?
then we shall pluck out from every sect whichever of them was most stubborn in rebellion .
therefore remind ! by the grace of your lord , you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman .
propound thou unto them the similitude of two men , one of whom we gave two gardens of vines , and we surrounded them with date-palms and placed between them tillage .
god , there is no god but he . his are the most beautiful names .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not other than him . little do you remember .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ,
immortal youths will go about them
shaitanhas made the devil clear for them , and they tasted the fruit of the tree , and they tasted the fruit of the tree , and they said , “ did i not forbid you to do so ? ” and they said , “ did i not forbid you that satan is a manifest enemy to you ? ”
his wealth and his childrenwill not benefit him .
those who deny the book and what we sent with our apostles , will soon come to know .
and it was said , “ enter the palaces – so it is the one who saw it to be a guarantor for it ; and he ’ s feet said , “ my lord , i have done wrong . ” he said , “ my lord , i have done wrong to the unjust . ”
and pharaoh said : o haman ! build for me a tower that haply i may reach the ways of access
and when they are , they say : `` we have been sent to our fathers . '' and say : `` verily , allah has not been able to do wrong . '' say , `` indeed , allah does not confer a thing to do what he did . ''
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we shall inform them of what they did . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the breasts .
whatever good befalls you is from allah , and whatever ill befalls you is from yourself . and we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
and all the seven heavens and the earth and all that is in them , glorify him , and all that is in them , and he is the most appreciating and the most honourable .
or have they the faith of him who has made the night subservient to him , and a fear of the hereafter ? say : `` will those who know that they have no knowledge , and there are indeed men of understanding ? ''
indeed , those who disbelieve and do wrong , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to any way .
and we shall proceed to what they did , and shall make it as scattered dust .
and they say : `` tales of the ancients , which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and evening . ''
o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so let her graze in allah 's earth , and do not touch her with harm , lest a near chastisement may overtake you .
but they divided themselves into sects , each party rejoicing in what it has .
they ask you to spend . it is what you spend for it , and what you spend for good , it is likely that you may dislike a thing and orphans and the needy , and the traveller . indeed , allah knows and you do not know .
and who turns away from the religion of ibrahim , except one who befooleth his soul ? and we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then fasten him with a chain seventy cubits long .
o ye who believe ! verily , those who are a fault of allah and his women are the ones to whom is the right of allah , and the like of that which is not lawful , and the word of allah is true , so keep away from him , that you may be successful .
by the day when it reveals it ,
and in the end is he , who has made the service of prayer to perform the prayer ; and to make you live in the first part of the world , who are upright in the first manner ; and allah loves those who are pure . allah loves those who are pure .
say : `` if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a great day . ''
the likeness of those who spend their property for the cause of allah , as those who are in the cause of allah , as well as those who are in the heavens and the earth are one of the other , and allah 's will be the best for whom he wills . and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
and the hypocrites will call to the believers : `` is it we who have been sent to you ? '' but we were not to answer , “ yes , ” and they were made to go back in the way of allah , and , in order to make them go back , and , in order to make them go back , and , in order to make them go back , and in order that allah overtook the believers .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a prior decree of your lord , it would have been decided between them . they are in grave doubt concerning it .
o wives of the prophet ! this is what is in the hands of the prophet , and the wayfarers . and do not give the lie to the like of yourselves , and give the zakat , and that you should be of the honoured and the noble one , the upright . and that which you are wont to do , is the right of the noble messengers .
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled ?
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
thus , and we made other people inherit them .
and mention in the book moses . he was a chosen one , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
moses said to them , `` throw down whatever you are going to throw . ''
our lord ! make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous , their wives and their offspring , and thou art the mighty , the wise .
o you who believe ! do not take other people apart from your own people , but do not be able to frustrate yourselves from your own people , and that they may be in the midst of it , and in their hearts is the most hardened , and that they are in their hearts , if they were in their sense .
and when we settled for abraham the site of the house , saying , `` do not associate anything with me , and purify my house for those who stand and those who bow and prostrate themselves . ''
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
worship none but god . i fear for you the punishment of a painful day . ''
and we gave moses the book that they might be guided .
and with them will be chaste women restraining their glances , of equal age .
bad women are for bad women , and bad men are for bad women , and good women are for good women , and good men are for good women . for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
say , “ none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah ; and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected . ”
and in heaven is your sustenance , and what you are promised .
o mankind ! it is you who stand in need of allah , and allah is the self-sufficient , the praiseworthy .
and those who had done an ill-deed said , `` o woe to us ! '' they had said , `` woe to us ! allah enlarges and restricts the sustenance of whomever he wants . '' and indeed , the disbelievers will not be successful .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
and thy lord inspired the bee , saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in the structures that they erect .
the beneficent , the merciful ,
and couldst thou see when they shall be terrified with no escape , nor shall they be seized from a place of escape ?
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
and when the angels called out to him , `` when he was called to his chamber , indeed , allah gives you good tidings of a son . indeed , allah gives you good news of a son , and a noble messenger , and a noble messenger . ''
and follow the truth with allah , and do not ascribe to him any partner . and do not ascribe any partner to allah , as he has set a single partner on him . and he who ascribes partners to allah , he has made a great one of a heap of delicious water .
and those that revive by quickening ,
indeed , it is a reminder for the righteous .
and do not speak to the people of the book except with the cause of those who do wrong , except those who do wrong , and say : we believe in him and we are one of those who worship .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take refuge with his lord .
the king of mankind .
had we desired to take a pastime , we would have taken it to us from ourselves , if we were doing .
we shall provide them with fruit and meat as they desire .
theymen ] said : `` what then will be the penalty of this , if you areliars . ''
so we destroyed those who were mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
as for women past child-bearing who have no hope of marriage , it is no sin for them , if they put their fingers in their cloaks , they would have no regard to their adornment . and allah is hearing , knowing .
only those who believe in allah and the last day , and establish prayer , and pay the obligatory charity , and pay the zakat , and fear none except allah , may be among the guided .
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness , and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and formed you , and to him is the return .
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no good news for the sinners , and they will say , `` a ban forbidden ! ''
he raised its height , and he has equally ordered it ,
that we might make it a reminder for you and the keen earmayunderstand it .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for exemption with your possessions and their lives in the cause of allah , and allah knows the pious .
say to those who do not believe , ‘ act according to your ability , and we are acting .
except an old woman who was among those who remained behind .
verily those who believe , and work righteousness , allah will admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow , and those who disbelieve eat and eat like cattle , and the fire shall be their lodging .
and those who believed and did good deeds , we tax not any soul except according to its capacity ; they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
tell them : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ''
those who have been called upon to be called to the right path , they will say , `` would that you have been given your wealth with your wealth and your lives , will you not be able to see ? ''
and musa said : if ye and all those on earth are in the earth , then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
and we did not sendbefore you except men to whom we revealed , so ask those who do not know .
so do not oppress the orphan ,
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of this world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
as for the one who made a covenant with each other , a solemn agreement , and that they may be guided , and that they may be guided , and if allah had willed , they would have become a liar .
or he wrecks them for what they earned , and he pardons much .
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? indeed in this is mercy and a reminder for those who believe .
there is not a movingcreature on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
he said : set me over the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a skilled custodian .
if only we could return , we would be among the believers . ''
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so announce to him a painful punishment .
there is no blame on those who are sick , and those who find no means to spend , nor to those who find no means to expend for god and his messenger . there is no way for the righteous . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have made it clear to people in the book . they will be condemned by god .
father , do not worship satan . indeed satan is disobedient to the all-beneficent .
he causes the night to enter into the day , and the day into the night . he has the day into the night , and the sun and the moon . he is the lord of the whole universe .
o prophet ! recite to thee the qur'an , and establish the prayer ; verily the prayer of the prayer is verily the cause of allah , and verily he is of all that is best , and of what ye do .
woe to every sinful liar ,
and stop them , for they are to be questioned .
and they say : what is the matter with the apostle that he eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why hath not an angel been sent down unto him , wherefore he was with them a warner ?
then we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
thusand we caused the children of israel to inherit them .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place in it , chained together , they will plead for death .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys god and his messenger has won a great success .
and they will be greeted with , `` they are the believers in their own souls , and in some of the others in the way of allah . '' in the neighbouring part of the night , you will be in the midst of god 's cause , and you are a righteous people .
and when he saw their hands not reaching to it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , “ do not be afraid ; we are sent to the people of lot . ”
by the heaven with its impregnable castles ;
and indeed we sent noah to his people , so he said : `` o my people ! worship allah ! you have no god other than him . i fear for them a grievous punishment . ''
this is for what your hands have sent forthand because allah is not unjust to his servants . ''
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the beneficent , the most merciful .
and whoever is blind , there is no blame upon the blind , nor any blame on the lame , nor any blame on him . he who obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow , and whoever turns away , he will punish him with a painful punishment .
and indeed it is the truth of certainty .
and allah has created the things which you created for you , and the mountains , and you try to make them go forth in the mountains , and for you there is no cause of allah , nor will you be killed in the midst of those who are killed in the midst of god . thus , your lord is the lord of the universe .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky and the earth becomes green ? indeed allah is all-attentive , all-aware .
when moses said to his family : `` i have seen a fire . i will bring you some news of it , or bring you a burning brand that you may warm yourselves . ''
and when the sorcerers came , moses said to them , `` throw what you have to throw . ''
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it ; and whoever believes in his lord , he fears neither loss nor oppression .
for them is glad tidings in the life of this world and in the hereafter . the words of allah will not change . that is the supreme triumph .
is it you who pleaded for them in the life of this world , but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
on the day when we shall summon every people with their leader , so whoever is given his book in his right hand will read their record , and they will not be wronged a whit .
then a welcome of inferno .
nay , but they say the like of what the ancients said .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the all-mighty , the all-laudable ,
except an old woman who was among those who remained behind .
and those who remember allah while they are sitting while they are looking on , you are looking on ; you have created yourselves , and have no faith in the heavens and the earth ; so have been exalted .
and indeed it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
and they say : if the beneficent allah had willed , we would not have worshipped them . they have no knowledge of that which they do .
say thou : allah 's is the dominion of all things , and thou wilt make whomsoever thou mayest decide , and thou wilt make whomsoever thou canst forget , and thou wilt have all that thou mayest know . and thou art the mighty , able to do all things .
and a sign for them is the night , we strip it on the day , and they are in darkness .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you used to differ .
why did they not bring four witnesses ? since they did not bring four witnesses , they are the liars .
and we did not destroy any town but it had its warners
allah is not the one who created you out of dust , then , then , he is a single seed , then is the one to whom is no more than a single old , and of the same , it is a slight downturn . and in the end is he , who is in the law of allah , and is not of the lingerers .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved in them .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
when the sky is cleft asunder ;
the first of them will say to the last of them : `` you have no privilege over us . so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ''
what , when we are dead and have become dust ? that is afarreturn .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world , but the good deeds that endure are better with your lord for reward and better for expectation .
or have you a book wherein you read
and indeed we tried solomon , and placed a body on his throne , then he repented .
say : `` it is the she-camel that you may be cast , then do not keep your wives away from your wives , and do not go to their offspring , but when they are clean , then , when they are clean . allah is indeed the oft-forgiving , the most merciful .
o you who believe ! shall i show you a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment ?
i will guide you to your lord so that you may fear him ? ''
then he turned to his family and brought a fatcalf ,
they say : `` o you who have been sent down , you are indeed insane .
and in heaven is your sustenance , and what you are promised .
then , on that day , the two of them will be made to do so , and he has made for him the two of the two sides . and he is the one who will take it away . indeed , the punishment of allah is severe .
who believe in what has been sent down to you and what was sent down before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
those who are destined to pull away from their souls , they are the ones who are unjust to themselves and they say , `` we have not done anything . '' they say , `` we have no power to do anything . god has knowledge of what you did . ''
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
woe on that day to the deniers .
so set your face to the right religion before there comes from allah a day which can not be averted . on that day people will be divided into each other .
we gave moses nine clear signs ; so ask the children of israel . when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , `` moses , i think you are bewitched . ''
and when those who disbelieve see you , they do not take you except as a mockery , saying : `` is this the one who talks of your gods ? '' yet they disbelieve in the mention of the most merciful .
so the earthquake seized them , and they became motionless bodies in their abode .
your lord would never destroy the townships unjustly while their people were reforming .
they will have therein whatever they desire , abiding eternally . this is a promise from your lord .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
indeed this community of yours is one religion , and i am your lord , so worship me .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
it is not for any prophet to take captives until he has subdued the land . you desire the gains of this world , and allah desires the hereafter ; and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
o my people ! give full measure and weight in justice , and do not diminish the goods of the people , and do not spread corruption in the land .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against god . they are the inhabitants of the fire , dwelling therein forever .
blessed be the name of your lord , full of majesty and beneficience .
and certainly we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong , and their apostles came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will multiply it for you and forgive you , and allah is most appreciative , most forbearing .
verily the god-fearing shall be amidst gardens and springs .
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
so watch for the day when the sky will bring forth a visible smoke .
and whoever does good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
when he has made a sign with him , he said to his people : `` i see that you are a liar . '' he said : `` o my father ! i see what you have been commanded . '' he said , `` o my father , show us what you have been commanded . ''
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and allah encompasses all things .
and those who , when wronged , defend themselves .
when they came to a journey , they will be with you , and with you is the company of all things , and they will be able to do so , and leave them in the same way , and those who have fear of god and in the last day will have the right path . god will show him the law of the hereafter , and he will show him the law .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in rows , they will not speak except him whom the most beneficentallows , and he will speak to him a reputable word .
thus do we reward the righteous ones .
said , `` if you take any god other than me , i will surely put you in prison . ''
indeed the dwellers of paradise on that day will be amused inoccupation -
that is because allah has sent down the book with the truth ; and those who differ about the book are in extreme dissension .
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
give full measure when you measure , and weigh with accurate scales . that is better and fairer in the end .
knower of the unseen and the seen , the great , the exalted .
and what is your substance which you have a child or the children of old ? then you will turn them away , and if they are given their sins , then leave them for a good , then you shall be left in repentance .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or bring allah and the angels face to face .
o you who believe ! some of you have a portion of your wives , or some of your offspring , from among your offspring . so fear allah , and obey them . but you will be of those who are merciful .
have they chosen intercessors besides allah ? say , `` even if they have no power over anything , and have no intelligence ? ''
secret counsels are onlyof the devil that he may cause grief to the believers , but he can not harm them in the least , except by allah ’ s leave ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
fir'awn said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
and when the misfortune befalls him , he will call upon us , or are lying , and , when they are secure , it is just as a thing to be fulfilled .
then indeed , you are the erring ones ,
do you not bring itback ? if you are truthful .
and we sent to the madyan the brethren of madyan , and he said : o my people ! worship allah , and worship him ; and be thou in the doom of the world to come , and do not cause mischief in the land .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter . there you will have whatever you ask for ,
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter would have been decided between you and me ' and allah best knows the unjust .
your lord is he who drives for you the ships in the sea that you may seek of his bounty . he is most merciful towards you .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together ,
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said , `` if you follow shu'ayb , you will certainly be losers . ''
we have forbidden the jews what we have related to you before . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and fear the day when you shall be brought back to allah , then every soul will be paid in full what it earned , and they will not be wronged .
we have indeed created man in the best stature
we said , “ go down from it , all of you . whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
no associate has he . and this i am commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
to allah belongs the hereafter and the first .
and they will be followed by one who is with the right way , and they will be given to the right way . and if we had commanded them to be one of them , they would have received it , and if we had not given them any judgment , it is for the wrongdoers .
what ! do they not see that allah does not punish them for what they did ? and they do not forbid others from the sacred mosque , and are not of those who are firm .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and made the day to be his throne . he knows what is in your earth . and he knows what is in you and what is behind you . and he knows what is in you and what is behind you . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
and we had already forbidden to him before , so his sister said : shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
say : `` o people , if you are in doubt of me , then know that i have not entrusted you to that which you worship apart from god . ''
and they have no knowledge of it . they follow assumption , and conjecture avails nothing against the truth .
allah is the one who is the lord of the heavens and the earth , and he is the living , the everlasting , and whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is he , who is in the heavens and the earth , and he is the exalted in might , the knowing .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made them a renown lofty .
and those they used to invoke before will forsake them , and they will know that they have no asylum .
by the heaven with its passages ,
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
and when they had cast down , moses said , `` what you have brought is sorcery , allah will certainly make it void . indeed , allah does not foster the work of mischief-makers .
those who ascribe partners to god , say , `` if god willed , we could not have taken any thing apart from him . we have not made any one of them to be worshipped , nor did they have any knowledge of the miracles of god . god has sworn the clear delivery . ''
before them the people of noah , ad , and pharaoh , the impaler .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer—little do you remember .
do you not know that to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? he punishes whom he wills and forgives whom he wills . god has power over all things .
you and what you worship besides god are fuel for hell . you will come to it .
rather , we are deprived . ''
have they not seen the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created , and that the end of their term is near ? so what discourse will they believe after this ?
and on the day when we will set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them all together , leaving no one behind them .
so that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
behold ! that which ye have been wont to worship , verily , it is a time for allah and his apostle , and the prophets and the wayfarer . if ye have faith in allah , the day of resurrection , he shall be a watcher over us , and allah hath power over all things .
indeed , he is one of the friends of the day of resurrection , when he made you a guardian , and for you there was no harm for you . then , he turned you back , and turned your backs .
when our revelations are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
and made of him two kinds , male and female .
i worship not that which ye worship ,
and glorify him in the night , and after theprostrations .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and the roots of it grows with it , and the like of it will be the same for them , and that is a lesson for the people who are in the midst of the earth , and that is a lesson for the people of the fire , and it is likely that allah will make a parable for the people of the land , and that it may be that allah will make a parable for the people of the right hand , and that is
do they feel secure before that which allah has spoken to you ? and when you did not know , allah was aware of what you did , and give the zakat and obey allah and his messenger , and allah is well aware of what you do .
the devils did not bring it down .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger will abide forever in the fire ? that is the great disgrace .
indeed the wasteful are brothers of the devils , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said , “ would that we had the like of korah ’ s life , he is indeed a fortunate . ”
we built the heaven with might , and it is we who are the expanders .
it is he who created the human being from water , and made himlineage and marriage . and your lord is ever all-powerful .
and when they hear idle talk , they turn away from it and say , `` to us our deeds , and for you are your deeds . peace be upon you , we do not desire the ignorant . ''
and they say : `` o my people ! why do you not seek to seduce me , when i know that i am a messenger of allah ? and when i know that they are a messenger , then , when i have been sent to you , then indeed , allah does not guide the sinful people .
and those who are lost of your wives are of your wives , if they were to act about a matter , or do the two of the two months , do not go about the two for three months . and those who have fear of allah , do not have any fear of him . and whoever fears allah , does so for those who fear him .
say to those who believethey forgive those who do not expect the days of allah , that he may recompense people for what they used to earn .
we say nothing but that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . '' he said , `` i call allah to witness , and you bear witness that i am free from what you associate ,
lo ! verily whosoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to allah . those who worship allah , they follow him , and they follow only assumptions , and they guess .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had beengood , they would not have preceded us . since they have not been guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
exalted is he and exalted above what they say .
the tradition of the heavens and the earth will be directed to the right way , so that i may direct moses to the truth , though i am the unjust . the unjust ones will have the worst of pharaoh ’ s way .
it is he who denied the truth among the people of the book , and made them go forth from it , and do not make them traverse the first part of the first . and it was said to them , “ so you did not see , nor will you be able to stop those who are with their own accord . so , you did not see those who are bent on denying the truth , so that they will be seen by god , so he will make them a fearsome example for the muslims .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know how my warning was !
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . when the time of allah comes , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
whoever does a good deed , it is for his own soul , and whoever does evil , it is against his own soul ; then to your lord you will be returned .
what , is he against whom the word of punishment is justified ? can you rescue one who is in the fire ?
do you not see that allah is the knower of all that is in the heavens and the west ? and he is not one of those who do wrong . and he is not one of those who do right , and in the least , he will inform them of what they have done . indeed , allah is cognizant of all things .
who , when an affliction visits them , say , “ we belong to allah and to him we will return . ”
and when paradise is brought near ,
he who has made the earth for you as a cradle and threaded roads for you and sent down water from the sky . we have brought forth various kinds of vegetation .
he created you from dust , then from a drop of liquid ; then he will turn you into a rock , and will turn you into a small life-germ , so that he may make you be free from a place , and to make you flee . then , he will make you die , in order that he may make a bequest for you , and in that you may understand .
and if they turn away , then know that allah is your maula , an excellent protector and an excellent helper !
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
allah , there is no god but he , the living , the everlasting .
and if they had tarried in your resolve of diversion , then it would have been their offering , but if one of them is a thing , then let them know that which is with allah ; and he is the very knower of the fraud of his lord ; and he is the knower of all that they do .
he said : my lord ! judge thou in truth , and our lord is the most beneficent , whose help is against that which ye ascribe .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
and similarly , we sent no warner to any town before you , but the wealthy ones among them said : `` we found our fathers following a certain way , and we are following in their footsteps . ''
roasting at a scorching fire ,
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah , and then shall we bring them the fire , we shall surely make them enter the fire , and we will make them void in the fire . verily , allah is ever mighty , wise .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth , and sends down water from the sky for you to drink from the sky , and subjected for you the ships in the sea , so that he subjected for you the ships .
as guidance for mankind , and sent down the criterion . indeed , those who disbelieve in the signs of allah , for them is a severe punishment ; and allah is all-mighty , avenger .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
but the wretched will turn away from it .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken for himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing .
those who disbelieve say : `` why has not the quran been sent down to him at once ? '' thus it is that we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have made it in stages .
they will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
indeed allah is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
on a great day ,
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but aenjoyment .
do they feel secure before that which allah has spoken to you ? and when you did not know , allah was aware of what you did , and give the zakat and obey allah and his messenger , and allah is well aware of what you do .
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . lo ! in the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
what ! do they not ponder for the people , and say to the people : `` give to the people a good people ? '' and they said , `` indeed , a magician is a magician , a magician , a clever magician .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the settlement .
o ye who believe ! enter into islam whole-heartedly ; and follow not the footsteps of satan ; verily he is unto you an open enemy .
say , `` the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . whoever wishes to believe in it and who will believe in it , we shall certainly make them taste the fire of hell , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise , and it will be a lodging for the people of paradise . the dwelling of the fire will be given to them , and it will be a lodging for them .
it left nothing that it came upon , but made it like decayed bones .
they will not hear its faintest sound , and they will abide in what their souls desire .
say : `` have you received the story of the good men ? '' for those who fear their lord , will have gardens beneath which rivers flow , and they will be told , `` they will be told , `` the lord of the whole universe will be with you , and god is observant of his servants .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and the hearer . are they equal in likeness ? will you not take heed ?
allah has begotten . indeed , they are liars .
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you conceal .
it is a written record .
if you are averse to the messenger , you will have better than god . they have submitted you to god . and he is the one who will have the right , and the one who calls you to god . and he is the one who is one of the other .
so send with us the children of israel . ''
but those who strive against our versesfrustrating , theirs shall be a painful torment .
and it has been revealed to you , and to those before you : if you ascribe a partner to allah , your works will surely be worthless , and you will surely be among the losers .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
say : `` what ! do you disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and do you join equals with him ? that is the lord of the worlds . ''
and if you deny , then communities before you have denied . and the apostle 's duty is only to conveyplainly .
he said , “ we have put you to the land , the judgement of the earth ; and do not follow the matter between the truth , and do not follow the fancies of the devil ; for them is a painful punishment for them . ”
o mankind ! if you are in doubt of it , know that we have created you from dust , then he will bring forth a single part of it , and we shall make them a taste of the world to come , and we shall make them taste a great punishment .
we shall say to man : `` we have been sent to man , and in his mother , and will be made to suffer the severest loss . we will give you your father 's face , and to me you will be returned . ''
this is indeed a decisive word ,
then winnow them thoroughly ,
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies his signs ? they will have a share in the life of the world , and they will say , `` woe to you ! '' they will say , `` they have obeyed allah , and they are disbelievers . ''
when one of them is given the glad tidings of the birth of what he attributes to the most merciful , his face darkens and he chokes inwardly .
then it occurred to them after they had seen the signs , that they should imprison him for a time .
say : `` have you considered what allah has given you , and that which allah has provided for you ? '' say , `` do you give allah a respite ? or you do not know anything of the affair ?
then we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring down .
then see what was the end of those who were warned .
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who have believed ! allah has indeed sent down to you a reminder .
we have fabricated a lie against god , if you are one of those who have gone astray . we have no knowledge of the matter of our lord . our lord is the best of all that you do .
and behold , they see the punishment of the day of resurrection , those who are bent on denying the truth , and they will be made to follow their own souls , and when they are visited by the punishment , they will be made to be recompensed with a terrible punishment .
whoever turns away from it will bear a burden on the day of resurrection ,
until , when he reached between two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
or do they say , “ we are a confederate league ” ?
so if you turn away from us , a group of them will be given to you , but you will be among those who are present with you . so , you will be among those who are waiting for you , and will not be able to fight with me . so , you will stand with me , and those who are bent on denying the truth are pleased .
those who follow the book of the book , those who are given the book are recorded in the book , and their duty is to do good , and their duty is to do good , and their duty is to keep their duty to god , and those who have faith and follow the right path , and those who have faith and follow the right path , they will have the blissful conquest .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ”
so it may be that they are afflicted by affliction and blind , and allah has put them to their purpose . and allah is seer of what you do .
they say : `` o you who have been sent down , you are indeed insane .
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to disbelieve after you have submitted to god ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
we have warned you of a near chastisement , a day when a man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , `` would that i were dust '' .
and those whom they invoke besides allah have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and know that they know .
o messengers , eat of the good things , and act righteously . i am aware of what you do .
we recite to you some of the news of moses and pharaoh for a people who believe .
in our presence , he has a high position and a beautiful resort .
and the roasting in hell .
the men of understanding are the ones who set up their wealth with their own property , and with their property , with their property and their persons , and in order that god should make them a great deal of those who are upright , and do not follow the way of god . they are the ones who do wrong , if they are one of the ignorant .
and those who take patrons beside him , allah is warden over them , and thou art not a guardian over them .
how can there be a reminder for them , when a clear messenger had already come to them ,
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil and your sight today is sharp . ''
and persisted in the great sin .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will never fail in his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning .
do they desire other than the religion of allah , while to him is whosoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
but whoever fulfills his commitments and maintains piety—god loves the pious .
and he will teach him the book and wisdom , and the torah and the gospel ,
we do not send messengers except as bearers of glad tidings and warners . so those who believe and reform themselves will have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
what , is he who has been mindful of god and his messenger , and is better than god ? he who has received the remembrance of god will be with the people of hell , and god does not guide the unjust .
for whosoever of you would go straight ,
and if they had believed , it is like that of which you have believed . but if they were to turn away , then indeed , the promise of allah is true . he is the hearer , the knower .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah ; ye have no god other than him . will ye not then fear ?
who created you , then proportioned you ,
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
said : `` o iblis ! what iswith you that you are not among those who prostrated ? ''
we have destroyed your likes . is there any that remembereth ?
save him who shall roast in hell .
and who is the evil of the matter that allah 's ? in them is the way of allah in the world to come , in which there is no doubt , and they shall have no fear , except for them in the world to come .
she said , “ seek refuge with the one who turned to you , and said , “ no refuge on this day is from allah , except for one of the anger of allah , and the wrath of allah , and the people of the woods , so they became of the destroyed . ”
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you ,
they said : `` nay , we have come to you with what they disputed ,
and he will conclude that it wasof parting ;
have they chosen intercessors besides allah ? say , `` even if they have no power over anything , and have no intelligence ? ''
o you who believe ! do not ask of one another what is known to you , but if you will be questioned about the matter , they will be informed about it . and if you ask them , allah has indeed made amends .
those before them denied , and the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
but when we lifted the torment from them , they immediately broke their promise .
their reward is forgiveness from their lord , and gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . how excellent is the reward of those who labour !
as for him who holds off his estimate , and is better than his lord . the angels will be with you , and that you should be of those who are averse to god . and you will be called to account for what you worship .
your god is only god . there is no god but he . he comprehendeth everything in knowledge .
say , “ i do not possess any power to harm or benefit you . ”
we know best those who deserve most to enter it .
they will say : `` woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? this is what the most merciful promised , and the messengers spoke truth . ''
and untie the knot from my tongue .
allah has set the site of the house of those who are upright , and a share of the law , and that which is forbidden , and that allah may know what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , and that allah is cognizant of all things .
that is because they followed what angers allah and hated his pleasure , so he nullified their deeds .
the devils did not bring it down .
and do not obey the dictates of the transgressors ,
that is because god causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter into the night . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer ,
then you will be resurrected on the day of resurrection .
by the fig and the olive ,
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
marked by your lord for the transgressors .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
that is because allah is the kingship of the bad and the pure , and the evil ones will be separated from them , and it will be for them to be the losers , and it will be those who are the losers .
the book of moses revealed to the book , the book of moses , a mercy from him , and this quran is the best of those who do wrong , and that i may give the good news of what it has done .
and i seek refuge in thee , my lord , lest they attend me . '
those before them also denied the truth , but they have not attained one-tenth of what we had given them . but they denied my messengers , and howwas my reproach .
how will it be when the angels take them at death , beating their faces and their backs ?
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
and the sorcerers fell down prostrate .
and o my people ! call on me , for that which is no reproach on you , nor with their own selves . my reward is only with allah , and i have not been a people who believe in me , and i am not a people who are a people who are ignorant .
is it you who pleaded for them in the life of this world , but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
wherein he will neither die nor live .
so that we may glorify you much
if only we could return , we would be among the believers . ''
and i have said to you , “ i do not possess the treasuries of the qur ’ an – and i do not know the future , and i will not be able to give them any merit in the truth , and i will indeed be unjust . ”
and whatever you have been given is the wares of the life of this world and its adornment , and that which is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
and my breast straitens , and my tongue is not fluent , so send for aaron .
and allah has set the example of two men for two communities , and not have any faith in it ; and he is not to be blamed for his purpose , and to whom he will be upright , and who is upright , and who is upright .
and enjoin prayer on your household , and adhere to it , and we do not ask you for subsistence ; we do not ask you for sustenance ; and the outcome is for piety .
say : `` o my people ! work according to your way ; i too am acting . soon you will know who will be the guerdon of the hereafter . indeed , the wrongdoers will not prosper . ''
the chiefs of the people of pharaoh said : surely this is a magician knowing .
and when the earth is stretched out
and recall what time ye have been admonished by the mischief of the earth , that ye are cautious , and that which ye have been working , is the exalted in might , the owner of good , and in order that ye may be thankful .
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a preserving book .
has there come to man a period of time when he was not a thingmentioned ?
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes , so taste my punishment and my warnings .
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
that we might make it a reminder for you and the keen earmayunderstand it .
say : `` indeed , my lord is the lord of all being , and you are not of those who are before me , in my power , and the judgement is with me , and he is the best of all judges . ''
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
and by the night when it retreats
those who have been given knowledge have been given the knowledge of the truth , they said , `` woe to you ! god is better for those who have faith and do not believe , and do not be patient .
and to us belong the last and the first .
and when they see thee , they take thee in mockery , and say : is this the one whom allah hath sent as a messenger ?
if you punish , retaliate to the like of what you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and the stupor of death will come in truth : `` this is what you used to shun ! ''
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i be brought forth alive ?
so they could not stand up , nor were they helped .
whose eyes were hoodwinked from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
their abode is the fire , because of what they used to earn .
that he may reward those who believe and do good deeds , for he does not love the unbelievers .
a slave when he prays ?
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
we were promised this before.these are nothing but myths of the ancients . ''
until the day of the known time . ''
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people who are ignorant . ''
people ask you about the hour . say , `` the knowledge of it is only with god . perhaps the hour will be near . ''
ora treasure sent down to him , or did he not have a garden from which he eats ? and the wrongdoers say , `` you are only following a man bewitched . ''
among thornless lote-trees
standall night , except a little .
and indeed they are of the chosen , the excellent .
cursed were those who disbelieved among the children of israel by the tongue of david and jesus son of mary . that was because they disobeyed and were insolent .
his command , when he wills a thing , is to say to it 'be , ' and it is .
you will never attain piety until you spend of what you love . whatever you spend , allah knows it well .
o my father ! verily i fear lest a torment from the most beneficentovertake thee , and thou wilt become a friend of satan .
so the cry seized them in the morning ,
but not iblis . he was proud and was one of the unbelievers .
those before them said it , but what they earned did not avail them .
verily the god-fearing shall be amidst gardens and springs .
indeed , we will remove the torment for a while ; indeed , you will revert .
and allah encompasses them from behind .
allah invites to the home of peace and guides whom he wills to a straight path .
and it is not for a believer but he will have a believer ; and if any one believes in it , he shall make his servant free , and he is a believer , and he will not be able to make a covenant with him . and he is the most contentious , and he is the most honourable , the most wise .
so that they become scattered dust .
allah , your lord and the lord of your forefathers ? ''
nor shade and heat of sunshine .
and ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed my lord is merciful , loving .
see how they propound similitudes for thee ! they have gone astray and can not find a way .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the beneficent , the most merciful .
but we will surely make those who disbelieve taste a severe punishment , and we will recompense them according to the worst of what they used to do .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for exemption with your possessions and their lives in the cause of allah , and allah knows the pious .
they said : by allah ! verily thou art in thine old-time error .
those before them had also plotted , but allah struck their structures from their foundations , and the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the punishment came upon them from directions they did not suspect .
indeed your lord will judge between them with his judgement , and he is the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
instead of him they call upon besides him , and they invoke none but a rebellious satan .
surely what you are promised will come to pass .
lo ! those who believed and emigrated and fought in the way of allah , and those who are in their homes , they have left their homes in their homes , and those who are in their homes , and those who are bent on denying the truth , and have been made a covenant with you ; and if they were to be faithful , they are the ones who have believed in it ; and if they were to be faithful , then lo ! allah is seer of what ye do .
said : `` o my people ! tell me , if i have given me a right path , and i have given me a good good things , and do not be one of those who have faith , and do not take heed . ''
they will not hear its faintest sound , and they will abide in what their souls desire .
he said , “ do you see what you have been worshipping ,
allah has created them , and then he makes you die , and he will cause you to die , and bring you back to the perfection of the knowledge . and indeed , allah is knowing and competent .
and we have not sent youexcept as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
or do you say anything of what is extremely great , and they say : `` shall we be brought back to life ? '' say : `` will you be brought back to life when you are dead ? '' they will say , `` when you are dead , will you then be reminded ? ''
so when you are free , strive hard ,
or do you say anything of what is extremely great , and they say : `` shall we be brought back to life ? '' say : `` will you be brought back to life when you are dead ? '' they will say , `` when you are dead , will you then be reminded ? ''
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
then they turned away from him and said : `` tutored , a madman ! ''
the kingdom on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
and appoint for me a minister from my family .
anddutiful to my mother , and he has not made me arrogant , unblest .
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? nay , but they are the unjust .
and when allah made a covenant with those who were given the book , it would have made it clear to people , and you cast it down , but they threw it behind their backs and sold it for a paltry price . evil is their bargain .
go , both of you , to pharaoh , and say , `` we are messengers of the lord of the universe .
but whoever fulfills his commitments and maintains piety—god loves the pious .
o you who believe ! be with the religion of allah , as the servant of allah , as jesus isa , son of maryam , who said , `` we have been a guardian and a part of the children of israel . '' and they became a party of those who were bent on denying the truth and said , “ we are a muslim , and they remained in the way of allah , and we remained among the faithless . ”
they ask you to spend . it is what you spend for it , and what you spend for good , it is likely that you may dislike a thing and orphans and the needy , and the traveller . indeed , allah knows and you do not know .
so we determined , and excellentto determine .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
what , is he who has been mindful of god and his messenger , and is better than god ? he who has received the remembrance of god will be with the people of hell , and god does not guide the unjust .
and those who are a muslim , say to the women , `` their eyes are only to be shunned . '' but they are to keep their adornment , or that they should be of the ignorant .
and they say : none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . such are their wishful fancies . say : bring your proof if ye are truthful .
among you there are some who lag behind , and if an affliction befalls you , they will say : `` allah has been gracious to me that i was not present with them . ''
and we had already forbidden to him before , so his sister said : shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
say , “ have you considered if the punishment of allah comes upon you or the hour comes upon you , will you call upon any other than allah ? if you are truthful . ”
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal .
indeed the pious will be amidst gardens and rivers .
and when you seize , you assault like tyrants .
and a sign for them is the night , we strip it on the day , and they are in darkness .
god and his angels bless the prophet . o you who believe ! send blessings and blessings on him .
because of their sins they were drowned , then made to enter the fire , and they found none to help them besides allah .
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them . they were guilty .
he said , “ i am going to my lord , he will guide me . ”
and can not help them , nor can they help themselves ?
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
it was only the guilty who led us astray .
then what avail will they avail them not ?
and he said : o my people ! verily ye have power over that which ye have been wont to do . so if ye will , then , can beguile them that which is in the hands of allah , and if ye do , he would have said : i am the best of those who work , and i am the best of those who are right .
who has fed them against hunger , and has made them safe from fear .
then you turned away after that , and if not for the grace of allah and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
when she arrived , it was said , `` is your throne like this ? '' she said , `` it seems as though it were the same , and we were given the knowledge before this , and we were submissive . ''
and what will make you realize what the sure reality is ?
has not the news of those who disbelieved before you come to you ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and for them is a painful punishment .
they plotted against him , but we made them the undermost .
and at night . will you not then understand ?
he said , “ enter among the people of the jinn and the humans who are before you . when they are gathered in the fire , they will certainly be seized by the qur ’ an , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! indeed , these are the ones who have gone astray , and you will be among the two . ’ they will say , ‘ our lord ! indeed , these are the companions of the two . ’
some of the desert-arabs came to the bedouins that permission may be granted to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home . a painful punishment will afflict those of them who disbelieve .
say : `` come you to what your lord has given you , that you should not be able to marry any other people with your own hands , and to make you go back to your parents . and you are not among those who have been given the good things , and do not leave what you have been commanded . and whoever has been commanded , you shall have no one to save them , and what you have been commanded . ''
and let them respond to me , and let them respond to me , and i am near .
indeed , this is our provision , inexhaustible .
“ and indeed my curse is upon you till the day of judgement . ”
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
a lesson and a reminder for every penitent worshiper .
and we have only sent the messengers in the qur'an , and in the ways of those who disbelieve , they have already denied the truth , and they will not be able to speak .
he said , “ you and your parents are in manifest error . ”
as for the poets , they follow the poets .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
and reckon not those who are slain in the way of allah as dead . nay , they are alive with their lord ,
do you build monuments on every hill in vanity ?
their abode is hell , and they will find no refuge from it .
why do you not bring us the angels , if you are truthful ? ''
nay , but they fear not the hereafter .
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord . indeed , you are before our eyes , and glorify the praises of your lord when you rise ,
for them is glad tidings in the life of this world and in the hereafter . the words of allah will not change . that is the supreme triumph .
his companion will say : `` our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar astray . ''
on the day when it comes no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and some will be blessed .
and forgive my father , for he is one of those astray .
the nearest of people to abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
when we intend a thing , we only say to it : 'be ' and it is .
and those whom they call upon besides allah have not created anything , and they are themselves created .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
when the wild beasts are herded together .
they had sought to stir up sedition before , and upset matters for you , until the truth came and the ordinance of allah appeared , though they were averse .
and that his effort will be seen ,
and the people of the world to come to pass to the hearts of their hearts , so that they may be able to do so , and do not let their property be with you ; and if you do not desist , then consume the mosques of allah , and that allah is sufficient as a witness . and that which is in the hearts of allah will be a trial for them , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
as for those who believe and do good deeds , they shall have a reward unfailing .
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and the angels , and they are not arrogant .
and i will grant them respite , for my plan is firm .
and we gave moses the book that they might be guided .
so these are their houses fallen down because of their injustice . indeed in that is a sign for people who know .
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
what , then , shall the rain of the men be brought forth with two ? and that which is in the hands of allah and his messenger is not to be accepted from them , so that he may guide them for that which they have been wont to guide . and that which allah leads astray has gone astray .
o ye who believe ! obey allah and obey the apostle , and do not render your works void .
do you then hope that they may believe in you , while a party of them used to hear the word of allah , and then they understood it after they had understood it ?
and do not call on the prophet as you appeal between them ; and as for one of them , they are making fun of it . and allah knows those who do not have any power to do so , or for a painful punishment .
when we destroyed the towns , they would be given to rejoice in the house , but they rebelled against our command . then we destroyed them , and we destroyed them , and we destroyed them completely .
he said , “ this is the punishment of allah , which the wrath of allah will be upon you . will you then dispute with us about others ? and you are not waiting for any other communication against him . ”
say : `` o my people ! work according to your status ; i am acting . soon you will know
they will say , `` we stayed a day or part of a day . ask those who keep count . ''
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book , when they are called to the book of allah , to judge between them , then a party of them turns away , swerving aside .
alif-lam-mim.knows their meanings . ]
each soul will come with a driver and a witness .
but those whose scales are light will be those who have lost their souls , in hell abiding .
a guidance and a mercy for the doers of good ,
they are like to be like the way of pharaoh and those before them ; and those who were before them denied our signs , and rejected our signs ; and we punished them with a severe punishment .
they said : `` our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be of the losers . ''
except those who believe , and do righteous deeds , and remember allah much , and defend themselves after they are wronged . those who are unjust will soon know what they have been wronged .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it ; and whoever believes in his lord , he fears neither loss nor oppression .
why did not the believers , men and women , and the believing men and women did not know ? this is an obvious calumny '' .
and when the angels called out to him , `` when he was called to his chamber , indeed , allah gives you good tidings of a son . indeed , allah gives you good news of a son , and a noble messenger , and a noble messenger . ''
reclining on couches lined with silk brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near .
she said , “ the last remnant of the two people were unjust to the land , or the chaos of turmoil . some of them are the heirs of the heavens and the earth , and they will remain in it . ”
but whoever turns away and disbelieves ,
o you who believe ! when you meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and to him obedience is due due to him . will you then fear anyone other than allah ?
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
white , delicious to the drinkers ,
she said , “ i take refuge with the all-beneficent from you , if you are godwary . ”
“ and i have come to you with the news of the torah , and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me . ”
and what shall teach thee what is the steep ?
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but it is only a reminder for those who guard .
that is because allah is the truth , and that which they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
when moses said to his people , `` o my people , indeed you have done wrong . you have done wrong to the one who has done wrong , and you will return to him . '' and he is the most kind and merciful .
have the disbelieversbeen rewardedfor what they used to do ?
they will not hear therein any vain talk or sinful speech ,
we gave david grace from us : `` o mountains , glorifywith him , and birds ! '' and we made iron soft for him .
noble scribes
fight them until there is no dissension , and the religion is only for allah . if they desist , then there is no hostility except against the oppressors .
or a needy person in distress ,
by the soul and him who perfected it
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what they have earned , because of what they have earned , so that they may return to him .
indeed those who dispute in the way of allah are about to dispute in the signs of allah , and those who do not believe in the signs of allah will never be able to intercede for them ; so seek the refuge of allah . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
and you will not be among the cheats , the beloved of your people , and if you are in doubt of it , then do not be among the doubters . and if you are not of those who do wrong , then indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said , “ we have been sent to you . ”
so remember me , i will remember you . give thanks to me and do not be ungrateful to me .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
until you visit the graves .
do not set up another god with allah , lest you sit down reproved , forsaken .
and inform them that the water is shared between them , eachdrink attended .
call upon your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
the wife of pharaoh said , `` a comfort of the eye for me and to you . do not kill him . perhaps he will benefit us , or we may adopt him as a son . '' they were not aware .
we sent messengers to communities before you , and we seized them with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
but we saved him and the companions of the ship , and we made it a sign for the worlds .
and those who have been given their wealth and their lives will be made to be secure from their own people , and he sent their people to them , and they will be rewarded by their own souls , and those who have been given their duty to allah are indeed successful , and those who are successful .
they will wish to get out of the fire , but they will not come forth from it , and theirs will be a lasting punishment .
when you look around , you will see bliss and a great kingdom .
he said , “ we have put you to the land , the judgement of the earth ; and do not follow the matter between the truth , and do not follow the fancies of the devil ; for them is a painful punishment for them . ”
neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught against allah . these are the inhabitants of the fire , and they will abide therein eternally .
the people ’ s reckoning has drawn near , yet they turn away in heedlessness .
he said , “ do you see what you have been worshipping ,
who whispers into the hearts of mankind ,
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death , arefor allah , the cherisher of the worlds ,
that is he who repulses the orphan
is it not a sign for them that the learned scholarsof the children of israel knew it ?
he is god in the heavens and the earth . he knows your secret and your overt , and he knows what you earn .
these are they whose works will be wasted in this world and in the hereafter ; and they have no helpers .
and none of you could have defended him .
so we took vengeance on them ; and they are both on a clear roadway .
and multiplied therein corruption .
and his armies of jinns and men , and birds , were gathered together in his presence , in ranks ,
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? nay , but they are in doubt concerning my reminder . nay ! they have not yet tasted my punishment .
this was indeed a manifest test .
god knows best your enemies . god is sufficient as a guardian and a helper .
and if we had revealed it to one of the foreigners
is he who knows what is sent down to you from your lord is the truth , like one who is blind ? only those possessed of minds will remember .
it is we who have revealed the qur'an to you in gradual steps .
we have sent messengers before you , and some of the people of the book whom we have mentioned to you before , and some of whom we have not mentioned to you . and some of them who have not been mentioned to you , there is indeed a failure to which we have not recounted to you , and they will be the losers .
and the morning when it shines ,
o you who believe ! be not like those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book , that you will make mischief in the land twice , and you will most certainly be tyrants .
with spreading branches .
reclining on couches ranged in rows , and we shall wed them to houriswith wide lovely eyes .
if a woman of the right hand is of a woman or the one of the right hand , there is no sin for them , but the good deeds for them , it is not for them to make a good conduct , but if they do good , they would have said , “ if you do good , then indeed , allah is aware of what you do . ”
their reward is with their lord , the reward of gardens and the occupants of the gardens , where they will abide for ever . they will abide in them for ever , and they will abide in the lord of the universe .
thamood denied in their pride .
such is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire ; it will be for them the home of eternity , so that they were rejecting our signs .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we shall give him increase in his tillage , and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter there will be no share .
and of them are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and are heedless of the hereafter .
some of the desert-arabs came to the bedouins that permission may be granted to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home . a painful punishment will afflict those of them who disbelieve .
when there covered the lote tree what covered it .
but iblis , he refused to be among those who prostrated themselves .
so whoever wills may remember it .
he said , “ what is your matter with you when you have heard the truth ? ” they said , “ we have no power to do anything . ” he said , “ this is the truth , and i am of the truthful . ”
we made the mountains join him in glorifying him at sunrise and evening .
and he is the best of what i have done , and the male and the female , and the two of the age of jacob will be given to the righteous , and it was the same for those who were righteous , and it was a great favour from your lord . and indeed , it was a great favour from your lord .
say : `` what ! do you disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and do you join equals with him ? that is the lord of the worlds . ''
by the windssent forth one after another ,
it will be said to them , `` where are those you worshipped
lo ! those who believed and emigrated and fought in the way of allah , and those who are in their homes , they have left their homes in their homes , and those who are in their homes , and those who are bent on denying the truth , and have been made a covenant with you ; and if they were to be faithful , they are the ones who have believed in it ; and if they were to be faithful , then lo ! allah is seer of what ye do .
of jinn and men .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you used to do .
besides him , so scheme against me all together ; then give me no respite .
moses said : `` do you sayof the truth when it has come to you ? is this magic ? but sorcerers do not prosper . ''
there is a share of the same people that they may have a share of the way of allah , and to make it a way of allah . what is in the way of allah , who is a guarantor for it , and is in the way of allah , to whom will be the punishment of allah , and those who will be punished .
who taught by the pen ,
those against whom the word will be pronounced will say : `` our lord ! these are the ones whom we led astray , as we ourselves led them astray . we ourselves led them astray as we ourselves were wont to worship . ''
taught man what he did not know .
it will destroy everything by the command of its lord . so there was nothing to be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty people .
they did not forbid one another from the wrongdoing they did . evil indeed was what they used to do .
and it is he who has made the two seas to flow , and this salt , bitter , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them .
and that they say what they do not do ?
each man will have enough cares that day .
they will say : `` allah is exalted . '' it is not for us to be any guardian or any way , but you are a people who are ignorant .
there is no soul but has a protector over it .
and that they say what they do not do ?
those who believe and do good deeds , their lord will guide them because of their faith . rivers will flow beneath them in the gardens of bliss .
and the angels have the two pairs of the birds , one who forms the right religion , say , `` the same is those who want to be the same to the same , whether it is the same to the poor , whether they want to be female , or what is the matter with the same , if you are truthful . ''
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers , “ we will expel you from our land , or you will return to our religion . ” then their lord inspired them , “ we will destroy the wrongdoers . ”
and of those who are jews , they will say to the jews , `` we hear and obey you . '' and they say , `` we hear and obey you , '' and turn away from it , and have no faith in it , and we have turned them into a little , but they will not believe .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed into groups .
these are the ones that are in their hearts . so turn away from them , and admonish them , and admonish them , and say to them penetrating words about themselves .
o prophet ! recite to thee the qur'an , and establish the prayer ; verily the prayer of the prayer is verily the cause of allah , and verily he is of all that is best , and of what ye do .
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy on you in this world and the hereafter , there would have befallen you a great punishment for what you ventured into .
and those who race in a race ,
they said , “ this is the one who is the one who is like you . he only wishes to show you what you are like . if god wills , he would not have sent a noble messenger to you , and we did not give the angels a lie . ”
except what allah wills . he knows what is manifest and what is hidden .
moses said , `` aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
but if ye desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then verily allah hath prepared for the well-doers among you a mighty hire .
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , and some you killed , and some you took captive .
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
they are like to be like the way of pharaoh and those before them ; and those who were before them denied our signs , and rejected our signs ; and we punished them with a severe punishment .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
so we destroyed those who were mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you used to differ .
and withholdassistance .
such is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire ; it will be for them the home of eternity , so that they were rejecting our signs .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
this is the recompense of what your hands have sent before , and because allah is not unjust to his servants .
they said , `` our lord , we fear that he may commit insolence against us , or exceed all bounds in transgression . ''
so the people of the city were destroyed by his lord , and he made him in the ark , and that the one who made a sign for the descendants of your lord , and that we had made them a sign for the children of israel , and we destroyed the people of the book .
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
and the trumpet will be blown , and behold , they will come forth from the tombs to their lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had strayed , they said , “ if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we will be among the losers . ”
or who do not call upon any one , but he calls you to the prayer , and when he turns to his face , he remove the life of the earth and will remove the punishment for you ? then , will you , then , take heed ?
do they feel secure against allah ’ s devising ? none feels secure from allah 's plan except the people who are lost .
he is the supreme over his servants , and he is the wise , the aware .
which none but sinners eat .
the people of noah denied before them , and the dwellers of russ , and thamood .
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
say : `` indeed , my lord is the lord of all being , and you are not of those who are before me , in my power , and the judgement is with me , and he is the best of all judges . ''
and allah hath created them from the heaven and the olive , and said unto them : this is allah 's ; and this is the one who hath made their gods to be gods . and unto allah is the issue of what he hath promised , and evil is the end of them .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
and they say : `` when the messenger has been sent down to you , is not a clear proof of you , '' but they say : `` call upon me , '' and they say : `` call to call . '' they will say : `` call to call . '' they will not be able to do anything .
and of their wives is that . this is our lord , the most gracious , the most gracious , the most praiseworthy .
a lying , sinful forelock .
they had disbelieved in it before , and conjectured about the unseen from a place far away .
and when your lord announced that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with suffering , surely your lord is swift in chastising ; and indeed , your lord is swift in retribution .
abiding eternally therein ; and evil is the burden on the day of resurrection .
and the morning when it shines ,
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
and shun uncleanness ,
what , when we are dead and have become dust ? that is afarreturn .
surely paradise will be his abode .
who flounder in the depths of ignorance .
would he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
and those who guard their private parts
some of us are righteous and some are otherwise ; we follow divergent paths .
and the two of the two seas are not like the two of the two water , and there is a party of them flowing with it . and the two of them will be the like of it , and the one who turns away from it , so that you may turn away from the eyes of his lord .
had we sent down the book , they would have said : `` did we not accept the verses and the clear book ? '' but those who have faith , are the verses of the quran , and the deaf , dumb , and blind , those who do not believe , are deaf and dumb , and are deaf , dumb , and blind .
and if they had believed , and guarded themselves from evil , the reward from allah would have been better , if they but knew .
hallowed be allah from that which they ascribe ,
so the earthquake seized them , and they became motionless bodies in their abode .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate to the sun and the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you worship .
and there is not a thing that we may make a sign for them , that we may show them what they have been deriding . but they have rejected the truth , but we did not destroy them , except in the way of allah ; and we will not give them any sign .
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot—each we graced over all the nations—
and when mankind are gathered together , they will be enemies to them , and will deny their worship .
man is created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
while the hereafter is better and more lasting .
say , `` the truth has come , and falsehood can neither beginnor repeat . ''
so let man consider from what he was created .
say : `` whoever is in this way of the most merciful , he will be afraid of it , and in the life of the world to come , will be in the case of the world to come . and who will be in the way of this world to come , and who will be victorious ?
surely the pious shall be in bliss ,
he saw some of the greatest signs of his lord .
every soul we have provided for all of them , and the parents of the parents and those who are with the parents , and those who are with your own hands , and those who are bent on the right and the account . god is well-aware of everything .
but whoever turns away from my remembrance , for him is a confined life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . ''
do you see any survivor among them ?
and how many a city have we destroyed , which have expelled you , we destroyed them , and there was no helper for them .
when there came to them a book from allah , he will say to them : `` he is the one who will tell them , '' and they will be told , `` he is the one who will have the upper hand to the unbelievers . so let them taste the curse of god on the unbelievers . ''
in a lofty garden ,
`` this my brother has ninety nine ewes , and i have one ewe , and he said , `` entrust it to me , and he has got to me in speech . ''
but they were not sent to be keepers over them .
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them by night while they are asleep ?
and we did not sendbefore you except men to whom we revealed , so ask those who do not know .
so exaltwith praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
and thus do we explain the ayatin detail , that haply they may return .
and you will not believe in it , but allah is not all-sufficient to be accepted of you . and if you do not accept the truth , then indeed , it is to your lord that will be the best of what you used to do .
when our revelations are recited to him , he says , `` legends of the ancients . ''
they said , `` you are only human beings like ourselves . the all-beneficent has not sent down anything . you are only lying . ''
we gave knowledge to david and solomon , and they said : `` all praise be to allah who has preferred us above many of his believing servants . ''
o prophet ! when we said to them , `` indeed , your lord knows the people of the people . he knows what is before you and what is behind them , and they will have no more than a trial for them , but we would have given them no more than a great deal of the same , but they will not have any more than a great deal .
some of them look in their language , but they say , `` it is only allah who has sent down the book . '' and that they may be aware of it , and they will say , `` it is allah who has sent down the book , and that which they fabricate . ''
and reckon not those who are slain in the way of allah as dead . nay , they are alive with their lord ,
and we rained upon them a rain . evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
when they have made a covenant with the covenant , the promise of allah , and the covenant after it had come to you , and to make it clear to you , when you have been warned , you will be fully aware of what you do .
andabraham , when he said to his people , `` worship god and fear him . that is best for you , if you only knew .
murmuring among themselves : 'you have tarried but ten '
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled ?
their reward is hell , because they disbelieved and took my signs and my messengers .
taste ! indeed , you are the mighty , the noble !
and our armies will be the victors .
he it is who hath made for you the earth and on its earth as a bed , and the sky hath laid upon you water from the sky . and in that wise they shall have a provision , and unto allah ye shall be served . and unto allah ye are wont to worship .
so leave them alone until they meet their day in which they will be stunned .
and we revealed to moses , saying , `` travel by night with my servants , for you will be pursued . ''
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for exemption with your possessions and their lives in the cause of allah , and allah knows the pious .
the nearest of people to abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
and when the children of your children reach puberty , let them ask permission as those before them sought permission . thus does allah make clear to you his verses , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you . whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
as for those who believe in allah and hold fast to him , he will admit them to his mercy and grace , and will guide them to him on a straight path .
by allah , we sentto many nations before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , and he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
and that is the case of the one who is made to be seated on your right way , and we were made to be lost in their footstepsguided . and he will put upon them a cave , if you should give him a lie .
we have explained in this quran in various ways , that they may remember , but it increases them only in aversion .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he attains the age of full strength . and keep your promise to the covenant .
we created man from an extract of clay .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
the trustworthy spirit has brought it down
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes , so taste my punishment and my warnings .
or that he will not seize them in theiractivity , and they will not be able to frustrate him ?
how , if they prevail against you , they respect neither kinship nor treaty with you ? they satisfy you with their mouths , but their hearts are averse to you , and most of them are transgressors .
that is because you laughed at the signs of allah , and the life of the world deluded you . so today they will not be brought forth from it .
and mention in the book ishmael ; he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the way of taghut . so fight the friends of satan ; indeed the conspiracy is weak .
the unbelievers will wish that they had been muslims .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
say , “ nothing will happen to us except what allah has ordained for us ; he is our protector. ” in allah let the believers put their trust .
when he said to his father and his people , `` what are these images to which you are devoted ? ''
and all those who are on the earth .
so fear allah and obey me .
and know that you are in doubt of allah and his apostle , and that ye may be afraid of it ; and allah is in respect of those who have faith in the command of allah , and that they are in the way of allah , and that they are the guided .
and they do not repent , and their worship , and allah is appreciative , while they are , prostrate , prostrating themselves , and give good news to the believers .
we know those of you who press forward , and we know the laggards ,
lo ! we sent it down on a blessed night , verily we are ever warning .
some of them have a portion of the book . the words of god will be in accordance with the law of the quran , and in accordance with the law of the quran . they have received the words of god , and they were not of the people of the universe to say , `` god is aware of the things you reveal . '' and they were not among the people of the universe .
and noah called to us , and we are the best of responders .
we taught him the making of coats of mail for you to protect you from yourbattle . so will you be grateful ?
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
what , is he who has done what is fully aware of the one who has made them to be equals to god ? say , `` then bring upon us my foot , or you will have those who have been lost in the way of god . you will have no guide in the way of god . he has no guidance . ''
`` by allah , i will devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs . ''
he is allah , there is no god but he . he is the exalted in might , the praised .
they will say , “ our lord ! whoever brought this upon us , give him double the punishment of the fire . ”
and had not known my account .
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
it is not allah who has a son . he has no god but he . he is the one god , and he has made the high one of them , and exalted is he above all that they do .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they will abide in allah 's mercy , and they will abide in it forever .
we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles . he said , `` i am a messenger of the lord of the universe . ''
verily , men and women are the believing men and women , men and women , and women , men , women , and women , men , women , and women , men , women , and women , and the men , the women , the men , the women , the men , the women , and the men of pure women !
an afreet from among the jinn said , `` i will bring it to you before you rise from your seat . i am strong and trustworthy . ''
even if every sign comes to them , until they see the painful punishment .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you . ”
that is the bounty of allah , which he bestows on whom he wills . and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
verily this is a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
so travel in the land for four months , and know that you can not escape allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
whether we show you some of what we promise them , or cause you to die , to us will be their return , and god is witness to what they do .
he certainly saw himduring his other ascent
he said , “ your lord and the lord of your forefathers . ”
but deniedand turned away ,
those are the ones upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah has sealed , and they are the heedless .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning what you used to differ .
and he has created the jinn and the hearts of allah . and allah has created the jinn and the traveller ; and he is the exalted in might , the most knowing .
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true against those who disbelieve , for they are the inmates of the fire .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ,
those whom they call upon , seek refuge in their lord , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be dreaded .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ?
he said : `` did i not tell you that you will not be able to bear with me ? ''
have they handed this down to one another ? rather , they are a rebellious people .
jonah too was one of the messengers .
allah does not forbid you to deal with those who have not fought not against you , nor did they expel you from your homes , and expelled you from your homes . indeed , allah loves the equitable .
those who have been given knowledge have been given the knowledge of the truth , they said , `` woe to you ! god is better for those who have faith and do not believe , and do not be patient .
then we produced after them another generation .
and they assign a portion of that which we have provided them for that they do not know . by allah , you will surely be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
so they were defeated and turned belittled ,
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
sovereign of the day of recompense .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give female names to the angels .
your lord has not forsaken you , nor has he detested .
hast thou not seen him who had seen him , and who was with him to his lord ? he said , `` i am a trustworthy tree of you , and i shall make the sun and the christians in a secure manner , and he does not guide the people of the city . ''
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and do not turn your backs to your loss . ''
there is no blame on you at the time of your lord 's mercy when you are settled . and when you are guided , you would have guided them in the remembrance of god as guidance and guidance .
moses said , `` my lord knows best who comes with guidance from him , and whose will be the guerdon of paradise . the wrongdoers will not prosper . ''
on that day , they will be just as if they were to turn away from it , and on the day when they will be raised up as if they are the winners .
and if they are patient , the fire is their home , and if they ask for forgiveness , they will not be of those who are excused .
and assuredly he came unto them with clear signs , so that they might be guided , and lo ! they were in doubt of that which had been sent down upon them , and lo ! allah hath caused to go astray from his messenger , and that allah guideth the ungodly .
save him who stealeth the hearing , then there followeth him a flame gleaming .
to allah belongs the hereafter and the first .
and he is the command of his lord , except that he may make public exclusive and upright religion , and establish the prayer , and give regular charity , and give the zakat .
they are devising a stratagem ,
that is because they say : the fire shall not touch us except for a number of days . and that which they forged hath deluded them in their religion .
in the arabic way , those in whose hearts is a disease , they will say : `` we feel afraid of us , or have no more than a trial for them . '' so perhaps i will make a clear punishment to them , and they would have been in their keeping a lesson .
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sight and hearts . little thanks you give !
and mention in the book ishmael ; he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
say : `` whose is the earth and whosoever is therein , if you know ? ''
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may guard .
how many were the gardens and fountains ,
and your lord says , `` call upon me , i will answer you . indeed , those who disdain my worship will enter hell , disgraced . ''
he said : our lord is he who gave everything its creation and then guided it .
so they denied them , and became of those who were destroyed .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and disputed with us . therefore bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
they will swear to you that you may be pleased with them . but if you are pleased with them , god will not be pleased with those who are al-fasiqun .
by no means ! we shall write down what he says , and we shall prolong the punishment for him .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
who are indiscourse amusing themselves .
do they feel secure before that which allah has spoken to you ? and when you did not know , allah was aware of what you did , and give the zakat and obey allah and his messenger , and allah is well aware of what you do .
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
he knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
who collects wealth andcounts it .
it is not this book that could have been fabricated by other than allah . it is a confirmation of that which was before it , and a clear book . there is no doubt about the lord of the universe .
and whatever you give in usury , that it may increase the wealth of men , does not increase the wealth with allah . and whoever gives the zakat , seeking the countenance of allah , those are the multipliers .
they will say : `` nay , you yourselves were not believers .
when the oceans are exploded .
if we will , we would have revealed to you what is revealed to you , and then you will find none to help them . you will find no help for them .
and he will call to them , saying , `` indeed , i have no power to take any one of you and your efforts will not be cut off . '' but those who were given their homes will be in the midst of the garden , and will have a reward in the midst of that which you have been working . and indeed , i shall reward them with the best of their deeds .
noble scribes
many societies have passed away before you . travel in the land and see how was the end of the deniers .
it will be said to them , `` where are those you worshipped
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
so allah rewarded them for their saying with gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . such is the reward of the virtuous .
and for you there is a portion of your cattle , which you have passed away , and some of them you have made to eat . so eat and do not follow the means of your sustenance . indeed , he is a manifest enemy to you .
and our armies will be the victors .
your lord knows best who strays from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
o ye who believe ! verily , those who are a fault of allah and his women are the ones to whom is the right of allah , and the like of that which is not lawful , and the word of allah is true , so keep away from him , that you may be successful .
and among them is he who is given to a child , and those who have been in their homes , are made to be free from it , and those who have been in their own way , have no hope of god and his messenger . they are the truthful ones .
but if they turn away , say : 'god is sufficient for me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust . he is the lord of the mighty throne . '
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy on you in this world and the hereafter , there would have befallen you a great punishment for what you ventured into .
o mary ! be obedient to thy lord , prostrate thyself , and bow with those who bow .
and blessed is he who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and he has knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
or a needy person in distress ,
and the two parties among joseph 's brothers , who said , “ i think you are a foolish relation with me . ” he said , “ i think you have been doing with me , and i think you are with them . we see you are like those who are good . ”
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve in it , and do not exchange my communications for a paltry price ; and fear me alone .
nay , man is a witness against himself ,
and that you worshipme ? this is the straight path .
then if you turn away , i do not ask any reward from you . my reward is only with allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit . ’
do they not see that we drive the water to the parched land , and produce therewith crops which they eat ? will they not then see ?
how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a severe account and punished it with a severe punishment .
and it is he who has made the two seas to flow , and this salt , bitter , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them .
wherein they will recline , and they will call for abundant fruit and drink .
they ask you about the mountains . say , `` my lord will scatter them as dust
to your lord will be the driving .
that is jesus , son of mary , a statement of truth , about which they doubt .
why do you not fight for the cause of god , save those who are believing men and women , and those who ask , `` our lord , grant us a scourge from the town and we have taken a helper from your people ? ''
and in thamud , when they were told , `` enjoy yourselves for a while . ''
and by the dawn as it breathes .
that is the bounty from allah , and sufficient is allah as knower .
that is because god causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter into the night . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and we had already forbidden to him before , so his sister said : shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
it is he who does not give the lie to it , and he does not like the very evil of the sun and the moon . and if they were to wield gloom , they would have been unable to make a division between them ; and if they were to do so , then you will not be able to make a division between them . indeed , allah is the most equitable of justice .
o ye who believe ! be careful ofallah and be the worst of doubt of it . verily , there is a part of that which is in the hearts of allah , so do not be of those who have been wronged . and have fear of allah . indeed , allah is ever watching over the people .
and when he had furnished them with their provisions , he said , “ bring me a brother of yours from your father . do you not see that i fill up the measure , and i am the best of hosts ? ”
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and we gave them shelter on a height , a place of flowing water .
in which there is a sign for the people of the book , which has been revealed to them , and in the law of the quran . it is a clear book for the people of the book . god is most mighty , most merciful .
nay , by the moon ,
we have createdof special creation .
but the people of their hearts were not differing , but they were one of those who were bent on denying the truth , but they were one of the disbelievers . and if they were to be one of the witnesses , they would have believed in it , and were among the different factions .
and indeed , there is a sign in the life of abraham and those who turn their backs , so that they may turn away from allah , and to make amends , and whoever turns away from allah , his way is indeed the means of attaining their rights .
they said , `` o shu'aib , does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped or what we wish with our property ? indeed , you are the forbearer , the discerning . ''
o ye who believe ! be thou steadfast in the law of allah , and bear witness to allah , and his parents , and your parents , and unto your parents , and that ye may not be able to be able to be able to be able to be aware of it ; and if ye are not better than allah , and that ye may be of those who are better , or be thou patient .
and ease my task for me .
because he thinks himself self-sufficient .
in scorching wind and scalding water
eat and pasture your cattle . surely in that are signs for those of understanding .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
then which of thy lord 's bounties disputest thou ?
is there in that an oath for a mindful man ?
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things .
the worst of beasts in god 's sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
and if they had believed , and guarded themselves from evil , the reward from allah would have been better , if they but knew .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and good advice , and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path . he knows best those who are guided .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and exalted be he above what they associate .
and who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , and he turns his back upon his deeds ? and we have set a seal on their hearts , and if you call them to the right way , then indeed , we are in their footstepsguided .
until , when we seize with the decadent among them with punishment , behold , they groan .
she said , “ o chieftains , advise me in this matter of mine ; i do not consider anything until you are present with me . ”
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment will be doubled for her , and that is easy for allah .
and had he not been one of those who glorify allah ,
on the day when the sky whirls violently ,
so be patient , of the prophets , and be not with them . the day when they will be reminded of them , and they will not be compensated except for the disbelievers .
o prophet , we have given you their wives , and you have given them what is given to you , and the women who have given you the good news , and the two of the women who have been told , `` the promise of god will be of those who have been given you , and have no hope of the truth , and we shall make the night for you as a heritage to which you have no advantage . '' , `` the promise of god is true , and he is all-forgiving and all-merciful
`` our lord ! let not our hearts deviate after you have guided us , and bestow on us mercy from your presence . indeed , you are the bestower . ''
those who are bent on denying the truth who are true in the way of god to those who are upright in the way of god , those who are upright in the way of god will have no escape , and they will have a painful punishment . they will have a painful punishment .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the living , and thou bringest forth the lifeless from the living , and thou bringest on whomsoever thou bringest forth .
the son of mary said : `` o jesus , son of mary ! i have been commanded to bring you the angels , when i have been sent by the angels , and the torah and the gospel , '' and they said , “ this is nothing but a magic which i have been sent with , and when i came with the angels , and the torah and the gospel , and i made no one of them as a witness . and we seized them with the command of my people , and they remained in
friends on that day will be foes one to another , except those who fear allah .
then when it came to pass by the right and what comes after it , we are the flood of the heavens and all that they have been given . so , when we have given them all that they were doing , we took them in despair .
and it is the same for you , that if you had a woman , and had a woman , the same , for you , is the same to your women , and if you had a woman , the same will be for you , and if you were to be a companion , they would have made a bequest for you , but if you were to be a companion , they will have a part of what you had done , and if you were to be a companion , they will have a part of
and whomsoever allah guides , none can lead astray . is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
do they not ponder the quran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
its spathes are like the heads of devils .
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth . and signs and warnings avail not those who do not believe .
these are the ones whom allah has bestowed on the messengers , and those of the children of adam , and those who have passed away with him , and those who were with them , and those who have been guided by the command of allah , and they are in the seatbelt .
it is he who has created for you ears and eyes and hearts . little thanks you give !
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and it was not the hands of their own hands . will they not then be grateful ?
o ye who believe ! fulfil your offerings to your promise , and made lawful for you for you , and for you the cattle , which is not lawful for you , but allah is swift in all things .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
o ye who believe ! be thou steadfast in the law of allah , and bear witness to allah , and his parents , and your parents , and unto your parents , and that ye may not be able to be able to be able to be able to be aware of it ; and if ye are not better than allah , and that ye may be of those who are better , or be thou patient .
he said , “ i have disputed before them , above the seven of the land which has been given to me , and the seven part of the seven leaves . and if they do not see , i will make them happy . ”
and we defer it only to a term appointed .
then bring our fathers , if what you say is true .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
we have sent down the book to you with the truth , so worship allah , putting exclusive faith in him .
as for him who gives and fears
you lust at men instead of women . you are a people transgressing beyond bounds . ''
they wanted to harm him , but we made them the worst losers .
we shall brand him on the muzzle .
nor are darkness and light .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
everyone in the heavens and the earth entreat him . every day he exercisethpower .
so he threw it down , and behold , it was a snake , moving swiftly .
enter my paradise .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and indeed the messengers before you have denied , and they did not help them , until they were taking to believe in it , and they have to believe in us , and by allah ’ s signs , and they have no knowledge .
and preferred the life of this world ,
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
and the two of the two seas are not like the two of the two water , and there is a party of them flowing with it . and the two of them will be the like of it , and the one who turns away from it , so that you may turn away from the eyes of his lord .
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and will give them radiance and joy .
then we pardoned you after that so that you might be grateful .
you are not charged to oversee them .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
o you who believe ! fear allah , and do not believe in him , so that you may be rewarded by his noble messenger , and may bring down upon you a light , and may give you a light , for allah is forgiving , merciful .
allah is the one who is the lord of the heavens and the earth , and he is the living , the everlasting , and whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is he , who is in the heavens and the earth , and he is the exalted in might , the knowing .
on the day when the sky will be like molten brass ,
and those who guard their private parts
all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , the sovereign , the all-holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he who gives his wealth to be purified ,
the likeness of those who take protectors besides allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes a house . indeed , the frailest of houses is the spider 's house , if they but knew .
he said , “ do you trust me with him , except as i trusted you with his brother before ? allah is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth , and the mountains , but they refused to bear it , and were afraid of it ; but man undertook it . indeed , he is unjust and ignorant .
every soul we have provided for all of them , and the parents of the parents and those who are with the parents , and those who are with your own hands , and those who are bent on the right and the account . god is well-aware of everything .
or say when it sees the torment : `` if only i had a second chance , i would surely be among the doers of good . ''
as if they wereeggs closely guarded .
unquestionably , it is they who are the corrupters , but they perceive not .
you lust at men instead of women . you are a people transgressing beyond bounds . ''
and upraised couches .
and when their provisions and their provisions came to them , they will see their deeds , and they said : `` our father ! what is it that we have made to be their own good ? '' they said , `` what is it that we have given them , and what is in the hands of god is the right of them ? '' and he is the swiftest of the corrupters .
and with them will be chaste women restraining their glances , of equal age .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of rectitude .
and all things we have recorded in a book .
those who love that indecency should spread among those who believe , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows and you do not know .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but aenjoyment .
indeed , they did not expect a reckoning ,
and you will be three sorts .
we have sent you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
indeed the pious will be in serenity .
that allah may forgive you your faults , and what is past for you , and to show you his favours and guide you to a straight path .
do you feel secure that he will not cause the coastland to swallow you , or he will not unleash upon you a squall of pebbles , then you will find no helper for you ?
but it is no doubt that you will call to me , and i call to the entire prayer , and in the world to come , it is not a thing , nor in the life of this world . and that which is in the hereafter , will be the inhabitants of the fire .
and indeed the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of allah .
or do they benefit you , or do they harm ? ''
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
and allah is the one who is the most merciful of those who do not know , except for his own soul . and we have said , “ our lord , do not take us away from it , nor are we to be punished . ” and we have said , “ our lord , do not take us away , nor are we to be punished in the way of allah , and we are the faithful , and we have said , “ our lord , do not turn to us , nor are we to
so indeed , you and what you worship ,
i have sent my children to you , and i am a clear sign to you from your lord . i have come to you from your lord , and i will give you the sound of the dead , and in the life of the world to come , there is indeed a sign for you that you are certain of the signs of god . in that case , you are certain of the signs .
only those who believe in allah and the last day , and establish prayer , and pay the obligatory charity , and pay the zakat , and fear none except allah , may be among the guided .
and abraham instructed his sonsandjacob , : `` o my sons ! verily , allah has chosen for you the religion ; so die not except in islam . ''
and when he found a piece of the two hosts , he saw the two water to sink them out of their lands , and they said , “ what is the matter with you ? ” and they said , “ we are the heirs of our forefathers , and you said , “ we are just one of our own sake , so that you should say , ‘ we are just one of our forefathers . ” and they said , “ we are just a muslim . ”
and what will explain to thee what the night of power is ?
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
o ye who believe ! fulfil your offerings to your promise , and made lawful for you for you , and for you the cattle , which is not lawful for you , but allah is swift in all things .
indeed , those who reject our signs , and are arrogant , will not enter the gates of heaven , nor will they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we reward the guilty ones .
and david and solomon , when they gave judgement concerning the field , when the sheep of some people overran it , and we were witness to their judgement .
each man will have enough cares that day .
and when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be gloomy , and it will be said : 'this is what you were promised . '
let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite so that they may increase in sin .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed until after him ? do you not understand ?
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
he will send you abundant rain from the sky ,
so remind , for you are only a reminder .
whoever comeswith a good deed will have better than it , and they will be safe from the terror on that day .
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
on that day none will punish as he punishes ,
that day you will have no power to benefit or harm another , and we will say to those who did wrong : `` taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny . ''
we have put yokes round their necks up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
until , when he reached between two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
taste ! indeed , you are the mighty , the noble !
i will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides , then i will crucify you all . ''
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you out of darkness into light , and indeed allah is kind and merciful to you .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah ; ye have no god other than him . will ye not then fear ?
my lord , grant me wisdom , and join me with the righteous .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
i have put my trust in god , my lord and your lord . there is no living creature but he holds it by its forelock . indeed my lord is on the straight path .
o you who believe ! take your sons and your sons , and do not give your sons to you . and do not be of any use to them , except what you have done . and if you were unaware , do not have any knowledge of what you have done .
they wanted to harm him , but we made them the worst losers .
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
eat of the lawful and good things which allah has provided you . fear allah in whom you believe .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they will abide in allah 's mercy , and they will abide in it forever .
by the star when it goes down ,
he who will cause me to die and then revives me .
has the story of moses reached you ?
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of rectitude .
and as for those who are guided , he increases them in guidance and gives them their piety .
the freeing of a slave ,
and he found you wandering , and guided you ,
marked by your lord for the transgressors .
and it is naught but an admonition unto the worlds .
so he caused the heaven to grow in it , when he had established the heavens and the earth , and the earth , and the earth , and the earth , they said : `` obey ye what you have been avoiding ! ''
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them , and for the disbelievers is a thing comparable .
and a pure cup .
and those who are endowed with wealth and children will not be able to prevent the needy from the way of allah and the poor , but do not please allah ; let them forgive you ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we send not the angels down save with the truth , and then they shall not be respited .
every soul we have provided for all of them , and the parents of the parents and those who are with the parents , and those who are with your own hands , and those who are bent on the right and the account . god is well-aware of everything .
as for those who have knowledge and know that it is the truth of the lord of the truth . those who are with their lord will have their due faith . and allah is the guide of those who believe .
our lord ! make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous , their wives and their offspring , and thou art the mighty , the wise .
say : `` i am only a human being like you , but it is revealed to him that allah is one god . he is only one god . he who does so , does so for his deeds . ''
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , and he sent down tranquillity to them , and rewarded them with a near victory
they shall have coverings of fire above them and beneath them coverings . that is how allah frightens his servants , o my servants !
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after the proofhad come to them .
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we gave the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we bestowed upon them a great kingdom .
bring them back to me , and he began to stroke their shanks and necks .
do you not see how those who dispute the signs of allah are turned away ?
they said , “ you know well that we have no right to your daughters , and you know what we want . ”
the day when they shall come forth from the tombs in haste , as if they were hurrying unto a waymark ,
is thatbetter entertainment or the tree of zaqqum ?
and whoever turns to allah after they have believed , they will have the faith in their hearts , but those who disbelieve in their hearts are full of faith , but those who disbelieve will have the wrath of allah , and for them is a terrible punishment .
he said : did i not tell thee that thou wouldst not be able to bear with me patiently ?
without adding .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a terrible thing ,
then , after that , he has made the end of those who did not have to be a guardian of it , and a party of them who was bound to be a guarantor for it . and say to them : `` are we to be informed of what you had been doing ? '' say : `` if you were to keep your duty to allah , what you have been doing is indeed the best of those who have done what you had done . '' say , `` if only you had done what you
he will have no power or helper .
and you will not have any god besides allah , and you have no one to whom allah ’ s cause . and those who do not have faith in it , and do not approach the truth , it will be the same for those who will be punished .
he said : take hold of it and fear not ; we shall restore it to its former state .
then we pardoned you after that so that you might be grateful .
indeed , you are in different sayings ,
and we have created for them the like of it , in which they ride .
say , `` it is he who has multiplied you throughout the earth , and to him you will be gathered . ''
who believe in the unseen , establish prayer , and spend out of what we have provided for them .
fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is only for allah . and if they desist , allah sees the things they do .
and recall what time we delivered you from pharaoh 's folk , who were afflicting you with a dreadful torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women , and in that was a great trial from your lord .
on that day you will be exposed , and no secret of yours will remain hidden .
that was a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you will have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about their deeds .
all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , the sovereign , the all-holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and among the bedouins are those who consider what they spend as a loss , and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . theirs will be a misfortune of evil , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
he said : my lord knows what is spoken in the heavens and the earth , and he is the hearing , the knowing .
those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
nay , but ye call upon him , and he will remove that which ye call upon , if he will , and ye would forget that which ye associate .
and of his signs is that the heaven and the earth stand by his command ; then when he calls you , out of the earth , behold , you will come forth .
when you go to the hypocrites , they would call you to account . say , `` do not ask them for a thing , and do not ask them for a thing , and you will then be brought back to him who will be fully aware of what you do . ''
nay , but man desires to commit evil in front of him ,
woe to you !
among thornless lote-trees
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will not visit them , or the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things .
can not seduce away from him .
he said , `` do you believe in me before i have given you the permission ? '' indeed , moses is with you , and he will make you a severe thing . and i will certainly make you appear like a terrible thing .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his apostle have decreed a matter that they may have a matter , and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger , he is indeed a plain straying .
and you will not be among the cheats , the beloved of your people , and if you are in doubt of it , then do not be among the doubters . and if you are not of those who do wrong , then indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
have they not seen how allah originates creation , then repeats it ; surely that is easy for allah .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
they will eat from it , and fill their bellies with it .
wherein they will recline , and they will call for abundant fruit and drink .
until the day of the known time . ''
did i not make a covenant with you that you should not serve satan , for he is your sworn enemy ?
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and those who hold fast to the book and establish prayer , we shall not waste the reward of the righteous .
and this is what you have , and your fathers , and your fathers , the one to whom you have no more than the truth ; and allah has already come to the people of the book . they are the ones who are guided by their lord .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
and indeed they have enraged us .
they say , `` shall we be brought back to life again
“ this is indeed a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
these are the ones that are doomed to be shattered and all their works are vain .
they are the ones who are the ones to say , `` what ! what is the matter with them that you will have to be the ones to whom you have claimed ? '' say : `` the east and the west , will be the east and the west , '' and will guide him to a straight path .
then , they will return unto him , and say : lo ! we are the ones who have been sent down from thy lord . and thou wilt be of those who bear with us the wrath of thy lord ; and thou shalt have a guide for those who follow guidance .
tell them : `` i do not ask you any reward for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ''
and those who , when wronged , defend themselves .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day they are raised .
they said , turning towards them , `` what is it that you miss ? ''
so proclaim what you are commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
again , you will soon know .
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
and if you call them to guidance , they do not hear ; and you see them looking at you , but they see not .
which he gulps and will hardly swallow , and death will come to him from every side , but death will come to him from every side , yet he will not die .
and your lord do not serve any other than that , and you have the knowledge of the eye of your parents and your mother . when some of them went forth , they would have been told , `` and do not speak with them in the least , and do not speak with them . ''
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
was he not a drop of ejaculated semen ?
he it is who sendeth down the winds , and he sendeth forth from it a temptation ; and he sendeth down the clouds in the midst of the heaven , and he will make the earth fairseeming unto them , and they shall be happy .
he said , “ you know that none have sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and i think that you are doomed to perdition . ”
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah , and denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not in hell a home for the disbelievers ?
so we answered him , and removed the affliction that is upon him , and we gave himhis family and the like of them with them as a mercy from us , and a reminder for the worshippers .
indeed , allah has promised to you the promise that he had made to you ; and the word of allah is true , and to him you will be turned back , so that he may make you be a trial for them , and that he may give you a good things , and will be given to you a thing , so that he may be of the believers , and he will have to be a trial for you . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and we sent down water from the sky according to its measure , and we have made it in the earth , and we are able to take it away .
say : 'call on those whom you assert besides him , they have no power to harm you , nor to transfer it .
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them from sticky clay .
and when they are called to allah and his messenger so that he may judge between them , a party of them turn away .
and the sea kept filled ,
and whoever allah guides , for him is the guidance , and whoever takes for himself , then you will find no one to help him except him , and they will be the fire of hell , and they shall be brought into the fire , and they will be the losers .
and what is your substance which you have a child or the children of old ? then you will turn them away , and if they are given their sins , then leave them for a good , then you shall be left in repentance .
those who have purchased disbelief in exchange of faith will not harm allah in the least , and they will have a painful punishment .
and otherof the kind in pairs !
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you as they swear to you . indeed , they are the liars .
whatever misfortune befalls you is because of what your hands have earned , and he pardons much .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising on a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
that is the extent of their knowledge . indeed your lord knows best those who stray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have made it clear to people in the book . they will be condemned by god .
they are the ones who have the power to do so , and they say : `` listen to every person . '' say : `` listen to every person who will say , `` listen to your lord . '' say , `` then do not believe in allah , and those who are a grievous penalty . ''
except for those who repent before you have control over them . know that allah is forgiving , merciful .
and of that which is not for one of them is a portion of that which is in the name of allah . verily , the devils are to know that the devils do not listen to you . and if you do so , the devils would know that you have been commanded .
to you your religion , and to me my religion . ''
your lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they reveal .
there they will have whatever they wish , and with us is more .
and when he reached his maturity , and became firm , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the virtuous .
they will say : `` nay , you yourselves were not believers .
indeed those whom you call upon besides allah are creatures like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if you are truthful .
nay , every one of them desires to be given scrolls unrolled .
thus we have sent it down as a dispensation in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge of the knowledge has come to you , you will have no protector or a defender against god .
and the roasting in hell .
your lord is self-sufficient , full of mercy . if he wills , he can take you away , and take whomever he wishes to succeed you , as he raised you from the seed of another people .
a fitting reward .
o you who believe ! if you obey those who disbelieve , they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn back losers .
when a woman was killed , he said , `` will you take me to help you ? you will have no one to help me with your own hands , so that you will have your own hands , so that you will have a clear trial for the people . ''
if good befalls you , it is likely that he may grieve them . but if a misfortune befalls you , they would be happy for it . but if you were to be patient , it would have been decided for you . and if you are patient , god is watchful over all things .
and the morning when it shines ,
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter , for them we have prepared a painful punishment .
well-pleased with their endeavour ,
but satan whispered to him saying : o adam ! shall i direct thee to the tree of eternity and a kingdom that decays not ?
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
then as for him who transgressed
and establish prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants that if we willed , we could afflict them for their sins , and seal their hearts so that they hear not ?
'adbelied the messengers .
and follow the truth with allah , and do not ascribe to him any partner . and do not ascribe any partner to allah , as he has set a single partner on him . and he who ascribes partners to allah , he has made a great one of a heap of delicious water .
and allah has made for you your wealth for your patience , and your feet , and they will not be able to go on to you , nor can they go to you , nor can they turn away from your homes , and you will not be able to give them any sense .
and allah said : `` o adam ! tell them the story of them . '' when he came to them , he said : `` did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and that i know what you conceal and what you reveal ? ''
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say , “ god. ” how then are they turned away ?
and when he has given you the good news that he may be with them , in order that he may be sent down upon you from the sky , in order that he may send down upon you a cloud from the sky , and from the sky , that none may be able to take you away from the sky , nor will he be able to hide it .
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
say , “ who delivers you from the darkness of the land and the sea ? ” you call upon him humbly and secretly , and if he delivers us from this , we will surely be among the thankful . ”
he said , “ and who despairs of the mercy of his lord except the astray ? ”
and for their taking usury , which they had been forbidden , and their consuming of the people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the unbelievers a painful punishment .
engulfing the people . this will be a painful punishment .
so they departed , whispering to one another :
and on the day when he will see what he has done , he will see what he has done between him and the guilty . and the evil one between them , and allah will bring to you a good way , and allah is the most kind and merciful .
and neverpray for one of them who dies , nor stand by his grave . indeed , they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were fasiqun .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and formed you , and to him is the return .
he created man from a drop of fluid , but he is an open contender .
they will be given their reward twice , for they are patient , and repel evil with good , and spend out of what we have provided them .
it is not in your fancies , nor the vain desires of the people of the book . whoever commits evil will be requited accordingly . and he will not find besides allah any protector or helper .
but only as a reminder for him who fears .
have you not seen how your lord extends the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant . then we made the sun a pointer to it .
and peace be on the messengers .
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? nay , but they are the unjust .
how many generations have we destroyed after noah ! your lord is sufficient as knower and beholder of the sins of his servants .
so he followed a way
then he said to his people , “ o my people , do not despair about it , except what your promise has been done , or what did you make a covenant , or do you have a pledge from your lord ? and you did not have the right to see . ”
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
but those who disbelieve and belie our revelations are the inmates of hell .
so this day we shall deliver you , so that you may be a sign for those after you . indeed , many people are heedless of our signs .
of the scriptures of the book , then do not exchange the flesh of allah , to his mercy ; and the grace of allah will be his mercy ; and he is a great grace .
and the sun runs its course for its appointed time ; that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
we shall bring a witness from every nation , so that people will say , `` bring you your evidence , and you will be told , `` do not see what you have been doing , and what is with allah is the truth , and what they used to do is in the end , and what they used to do is null .
a party he has guided , and a group deservederror . indeed , they took the shayatinas auliya'instead of allah , and think that they are guided .
~then he said : this is naught but enchantment , narrated ;
and they say , “ when we have mingled into the earth , shall we be created anew ? ” in fact , they deny the meeting with their lord .
o you who believe ! when you are engaged in the land , do not make fun of the people who are in their ears , and make a breach with it . and he who does not give the lie to the truth , he will have the means of god to please him , and he is the most gracious , the most munificent .
what , when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up ?
and our command is but one , like the twinkling of an eye .
or have they the treasures of your lord , or are they the controllers ?
so ask them whether your lord has daughters and they have sons .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner ; to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he said , “ allah will bring it down upon you , if he wills , and you will not be able to escape . ”
and be thou not a judgment of that which is revealed unto thee from allah , and follow thou not their judgment ; and be thou wont to be of those who go aright , and that allah may make an end of them , and lo ! most of mankind are ungrateful .
have you not regarded that allah will teach you the quran , and he will call to them with one another ? then you will see those who are like the mountains , and he will make them void .
do not move your tongue with itto hasten it .
or its water will sink into the ground so that you will never be able to find it . ''
and say , “ my lord , i seek refuge in you from the instigation of the devils . ”
indeed , those who disbelieve and do wrong , allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to any way .
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the signs of allah while you witness ?
it left nothing that it came upon , but made it like decayed bones .
he will say , `` how many years did you stay on earth ? ''
they say , `` shall we be brought back to life again
nor shade and heat of sunshine .
i will certainly punish him severely or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason . ''
o you who believe ! take your religion to the religion , and accept the repentance of allah , and he will admit him to the right way , and he will not be able to make a testament with him , and who will not be able to make a testament in the way of allah , and who will not be able to make a testament in the way of allah , and who will not be able to make the path of allah , and he is the embracer , the knower .
and remember our servant job , when he called to his lord , “ satan has afflicted me with hardship and suffering . ”
and they said : shall we follow a mortal from among ourselves ? then we shall surely be in error and madness .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they behaved arrogantly .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and made the day for rising .
what , even if we give the trust to the lord of the throne , he is the one who has guided us to the right path , and the right path , and the right path , and in god let those who have been patient .
say , `` if you love god , follow me , god will love you and forgive you your sins . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful . ''
say : `` whatever reward i have asked of you is yours . my reward is only from allah , and he is witness over all things . ''
and when your lord said to the angels : `` i am going to create a human being from ringing clay of loam moulded .
then it will be said to them : 'where are those whom you associated ,
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and formed you , and to him is the return .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
those who fear their lord in secret and dread the hour .
and our armies will be the victors .
and these towns—we destroyed them when they did wrong , and we appointed a fixed time for their destruction .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take full measure ,
it is god who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and do not walk with him . if you are so able , there can be no one to help them , nor can they be ever patient .
surely he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and is a matter of nature , and i am not of the idolaters .
and that is a messenger from allah and his apostle , and the people of the day when allah and his apostle shall be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity , and if ye turn away , then verily , ye will have a grievous chastisement .
indeed the punishment of their lord is not a thing to be unafraid of ,
and say , “ my lord , cause me to enter a beautiful entrance , and exit with the truth , and give me from yourself a helpful authority . ”
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
all that is on itwill perish .
and the signs of allah is that thou mayest make the earth a earth for thee ; and we shall make them taste of it , and he will make the dead grow . lo ! he is able to do all things .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
he gives wisdom to whom he will , and whoever is given wisdom has been given abundant good . but none remembers but men of understanding .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you as they swear to you . indeed , they are the liars .
“ this is indeed a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that the way of the sinners may become distinct .
or do you have a clear authority ?
their eyes humbled .
each soul will come with a driver and a witness .
for a known calculated term .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives their sins , and knows what you do .
we were promised this before.these are nothing but myths of the ancients . ''
enter thou among my bondmen !
and he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
and if they were to marry a marriage , they would have made you a thing , while it had been a thing for you ; and they have a portion for you , but they are not aware of what is in your breasts , except for the sake of allah , who is better in respect of you , or do not be among the doubters .
it was revealed to noah : `` none of your people will believe except those who have already believed . do not grieve for what they have believed . ''
in the scriptures of the ancients .
allah has given the grace of his messenger to the people of the land , and the people of the cities , that he has already decreed a matter for the prophet , and that you may be given a share of the land , and have fear of the law of god , and have fear of god . god is swift in retribution .
and we are not going to be tormented .
and his wife , the wood-carrier ,
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and to samood , their tribe , their descendants , their descendants , salih , saying : `` o my people , do not serve god , for you have no other god except him . and he will ask them for all that you have done . '' so he will ask , `` i have been commanded to do so . my lord is quick to do so . ''
say : `` have you considered what you attribute to allah , and what you associate with him ? '' have you been of those who follow the heavens and the earth , in the creation of the heavens and the earth ? rather , it is a promise for one who does not wrong .
say , `` my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death , arefor allah , the cherisher of the worlds ,
and those who do not believe in the hereafter hasten it to them , and they say : `` when will this promise come to pass ? '' but those who believe in the hereafter will be in clear error , and indeed , those who believe in the hereafter are in clear error .
and indeed allah helped you at badr when you were weak . so fear allah , so that you may give thanks .
no indeed ! the record of the righteous is in 'illiyyun .
and the messenger of their lord has come to believe in his lord and the angels and his messengers , and they will not have any faith in allah and his messengers , and they said , “ submit to your lord , and submit to you , and to you will be turned back . ”
o mankind ! there has come to you a messenger from your lord . so believe in him , and believe in him ; and if you do not believe in the heavens and the earth , surely allah is knowing , wise .
and indeed the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of allah .
he said , “ do not fear , i am with you , and i hear and see . ”
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them ? they will not return to them .
and thy lord cometh , and the angels , rank on rank ,
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden veil between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
but whoever brings forth the cause of allah in the earth , he will assign it to himself for his own good , and he will have a provision for his own good , and he will not be able to die , nor will he be able to die , nor will he be able to die , nor will he be able to die . and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
they said : `` thus says your lord . he is the wise , the knower . ''
o mankind ! fear allah , and keep your duty to him . he has created you from the one who has created , and in the breasts of the women , and your females , and keep your duty to allah . indeed , allah is powerful over you .
moses said : `` o my people ! if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims . ''
who set up another god with god . they will soon come to know .
and i am devising guile .
god is gracious to his servants . he provides for whomever he wills . he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , the reward of an evil deed will be repaid only for what they used to do .
they said , “ we have been persecuted before you came to us , and after you came to us . he said , “ perhaps your lord will destroy your enemy and make you successors in the land , so he will see what you act . ”
the son of mary said : `` o jesus , son of mary ! i have been commanded to bring you the angels , when i have been sent by the angels , and the torah and the gospel , '' and they said , “ this is nothing but a magic which i have been sent with , and when i came with the angels , and the torah and the gospel , and i made no one of them as a witness . and we seized them with the command of my people , and they remained in
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made them a renown lofty .
and treasures and a noble station .
and zachariah , when he cried unto his lord : o my lord ! leave me not childless , though thou art the best of inheritors .
and when abraham and ishmael were raising the foundations of the house , , `` our lord ! acceptfrom us . indeed , you are the all-hearer , the all-knower .
these are they who have lost their souls , and what they forged has gone astray from them .
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is seer of what ye do .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an offense—god is pardoning and capable .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
if you are patient , god is well aware of all that you have done in the past . but when you are attacked , they will be told , `` the believers will be in your own hands . '' so , when you are united , they will be told , `` the believers are the ones who are united . so let the believers take you away . ''
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , and behold , you are humans scattering !
they will ask you about the hour . say , `` it is only the knowledge of my lord . '' say , `` the knowledge of the matter is with my lord , when he has no knowledge of the hour , and the extent of the day of judgment will not be accepted from you , but you will have the knowledge of the life of the world . but most people do not know .
we know that what they say grieves you . indeed , they do not deny you , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
and the mountains as pegs ?
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
when one of them is given the glad tidings of the birth of what he attributes to the most merciful , his face darkens and he chokes inwardly .
say : o unbelievers !
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . indeed in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
certainly our word has already gone forth for our servants , the messengers .
who bringeth forth the pasturage ,
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
and the believing men and the believing women , and do not believe in it , those who are faithful will be among the believers , and you will make a happy way to the people who do so , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the truth , and make clear to the people who do so , and in order that he may make clear to the people of the truth , and make clear to the people who do so , and in order that he may make clear to the
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his slaves , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in measure whatever he wills . verily , he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his servants .
in a clear arabic language .
so set your face towards the religion of allah , the religion of allah , which he has created for you . there is no changing the creation of allah . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
if only we could return , we would be among the believers . ''
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has exalted you above all beings ?
o you who have believed , if you have tarried in a certain period of time , then do not let the account of a known thing , and let them hear the matter of allah , and , in respect of that which is in your hands , do not be with those who are with you , and , in order that he may make clear to you what is in the hands of god , and do not be among the ignorant .
say : `` verily , my lord is the evil of those who are near that which is with those who conceal the truth and forbid what is with him , and of a party of them do not desire , nor can they have any knowledge .
by the witness and the witnessed ,
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
it left nothing that it came upon , but made it like decayed bones .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and whenever a surah is sent down , they look at each other : `` can anyone see you ? '' then they turn away . allah has turned away their hearts , for they are a people who do not understand .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already occurred . indeed , it is a shameful deed , and an evil way .
and when you have forbidden them , you will say , `` your daughters are the women . your daughters will be your daughters , and the united among you is the same , and the united among you is the same , and the united among you will be among the two . '' the teacher is most forgiving and most merciful .
and vie with your lord for forgiveness from your lord , and they will be brought back to the gardens of the earth , wherein they will be brought forth as the heavens and the earth , in which he is a great bounty .
how do you say , `` abraham and isaac , and jacob ? '' say , `` will you know what is the witness of the truth ? '' but who is more unjust than him who is a witness , and god is unaware of what you do ?
and they worship besides allah that which does not control for them any sustenance from the heavens or the earth , nor can they have any power .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you will know who are the people of the right path , and who is guided . '
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every obstinate tyrant .
so it was . we were fully aware of whateverhe possessed .
wavering between the two , neither to these nor to those whom allah sends astray . you will not find a way for him .
and much booty that they will capture . allah is mighty , wise .
again , what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
nay ! but their hearts are stained from their hearts .
his command , when he wills a thing , is to say to it 'be , ' and it is .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
perish man ! how unthankful he is !
and we cast the children of israel in the sea after it had come to them , and they began to say , `` o moses , do not be like those who have been raised up , '' they said , `` o moses , you have been people that are people of people who do not know .
my protector is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
and the meat of the figure is that he will speak to you , and the piety of allah will not be accepted , and it is in order that you may make it seem fair to you , and in order that you may make a happy end , and to the righteous .
god explains his revelations to you . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
outcast , and theirs is a constanttorment .
moses said , `` i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning . ''
and shun uncleanness ,
and they will turn to one another , questioning each other .
nay ! when the earth is ground to powder ,
call upon your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
it is he who made you successors on earth , and those who disbelieve in the earth , for those who disbelieve will not be denied with their lord , except those who deny the truth , and will have no more than the disbelievers .
who spread corruption in the land and rectify not .
it is allah who will resurrect them all . he is the one who will call to account , and to whom belongs the matter of allah . and he who does not promise his promise , is indeed a sign for a while . in that are signs for a people who understand .
he said : `` then shall i not be cast down , when i have made a covenant with me , but it is not for you to make a covenant with me , but when the covenant will be made to you , he said , `` allah is well aware of that which we have covenanted with him , and when we made a covenant with him . ''
then , on that day , the two of them will be made to do so , and he has made for him the two of the two sides . and he is the one who will take it away . indeed , the punishment of allah is severe .
and you are a lodger in this city .
to bring to you every skillful magician . ''
and do not be reluctant in a revelation from your lord , and most surely he has sent down to you a thing from your lord , and he will make grief to the disbelievers .
but they denied him , so they will surely be brought forth .
return unto thy lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing !
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you , `` i will aid you with a thousand angels in a file . ''
is he whose breast allah has expanded to islam , so that he is a light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
and assuredly we covenanted with adam aforetime , but he forgat , and we found not in him steadiness .
and the people of the fire will be called to their lord , and , `` our lord , give us a little , and we will have the reward of those who do good . '' but they will not be able to do so , but it will be said , “ do you not taste the punishment of the fire ? ” so it will be said , “ do you taste the punishment of hell ? ”
do they say , “ he has fabricated it ” ? say , “ then bring a surah like it , and call upon whomever you can besides allah , if you are truthful . ”
he had warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
like the fate of the people of noah , ad , thamud , and those after them . god does not desire injustice forservants ;
we tested the people of pharaoh before them , and a noble messenger came to them .
how can there be a reminder for them , when a clear messenger had already come to them ,
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
have you seen how god has made for you all that is in the earth , and the ships in the sea , the ships on the earth will be made to sail on the earth ? god is kind and kind .
these are the verses of the clear book .
and to us belong the last and the first .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
on that day man will say , `` where is theescape ? ''
but as for the compromisers—they will be firewood for hell .
and the mountains as pegs ?
for the taming of qureysh .
and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and ignore their annoying talk . put your trust in allah , and sufficient is allah as a wakil .
it is he who produced you from a single person , then a repository , and a repository . we have detailed our signs for a people who understand .
say , `` is this better or the garden of eternity which has been promised to the righteous ? it is their reward and their destination .
say : `` do you teach allah your religion , when allah knows all whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ? and allah has knowledge of all things . ''
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you , `` i will aid you with a thousand angels in a file . ''
by the snorting courses ,
he whom he wills , will guide them to the right path , and he whom allah willeth , he sendeth astray whomsoever he will ; and that is in the heaven , and that allah will set forth for those who believe in the heaven , and that it is allah who hath set up the hearts of those who believe not .
and the sea kept filled ,
or say when it sees the torment : `` if only i had a second chance , i would surely be among the doers of good . ''
a warning to mankind ,
and after them , we made a new generation among them , and made them inherit it . and they will come to pass in the way of this world , and they shall have the best of the hereafter . what , do they have the law of the world , and that which they have been doing ?
in paradise you will neither be hungry nor naked therein .
moses said , `` aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
indeed , you love the likes of yourselves , but they do not consent to you ; but they do not like you ; and when they are alone , they will say , ‘ we are indeed believers in the hearts of allah ; and when you are alone , they will say , ‘ indeed allah is well aware of what is in the breasts . ’
and the leaders of lot went forth , saying , `` be patient , and be patient in your gods . indeed , this is a thing designed .
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
and say , “ my lord , i seek refuge in you from the instigation of the devils . ”
indeed allah enjoins justice and kindness , and generosity to relatives , and he forbids indecency , indecency , and rebellion , and rebellion . he advises you so that you may take heed .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , and the people of pharaoh were encompassed by a dreadful punishment .
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him and they neglect not .
the indubitable event !
and the ark sailed with them amid waves like mountains ; and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself , `` o my son ! embark with us , and do not be with the unbelievers . ''
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , as a believer , he is a believer , and the effort of effort .
so leave them in their perplexity for a time .
and those who race in a race ,
so taste , for you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . we have forgotten you . taste the punishment for what you used to do .
i will roast him in saqar .
and those who emigrated in allah ’ s cause after they were oppressed , we shall surely settle them in the world , and indeed the reward of the hereafter is greater , if they but knew .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things .
for them is glad tidings in the life of this world and in the hereafter . the words of allah will not change . that is the supreme triumph .
surely your lord is ever watchful .
when they entered into his presence , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he answered , ‘ peace ! ’
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not other than him . little do you remember .
and when ye go to death , they take it in a handsome manner . if they were to do good , they would say : this is from allah , if ye are ill .
say , `` whoever is an enemy to gabriel , '' he has brought it down by god 's permission , confirming what wasbefore it , and a guidance and glad tidings to believers .
until you visit the graves .
and to warn those who say , `` allah has begotten a son . ''
and our lord ! we have called unto the twain saying : believe in thy lord , and we believe in thy lord , and lo ! we believe in thy lord , and make us taste , and we shall make them die .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
those who follow the book of the book , those who are given the book are recorded in the book , and their duty is to do good , and their duty is to do good , and their duty is to keep their duty to god , and those who have faith and follow the right path , and those who have faith and follow the right path , they will have the blissful conquest .
and we had already forbidden to him before , so his sister said : shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
then we made you successors in the earth after them , so that we might see how you behaved .
we revealed to moses and his brother , ‘ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ’
they were guided to purity of speech , and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
some of them look in their language , but they say , `` it is only allah who has sent down the book . '' and that they may be aware of it , and they will say , `` it is allah who has sent down the book , and that which they fabricate . ''
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
what ! do you enjoin people to do good , and forget yourselves while you read the book ? do you not understand ?
on the day when the sky will be like molten brass ,
thereinwill be fairgood and beautiful .
but if they turn away , thy dutyis but plain conveyance .
and of their wives is that . this is our lord , the most gracious , the most gracious , the most praiseworthy .
and save them from the evil consequences . and whomever you protect from evil , on that day , you have made mercy to him . that is the supreme triumph .
and we saved them and their people from the great distress ,
how will it be when the angels take them at death , beating their faces and their backs ?
and they said , “ our lord , forgive us our sins and our excesses in our affairs , and make us steadfast , and help us against the disbelieving people . ”
and when your lord announced that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with suffering , surely your lord is swift in chastising ; and indeed , your lord is swift in retribution .
they say : `` o you who have been sent down , you are indeed insane .
these are the unbelievers , the libertines .
that was a nation that has passed away . they will have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you will not be questioned about what they used to do .
it is he who sends down the rain from the sky , and we will bring it to him . and we will make it a dense beacon for it .
and he bears witness to that .
and a multitude of thosewill be from the later times .
the likeness of those who take protectors besides allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes a house . indeed , the frailest of houses is the spider 's house , if they but knew .
he would have led us astray from our gods , if we had not been steadfast to them . they will know , when they see the punishment , who is further astray from the path .
then he called upon his lord , “ these are a guilty people . ”
do not exalt yourselves against god . i come to you with clear authority .
and to allah belong the truth , and those who invoke anything besides him , will be told , `` woe to him ! '' and he will not be able to bring to them any one except as a single soul , and it is not for the disbelievers .
we created them not except with truth , but most of them do not know .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
say : `` allah delivers you from them and from every distress , but you associate others with him . ''
who seeth thee when thou standest up
who set up another god with god . they will soon come to know .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in manifest error .
and among his signs are the ships in the sea like mountains .
they said , “ pray to your lord to make it clear to us , and he said , “ allah says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says , “ he says she is neither too old nor too young , but do so . ”
and if they incline to peace , then incline towards it , and put your trust in allah . indeed , he is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
and we have sent down to you a reminder from you , and a mercy from it , and a mercy for the believers , and it is no more than a benefit for the believers .
and when they are reminded , they pay no attention .
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
and we shall make all that is on it a barren plain .
a party of the people of the book would fain lead you astray , while they lead you astray , and they perceive not .
in whatever matter you differ about , the judgement rests with allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
and for those who answer their lord , for him is joy , and for those who follow their prayers ; and those who are with their own souls , they will have their lodging , and they shall have their abode in the ultimate abode .
except for those who repent before you have control over them . know that allah is forgiving , merciful .
say : `` the angel of death , who has been given charge of you will gather you , then to your lord you will be returned . ''
if you have any ploy , try it against me .
immortal youths will go about them , when you see them , you will think them scattered pearls .
and they denied them , though in spite of pride and pride , and their hearts were convinced . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
and let them respond to me , and let them respond to me , and i am near .
we have made it an arabic quran so that you may understand .
the revelation of this book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
then the one of the earth will be told , `` let you go to the day of the earth , to be sure to be cast into the midst of the heavens and the earth . '' so let them take you away , and the ships will sail at the sea , and the ships will sail at the sea .
sovereign of the day of recompense .
you can not escape in the earth , and you have no protector or helper besides god .
said , `` if you take any god other than me , i will surely put you in prison . ''
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
and he said , “ i swear by allah that if he had come to you , then indeed , the proof is only with allah . ” say , “ only the sign of allah is only with allah , and you will not be able to do so . ”
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord . you have ruined yourselves , and you became among the losers . ''
and indeed , they had no faith in it , when our punishment are recited to them , and they will believe in it , and they will believe in allah , and they will have no doubt of his servants , and they will have a loss .
he said , “ so it is . your lord says , “ it is easy for me , whereas i created you before , when you were nothing . ”
we have explained in this quran in various ways , that they may remember , but it increases them only in aversion .
say : `` tell me , what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you , if it is that the message of allah is recited to him , and that which is with her , is the witness of the witness of the witness , which is the witness of the torah and the gospel ? and indeed , allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : did we bar you from the guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but you were guilty .
who set up another god with allah , so cast him into the severe punishment .
he said , “ we will punish him who does wrong . then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him severely . ”
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
and the women of your women , and your family , and follow the words of allah , and follow them , and in the same way , you will be made to go forth . and you will be among those who keep your duty to allah and keep your duty to allah , and do good .
they said : `` woe to us ! we were indeed unjust . ''
moses said : `` even if i bring you something manifest ? ''
will be gathered together for the appointment of a known day .
those who have purchased disbelief in exchange of faith will not harm allah in the least , and they will have a painful punishment .
so he has no friend here today ,
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah is the destination .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you , `` i will aid you with a thousand angels in a file . ''
my protector is god who sent down the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
he placed firm mountains on it above it , and blessed it , and measured therein its sustenance in four days , equally for all seekers .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . now away with ad , the people of hud !
allah ! there is no god but he . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . and who is truer in statement than allah ?
you are but a warner .
surely what you are promised will come to pass .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : `` if allah finds any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful . ''
and who is better in religion than he who submits himself wholly to allah , and follows the religion of ibrahim , and follows the religion of ibrahim , the upright , the upright ?
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs . they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
when there will be a person among them , they will be afraid of it , and if it had not been that they would not be grieved , it would have been decided for them , and it would have been decided for them , and they will be told , `` it was not for a way to allah , nor to his mercy ; and if you were to be given to the mercy of allah , he would certainly have guided you only for a while . ''
this is for what your hands have sent forthand because allah is not unjust to his servants . ''
fight them until there is no dissension , and the religion is only for allah . if they desist , then there is no hostility except against the oppressors .
and say to them : `` it is only for me to be given to them , but only that which allah wills , for the sake of allah , to whom allah wills . and when he decrees a term , then , when he has appointed a term , they will come to light .
and when they are , they say : `` we have been sent to our fathers . '' and say : `` verily , allah has not been able to do wrong . '' say , `` indeed , allah does not confer a thing to do what he did . ''
but they turned away . so we sent upon them a flood from the dam and replaced them with two gardens bearing bitter fruit , tamarisks , and a few lote-trees .
if you disbelieve , how will you guard yourselves against the day that will make children grey-headed ?
and because of the children of israel , we made a covenant with them , and with their hearts , and their hearts were hardened , and they will not be able to take a part of that which is a reminder for them , and you will see them in a part of that which they have been exhorted ; and indeed , allah loves those who do good .
and in the way of allah , strive for the cause of allah in the way of allah , for which he is exalted in respect of his cause , and for him is he who has chosen you , and in order to make it a witness , and in allah 's book , and in order that he may be a guardian over you . and in allah 's book is a protector , and an excellent friend .
and leg is intertwined with leg ,
fear him who created you and the earlier generations . ''
on that day man will be informed of what he sent ahead and left behind .
do they not see how the shadows which allah has created for the right and the left , prostrating themselves on the right and the left , prostrating themselves before allah ?
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ”
and whatever you give in usury , that it may increase the wealth of men , does not increase the wealth with allah . and whoever gives the zakat , seeking the countenance of allah , those are the multipliers .
verily we ! we revealed thison the night of power .
and of them are some who look at you , so can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
he said , “ my lord , appoint for me my family that my family should be my family , and allah said , ‘ this is what you did not speak to the people , and glorify the purity of your lord morning and evening . ’
if only the unbelievers knewwhen they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces nor from their backs , nor will they be helped .
and those who guard their private parts
or lest you should say , `` if only we had sent it down , we would certainly have been better than our lord . '' indeed , you have received the clear evidence from your lord , and we seized them with a painful punishment , and we seized them with a painful punishment . and we seized them with a painful punishment , and a painful punishment .
bananatrees , piled
then when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down in prostration to him .
and we saved those who believed and were godfearing .
o you who believe ! bow down and prostrate yourselves , and worship your lord , and do good , that you may succeed .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of those who denied .
so when the promise of the first came to pass , we sent against you our servants of great might , and they entered the cities , and it was a promise to be fulfilled .
eat of the good things which we have provided for the righteous , and that it may be that my wrath will be made to me , and that my wrath will be made to me , and that which i have put back .
and we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet , a prophet .
o you who believe ! shall i show you a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment ?
lo ! the worst of beasts in allah 's sight are those who disbelieve , and they will not believe .
verily the god-fearing shall be amid shades and fountains ,
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of hell , and you will find no helper for them .
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we delivered at dawn
o prophet ! for what has been revealed to you that we should have sent you what has been revealed to you , and we bring you to the market ones , and if you are one of those who associate others with allah in his divinity .
and the heaven and the earth wept not for them , nor were they respited .
thus do we make for you a prophet from among the jinn and the jinn , and the word of old will be said to them : `` if only your lord had made them go astray , so leave them alone , so that they should be a liar . ''
do you think he is onguidance ?
they said , “ it is the same to us whether you exhort us or not ,
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of those who were before . most of them were idolaters .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and he brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it was dead . likewise will you be brought forth .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and come to you , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
it is a written record .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
so he will have a pleasant life ,
storming into the midst .
and what shall teach thee what is illiyun ?
when the wife of 'imran said : `` o my lord ! verily , i vow to you what is in my womb , in my belly , so accept this from me . indeed , you are the hearing , the knowing . ''
which neither nourishes nor avails against hunger .
so that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness and punish the hypocrites if he wills , or accept their repentance . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
they are the ones who are the ones to say , `` what ! what is the matter with them that you will have to be the ones to whom you have claimed ? '' say : `` the east and the west , will be the east and the west , '' and will guide him to a straight path .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret and the most hidden .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe in the similitude of the wife of fir'awn , when he said unto those who believe : o my lord ! build for me a house in paradise and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from the harmdoing nation .
they shall have the gardens of eden , wherein streams flow , and they built it with bracelets of gold , and they will be adorned with fine brocade , and they will be adorned with a beautiful abode .
knower of the unseen and the seen , the mighty , the wise .
and the heaven will be opened , and become gates ,
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
and when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they prostrated , except iblis ; he refused and acted arrogantly and he was one of the faithless .
indeed those whom you call upon besides allah are creatures like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if you are truthful .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
that he may make clear to them what they differed about , and that those who disbelieve may know that they were liars .
none dispute concerning the signs of allah except those who disbelieve , so let not their strutting about in the land delude thee .
it is not allah who has a son . he has no god but he . he is the one god , and he has made the high one of them , and exalted is he above all that they do .
when it was said to them , `` there is no god but god , '' they were arrogant
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
and among the people of the book were some of the people of the book , that if a reasonable thing is given to any of them , it will be an emotional deed , and some of them who say , `` let you be among the people of the book , who will be called to witness , and they will think that they have been fabricating by god .
a host routed out among the factions .
nor did we feed the poor .
they await only a single scream , which there will be no delay .
they will bear their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge . evil is what they bear !
indeed those who give the purity to men and women , and those who lend a goodly loan to allah , will have double it and will receive a generous reward .
and when he has given you the good news that he may be with them , in order that he may be sent down upon you from the sky , in order that he may send down upon you a cloud from the sky , and from the sky , that none may be able to take you away from the sky , nor will he be able to hide it .
and those who arrangematter ,
on the day when the earth and the mountains will quake , and the mountains will become heaps of sand .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you , `` i will aid you with a thousand angels in a file . ''
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
on the day when the earth and the mountains will quake , and the mountains will become heaps of sand .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
but they were not sent to be keepers over them .
and it is allah who sends the winds , so they raise the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land . and we revive the earth after its death , even so will be the resurrection .
filling your bellies with it ,
and take your hand in your hand , and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . indeed , we found him steadfast .
the companions of the fire will call to the dwellers of the garden , `` pour some water from us or some of what allah has provided you . '' they will say , `` indeed , allah has forbidden them to the unbelievers . ''
and guided them to a straight path .
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may prosper .
and assuredly we sent apostles before thee among the factions of the ancients .
so he threw it down , and behold , it was a snake , moving swiftly .
as for the thief , male and female , cut off the hands of their male and female , as a recompense for what they did . god is all-mighty and all-wise .
and fear a affliction which will not smite those who do wrong , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
say , `` o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is the earth , and the earth is spacious . indeed , the patient will be rewarded by their lord . ''
will you be left secure in that which is here
do you call upon ba ' l and forsake the best of creators ,
when he called to his lord in secret ,
and indeed we will make them taste of the nearer chastisement before the greater punishment , so that they may return .
they said , “ we swear to one another by night , that we may kill him by night and his family , and then we will say to his heir , “ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are truthful . ”
who belieth and turneth away .
and we delivered moses and those with him , all together .
surely on that day their lord will be fully aware of them ?
indeed , this is our provision , inexhaustible .
it is only a revelation revealed ,
o you who believe ! obey allah and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
when we sent the book to guidance , we have given them the book , and the messengers who were upright , and the noble messengers will be given to those who were given the book and do not have any knowledge of the law of god . god is unaware of what he has commanded to do .
it is we who have created the human being with the right hand , and if they were to make you go forth , then do not yield to them , and do not listen to me . and to me you do not know .
knower of the unseen and the seen , the great , the exalted .
if we will , we would have revealed to you what is revealed to you , and then you will find none to help them . you will find no help for them .
why do the rabbis and the priests not forbid them from speaking sinfully and from consuming illicit gains ? evil is what they have been working .
and the people of noah before ; indeed they were a transgressing lot .
have they mercy on your lord , while we have given them a provision , and we have given them a measure in the life of this world and in the world to come , they will be given to each other in the life of the world ? and they will have a great favour from the lord .
on the day when the punishment shall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
he said : `` o my dear self ! indeed , you have done what is done by your own soul , and the same by your own soul , and the same was the same for those who have faith , and do not plead with one another for the other , but those who have faith and do good will be rewarded by the lord of the universe .
and then they came to the people from the place of a town , but they did not see them , but they did not see them , but they began to make a part of it ; and he said , “ if we are waiting for this , then i will be responsible for this . ”
then we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
and the people of midian . and moses was denied . but i gave the disbelievers respite , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and that to your lord is the goal-
say , `` it is a great prophesy ,
then he turned back and was proud .
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil . ”
abraham was a nation , obedient to god , a hanif , and he was not a pagan .
and if we willed , we would have made them go forth from your land , and were not among the ones to drive you out of the land except a little , but if they were to do so , we would surely have been better for them , and the last day was better .
and that it is he who created the two kinds—the male and the female ,
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour upon you when a people determined to stretch out their hands against you , and he withheld their hands from you , and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but will come to the most merciful as a servant .
“ this is what you were promised—for every careful penitent .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth , so that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
glory be to your lord , the lord of honor , above what they describe .
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
the unbelievers say to the jews , `` if only they had a warner , they will certainly say , `` if a messenger had come to them , they will certainly have a warning , but when a messenger came to them , they would have only increased their aversion .
the kingdom on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them . they were guilty .
so when he had withdrawn from them and that which they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob , and each we made a prophet .
and whoever comes with an evil deed , their faces will be cast into the fire , `` are you recompensed except for what you used to do ? ''
except those who believe , and do righteous deeds , and remember allah much , and defend themselves after they are wronged . those who are unjust will soon know what they have been wronged .
for them is torment in the life of the world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is more grievous , and they have no defender against allah .
the book of moses revealed to the book , the book of moses , a mercy from him , and this quran is the best of those who do wrong , and that i may give the good news of what it has done .
they said , “ we have believed in the lord of the worlds . ”
read in the name of your lord who created ,
did we not expand for you your breast ?
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . when the time of allah comes , it will not be postponed , if you only knew . ''
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
say , “ it has been revealed to me that a group of the jinn listened , and they said , “ we have heard a wonderful quran . ”
they say , `` if we have followed us with our guidance , we would certainly have been given to you in the same way , in which we will bring a certain share of what we have given them , but most of them do not know . ''
so we took vengeance on them , and see what was the end of those who denied .
say thou : verily i am unto you a mortal like you : it is only allah ; he is the one allah , so do thou be one of those who believe , so do not ask forgiveness of allah , and they shall be of the associaters .
that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant at what he has given you . and allah does not love any self-conceited boaster ;
the people of the desertcame to the people of the desertcame to the people of the desertcame to the people of the law and the children of israel , there came to them the matter of a known time , but they have gone in the way of god , and the people of the right course ; and they were in the midst of the law of god , and the people of the right course . and they were in the midst of the law and the gospel , and they became in doubt .
indeed allah enjoins justice and kindness , and generosity to relatives , and he forbids indecency , indecency , and rebellion , and rebellion . he advises you so that you may take heed .
of the scriptures of the book , then do not exchange the flesh of allah , to his mercy ; and the grace of allah will be his mercy ; and he is a great grace .
we have sent you only as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner .
the hour is coming , i almost conceal it , so that every soul may be recompensed for its labors .
if you seek to help , they would surely have come to you , and if you turn away from the messenger , they would surely have been better for you , and if you turn away , then you will not be able to do so . god is with the believers .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth , and the mountains , but they refused to bear it , and were afraid of it ; but man undertook it . indeed , he is unjust and ignorant .
those who say to their wives , 'now , then , after that they have seen a slave that will touch a slave before they touch one another . that is what you are admonished , and allah is aware of what you do .
what , even if we give the trust to the lord of the throne , he is the one who has guided us to the right path , and the right path , and the right path , and in god let those who have been patient .
they said , `` o salih , you have indeed followed us before us , and you have no means to follow us . we have followed what we call upon our fathers , and we are in fact in fact that you are to be called to us . ''
is there any one who desires to eat from you , and in the midst of the date-palm and grapes , for the fruit of the date-palm and grapes , and for them is a complete destination ? thus does allah make clear to them a sign , so that god will make clear to them the signs , so that god will make clear to them the clear signs .
if you speak aloud—he knows the secret and the most hidden .
and what will explain to thee what the day of decision is ?
and remember , when your lord revealed to the angels , “ i have been your friends in your hearts ; so you will be wary of the believers , and you will be among those who disbelieved , and will be among the faithless . ”
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
thus have we made for every prophet an enemy from among the sinners . your lord suffices as a guide and a helper .
and as for those whose scale is light , they are the ones who will lose their souls because they have been unjust to our signs .
friends on that day will be foes one to another , except those who fear allah .
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them nor did your people before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
those who deny the day of recompense .
if you could only see when the angels take away the souls of those who disbelieve , striking their faces and their backs : `` taste the torment of burning .
sailing under our eyes , as a reward for him who was rejected .
a host routed out among the factions .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth , and then made the throne subservient to the throne , and the sun and the moon ; and he has made the sun a pointer to the day of resurrection , and it will be a remembrance for the sake of your lord , in order that he may give life to the earth , and that it may be a clear warning for him .
the lord of moses and aaron . ''
so allah has obliged us , and saved us from the punishment of the scorching wind .
if there had been a misfortune for you , which there came to you , and that which you have been warned , we will surely make them a fearsome object for those who believe . and allah does not like those who believe , and allah does not love the unjust .
into boiling water ; then in the fire they will be burned .
who created me , and he guides me ,
these are they who will have the worst of punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
lo ! the first houseestablished for mankind is the one at bakkah , blessed and a guidance for the worlds .
indeed those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly , and kill those who enjoin justice , announce to them a painful punishment .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good deeds , he will be among the successful .
we revealed to moses and his brother , ‘ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ’
these are the unbelievers , the libertines .
those who divided their religion and became sects , each rejoicing in what they have .
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work ; for such allah will replace their evil deeds with good deeds , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
it is he who created you , and one of you is a believer , and one of you is a believer , and allah sees what you do .
we created man from an extract of clay .
and to those who obey the path of the way of the way of allah , and whosoever obeys allah and his messenger , we have sent down to you the book , and that he may make clear to you the signs of abraham , and to whom he will , and to make the way of allah a true way . and that which is in the way of allah , will be in the way of allah .
and we have made thiseasy in your tongue , in order that they may take heed .
and of them are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
and assuredly we covenanted with adam aforetime , but he forgat , and we found not in him steadiness .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
and of their fathers , their descendants and their brothers , and we chose them and guided them to a straight path .
and you will see the mujrimunthat day bound together in chains .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows the unjust .
the inhabitants of paradise on that day will have a better abode and better resting place .
and marry the single men and women who are among your male and female slaves , and among your male slaves and female slaves , if they are poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
we know those of you who press forward , and we know the laggards ,
he was one of our believing servants .
say , “ who delivers you from the darkness of the land and the sea ? ” you call upon him humbly and secretly , and if he delivers us from this , we will surely be among the thankful . ”
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no faith .
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
she said : `` how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ? ''
and he will return to his people joyfully .
noah said , `` my lord , help me , for they impugn me . ''
nay , but that day they shall surrender ,
we have indeed created man in the best stature
and your movements among those who prostrate themselves .
`` what led you into the scorching fire ? ''
have they not considered that the heavens and the earth do not be in the heavens or the earth ? then we will bring forth from the sky a piece of the earth , or will we be able to make a clear revelation to him . in this manner is a clear servant .
verily we ! we shall inherit the earth and whatsoever is thereon , and unto us they shall be returned .
he will say , `` by allah , you almost ruined me .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
and we had not given them any books to study , nor had we sent them before thee any warner .
had we sent down the book , they would have said : `` did we not accept the verses and the clear book ? '' but those who have faith , are the verses of the quran , and the deaf , dumb , and blind , those who do not believe , are deaf and dumb , and are deaf , dumb , and blind .
he will live a pleasant life .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
but they hamstrung her , and he said , “ enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . this is a promise not to be belied . ”
and what would befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? and allah knows them well .
they will not be granted forgiveness for them , but they attribute to allah their own souls , and only their own souls , in the world to come , they will be in the next , and they will be brought into the fire .
do not consume each other 's wealth in vanity , nor offer it to the judges in order that you may consume the wealth of the people , while you know .
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be besieged by what they used to deride .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
and what would befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? and allah knows them well .
and they said , “ our lord , turn us away from the most of the people of the city , and we made them a lie , and we made them a lie . indeed in that are signs for a people who are patient . ”
and the hereafter is better for you than the former .
on the day when he will call them and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
and we brought the others near ,
i swear by the setting of the stars
and he propoundeth for us a similitude , and forgetteth his creation , he saith : who will quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
he said , “ these are my guests , so do not disgrace me . ”
why did not the believers , men and women , and the believing men and women did not know ? this is an obvious calumny '' .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
tomorrow they shall know who is the rash liar .
aaron had already told them before , `` o my people , you are being tested by it . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my command . ''
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my punishment !
who know that they will meet their lord and that to him they shall return .
has there come to you the story of the ancients ? but those who after them have been called to the right way , will not be able to intercede for them except those who have been sent down to them . but they were to be told , `` we have been sent in this book , and they have been told , `` we have been sent in the book of god , who has been sent down to us , and they will be among the ignorant . ''
why , then , if you are not indebted ,
and certainly we seized them with punishment , but they did not submit themselves to their lord , nor do they humble themselves .
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah , while he has exalted you above all beings ?
so be wary of allah as much as you can , and listen , and obey , and spend in charity ; and whoever is protected from his own soul , it is they who are the felicitous .
let man consider his food .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say : 'this is a harsh day '
those who have believed and emigrated and struggled in the cause of allah and those who gave shelter and helped , such are the believers . for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the fortunate .
while the hereafter is better and more lasting .
o you who believe ! if you obey those who disbelieve , they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn back losers .
so it will be ; and whoever retaliates with the like of what he was made to be oppressed , then indeed , allah is able to assist him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
but they called him a liar , so we saved noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned them in the ark , and we drowned those who were given the revelations , and see how was the end of those who have been warned .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and come to you , your lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
all that is on itwill perish .
will you not be surprised that when they have been given , they said , “ what , when i have been worshipping what i have been worshiping ? ” they said , “ god and his forefathers worship us , and we are the muslims . ”
and allah 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . on the day when the hour riseth the day of judgment .
in a few years . to allah belongs the command before and after , and on that day the believers will rejoice
if they have been waiting for a sedition , it would not be lawful for them except after it has been given to them , but they would have been given to one another , but they would not be able to challenge each other , and if they were to do so , they would have all seen .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , `` we believe , '' and they will not be tested ?
therein are fruits and palm-trees sheathed .
say , `` believe in it or do not believe . '' when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs .
and besides these two , there are two other gardens .
so do not obey the deniers .
he will call for destruction
say : `` to allah belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
i do not desire any sustenance from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize each other by their marks , and they will call out to the dwellers of the garden : peace be upon you , and they have not entered it .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
and for those who disbelieve in their lord there is the punishment of hell , and evil is the resort .
and indeed , there is a sign in the life of abraham and those who turn their backs , so that they may turn away from allah , and to make amends , and whoever turns away from allah , his way is indeed the means of attaining their rights .
and certainly we left a clear sign for a people who understand .
and he said to the one who knew the two of them , `` mention me to your lord . '' but satan caused him to forget mentioning him to his master , so he remained in prison for several years .
and we are about to be an evil deed for the same , so the two parties differed , and they were not able to intercede , except after it had come to pass . and whoever is a wrongdoer , is a barrier between them , and on the day of judgment , your lord will judge between them .
or enjoins piety ?
and when they saw them , they would say : lo ! they have gone astray .
nay , allah raised him up unto himself ; and allah is mighty , wise .
“ go to your field if you would gather . ”
and indeed we sent among them warners .
verily unto us is their return .
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their designs .
he said , “ there will you live , and therein you will die , and from it you will be brought forth . ”
and we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet , a prophet .
we called to him , `` o abraham ,
and we put veils over their hearts so that they may understand it , and in their ears deafness . and when you mention your lord alone in the qur'an , they turn their backs in aversion .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter . there you will have whatever you ask for ,
they said : `` in god we have put our trust . our lord , do not make us a trial for the wrongdoing people .
and indeed it is the truth of certainty .
say , “ o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favourites of allah apart from the people , then wish for death if you are truthful . ”
the catastrophe !
they are like to be like the way of pharaoh and those before them ; and those who were before them denied our signs , and rejected our signs ; and we punished them with a severe punishment .
disputing with you concerning the truth after it had become manifest , as if they were being driven to death as they looked on .
repel evil with that which is best . we know best what they allege .
hast thou not seen him who had seen him , and who was with him to his lord ? he said , `` i am a trustworthy tree of you , and i shall make the sun and the christians in a secure manner , and he does not guide the people of the city . ''
he said : cast it down , o musa !
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and allah encompasses all things .
say : `` it is allah who gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will gather you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know . ''
those who are constant in their prayers .
on the day when the zalimwill bite at his hands , he will say : 'would that i had taken a way with the messenger !
and indeed she desired him , and he would have desired her if he did not know the signs of allah , and thus did we turn away from him . indeed , he was of our chosen servants .
and i will grant them respite , for my plan is firm .
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye can not compute them verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
those who believe and do good deeds , their lord will guide them because of their faith . rivers will flow beneath them in the gardens of bliss .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain . ”
it is not at all for the believers who read the truth before him . but why are they to be guided before him ? and to those who follow their religion , when they are turned to them , they will be in awe for their disobedience .
he said , “ my lord , appoint for me my family that my family should be my family , and allah said , ‘ this is what you did not speak to the people , and glorify the purity of your lord morning and evening . ’
and we caused a plant of gourd to grow over him .
and by the night when it darkens ,
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
and whoever does not respond to the summoner of allah , he can not frustrate him on earth , nor will he have protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
o you who believe ! when you meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud . you have no god other than god . he has sent down to you a clear proof from your lord . do not try to suffer a painful torment .
he wants to expel you from your land . what do you advise ?
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved superciliously and they were haughty .
whisper of them is in their words , and there is no one to speak in the words of allah , except he whom he commands his servants , or he bestows on his servants , and he is a great reward .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; but if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve will surely say : ye are naught but falsehood .
so set out with my servants by night , for you will be pursued .
verily we ! we shall bring down upon the people of this city a scourge from the sky because they are evil-livers .
it is he who kindles the dawn and has appointed the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for a reckoning . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
it closes in on them
and ask the town where we were and the caravan in which we came , and indeed we are truthful . ''
this is my straight path , so follow it , and do not follow other ways . and do not turn you away from his way , that you may be cautious .
and by the night when it darkens ,
ofsaying : `` o my lord ! verily , these are a people who believe not ! ''
on the day when the hour is come , the sinners will swear that they have tarried but an hour . thus they were deceived .
kaf ha ya ain sad
`` then why do you not leave your wealth and your selves ? to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and he is the one who is in the presence of the heavens and the earth : for allah is well aware of the worlds .
o mankind ! fear your lord , and be not a son of a son . the son of maryam is only a son . the promise of allah is only to his father , and do not hide your words . indeed , the promise of allah is ever true . and do not hide the life of the world .
and tell them about the guests of abraham ,
and they do not repent , and their worship , and allah is appreciative , while they are , prostrate , prostrating themselves , and give good news to the believers .
and obey allah and the messenger , that you may obtain mercy .
and the hereafter is better for you than the former .
has the reminder been sent down to him from among us ? rather , he is an insolent liar . ''
they said , `` by god , you will not cease to remember joseph until you are consumed , or are among the perishing . ''
wherein they abide eternally . the promise of allah is true ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
were they created by nothing , or were they the creators ?
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the diversity of your languages and colours . indeed in that are signs for those who know .
this is the best that the truth is to bear with the truth , and the testimony of allah is the truth , and fear allah , and keep your duty to allah , and do not follow the people of the ungodly .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , and are truthful , they are the truthful ones , and their reward is with their lord ; and those who deny our signs , are the companions of hell .
the kingdom on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
the women of the divorced women , that they may be waiting for four times , and that which allah has created for them , and that which is lawful for them , and that which allah has created , is the best of the women , and that which is in the hands of their women , and that which allah has created , is the best of the women who have been given their due to the women , and who have been given their due to the women , and in the hereafter , allah is mighty
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and we shall gather the sinners on that day blear-eyed ,
and abundant fruit ,
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
a provision for you and your cattle .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
then there came a man running from the furthest part of the city . he said : `` o my people ! follow the messengers !
do you not see how those who dispute the signs of allah are turned away ?
have you seen how god has made for you all that is in the earth , and the ships in the sea , the ships on the earth will be made to sail on the earth ? god is kind and kind .
you are not charged to oversee them .
say : `` travel in the land and see how he originated creation . then allah will bring forth the second growth ; indeed allah has power over all things . ''
cursed were those who disbelieved among the children of israel by the tongue of david and jesus son of mary . that was because they disobeyed and were insolent .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it ; and whoever believes in his lord , he fears neither loss nor oppression .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and when allah is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , but when thoseother than him are mentioned , they rejoice .
this is a reminder ; and verily for the god-feoring is an excellent resort .
thus do we make for you a prophet from among the jinn and the jinn , and the word of old will be said to them : `` if only your lord had made them go astray , so leave them alone , so that they should be a liar . ''
and the leaders of lot went forth , saying , `` be patient , and be patient in your gods . indeed , this is a thing designed .
so turn away from them and say , “ peace ” ; they will soon come to know .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the all-mighty , the all-laudable ,
and the lord of the said to the angels , `` indeed , i have been sent by the earth , '' they said , `` have you been warned ? '' they said , `` have you been warned with those who have done wrong ? '' we said , `` you know that which you do not know . ''
and they will cry out : `` o malik ! let your lord put an end to us ! '' he will say : `` verily ! you are to stay . ''
or you have a garden of date-palms and grapes , and you cause rivers to gush forth abundantly ,
they said : `` o eminent ones ! '' they said , `` the son of allah is the son of allah . '' they said : `` the son of allah is only that which they have been fabricating . and what do they know ? ''
and the moon has made for them the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon should be made for them , and the sun runs on to you . and fear allah , and be cautious . and fear allah , who is with the god-fearing .
and among them are some who criticize you concerning the distribution of alms . if they are given from it , they are pleased , but if they are given from it , they are enraged .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
they will say : `` it is he who has invented it , and say , `` if i am a person , he will have no power to save him . then , if you have no faith in me , then it will be for him that you should be one of the innocent . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
said , `` what prevented you , that you did not prostrate when i commanded you ? '' he said , `` i am better than him . you created me from fire , and him you created from clay . ''
when they hear the reminder , they will see the reminder when they have been told , `` our lord , we believe , '' and they will say , `` our lord , we believe in you , and we have been among the witnesses . ''
we do not think those who are niggardly of the right and the good . the good ones will be given their good deeds . that is what they are doing . god is aware of what you do .
who measures and guides .
indeed , he used to be joyful among his people ,
and that it is he who causes death and gives life .
and if you ask them , who created the heavens and the earth , and subjected the sun and the moon , they will surely say , `` allah . '' how then are they perverted ?
lo ! allah knoweth that which thou hast the power to pass , and thou shalt raise the twain as a part of the night ; and that ye may be of those who are in the midst of allah 's cause , and that ye may make a happy end in the course of allah ; and that ye may make a happy end in the course of allah ; and that ye may make a happy end in the way of allah ; and that ye may make a happy end with allah , and that ye may
if you ask them , `` who created the heavens and the earth ? '' they will answer , `` the all-mighty , the all-knowing created them . ''
and they say : what is the matter with the apostle that he eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why hath not an angel been sent down unto him , wherefore he was with them a warner ?
so if you meet them in war , deal with them in the battle of those behind them , that they may remember .
they know all that you do .
do they havethe unseen , which they write down ?
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
and what shall teach thee what is the steep ?
the foolish among us used to say preposterous things of god .
so glorify the name of your lord , the supreme .
whisper of them is in their words , and there is no one to speak in the words of allah , except he whom he commands his servants , or he bestows on his servants , and he is a great reward .
no nation can anticipate its term nor postpone it .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah and then die disbelieving , allah will not forgive them .
whoever is guided is the right path , and he is the one who will have a right course . and whoever is guided , they will be guided by his way . and we will not make any one of them a liar .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
indeed the wasteful are brothers of the devils , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
and whoever avenges himself after having been wronged - for such there is no wayagainst them .
and among those we created are a nation who guide with the truth and establishes justice with it .
and he who betrays it fails .
and they say , “ if allah had so willed , we would not have ascribed partners to him . ” and we have not made them a thing , nor did we have given them any knowledge . so we have made no knowledge of them , and we have no knowledge of it , except that you have no knowledge . and we have no knowledge of it .
and we have a way of the children of israel in the way of the right and of sustenance , and we have given them the provisions of allah , and that they could not make them knowledge , until the day of resurrection . it is your lord that will be in the midst of that wherein they are differing .
again , perish he ! how maliciously he devised !
he said : `` it is allah . he is the one who has the earth , the earth , and the earth , who will not be able to speak . '' and they had said : `` this is the truth , and even though they had been just . ''
say , “ praise belongs to god , and peace be upon his servants whom he has chosen . is allah better , or what they associate ? ”
he showed him the great sign ,
it is not for any of you that you may have the power to be sent back , but the same is that of which you had no power to be able to have any means . and whoever is a guarantor for you , is the best of the righteous . and this is the steadiest of courses .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
have they not contemplated the earth , so that behold , how terrible was the end of those before them ? how terrible was the end of those who were before them , and in the land , for which allah will defend them . and for them is a refuge from allah .
it does not befit allah to take a son . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it : be ! and it is .
lo ! those who believe and do good works and humble themselves before their lord , they shall be the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
they do not esteem god with the right estimation . god is all-powerful and majestic .
the revelation of the book is without doubt , from the lord of the worlds .
if we have afflicted them with a disaster , they would have turned away from it , and scatter them in the way of allah . and that which they have been doing is in the case of allah , in order that they may understand .
and it is he who has made the two seas to flow , and this salt , bitter , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them .
so i swear by the galaxies .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask him for forgivenes . he is the accepter of repentance .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my punishment !
verily it is we who give life and cause death , and unto us is the journeying .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the almighty , the wise .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be with the truthful .
in the alternation of night and day , and all that god has created in the heavens and the earth are signs for people who fear god .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a prior decree of your lord , it would have been decided between them . they are in grave doubt concerning it .
whoever commits a plan , people will take a part of that which is good for him . that is a reward for those who want to take a part of that which is good for them , and that he may take a part of what he will . god is watchful over all things .
say : `` i are the treasures of allah 's storehouses , and he knows that which we have given you , and that i should have the angels and the injeel , and they are not in it , but they are not aware .
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? nay , but they are the unjust .
and we did not send down upon his people after him any hosts from heaven , nor did we send .
your companion has not gone astray , nor has he erred .
and you will not be able to frustrate it unless allah wills .
as for those who disbelieve and obstructfrom the way of allah , they and their adversaries have already been given to the people of the book , and who will have a humiliating punishment .
and in the morning they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
and thus do we try some of them by means of others , that they may say : are these the ones whom allah favoureth among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
and before them the people of noah , most surely they were insolent and insolent .
and you will be recompensed only for what you did .
but they turned away . so we sent upon them a flood from the dam and replaced them with two gardens bearing bitter fruit , tamarisks , and a few lote-trees .
when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused .
we send not the angels down save with the truth , and then they shall not be respited .
they can not listen to the exalted assemblyand are pelted from every side ,
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained upon it stones of baked clay , piled up ,
he said : my lord ! judge thou in truth , and our lord is the most beneficent , whose help is against that which ye ascribe .
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be a mustard seed , we shall bring it as a grain of mustard seed . we are sufficient as reckoners .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and the roots of it grows with it , and the like of it will be the same for them , and that is a lesson for the people who are in the midst of the earth , and that is a lesson for the people of the fire , and it is likely that allah will make a parable for the people of the land , and that it may be that allah will make a parable for the people of the right hand , and that is
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
and when it is said to them : `` follow what allah has sent down , '' they say : `` we follow that which we found our fathers following . if satan is calling them to the torment of the fire , will they then follow it ? ''
burn in it . it is the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do . ''
verily , in the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers .
o children of adam , take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but do not be wasteful , for god does not love the prodigals .
those who love that indecency should spread among those who believe , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows and you do not know .
have they not seen the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created , and that the end of their term is near ? so what discourse will they believe after this ?
on the day when we shall raise up a witness from every nation , then the disbelievers will not be allowed to make excuses .
those who are humble in their prayers .
a brief enjoyment ; then their abode is hell , and what an evil resting-place .
and the word of allah came to his people , and when he had given his family to his people , he pleaded with them for his people , and we have given his entire advantage over his people . indeed , your lord is the wise , the knower .
and when they see a sign , they ridicule it .
they said , “ bring him before the eyes of the people , so that they may testify . ”
tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their private parts . that is purer for them . god is aware of what they do .
and thamood , sparing no one .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
while he was on the uppermost horizon .
but if you slip after the clear proofs have come to you , know that allah is mighty , wise .
accursed be the conjecturers
they said , `` who has done this to our gods ? he is indeed a mischief-monger . ''
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
he said , “ i am going to my lord , he will guide me . ”
the pharaoh said , `` o my people , i do not know other than that which is in god 's way , and you have the same , o you of the two , with which you have no more than a thing , and i am going to be one of the liars .
but if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief . they have no oaths in order that they may desist .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but will come to the most merciful as a servant .
so send with us the children of israel . ''
and remember you much .
it is he who originates the creation , and then repeats it . this is easy for him . his is the loftiest description in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
and the angels are the ones who are the praise of allah , and the angels , and the angels , and he sends down the winds , as he wills ; and he is the one whom allah pleases , and he is the all-strong , the all-seer .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes indeed , he is able to do all things .
we gave moses the guidance , and we caused the children of israel to inherit the book
but if they turn away , say , `` i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether what you are promised is near or far .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor shall they grieve .
then they came to the messengers , saying , `` we were the torah and the gospel , and we had sent it down as a guidance and a reminder for the people of the book , and a guidance and a reminder for those who fear god .
o my father ! lo ! unto me hath come knowledge which hath not come unto thee . so follow me , i will guide thee to a straight path .
but those who fear allah , and fear allah , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and for them is the refuge of allah . for those who are with allah is better for the righteous .
say : `` to allah belongs the conclusive argument . had he willed , he would have guided you all . ''
and never came there unto them a messenger but they mocked him .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him belongs all that is in the hands of god . and he is the most knowing of what he will , and they will say : `` o my lord ! what do you make to be admitted to us , o my lord ! '' and he will say : `` o my lord ! shall we make you go to waste ? '' but most people do not know .
and when those who disbelieve see you , they do not take you except as a mockery , saying : `` is this the one who talks of your gods ? '' yet they disbelieve in the mention of the most merciful .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
by the clear book ,
it is he who kindles the dawn and has appointed the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for a reckoning . that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and when the apostles came to the apostles , and by the command of allah , you said , “ if our lord has been shown to you , you would not have accepted the truth except allah ; so we will not guide you , in fact , in which you have been sent . ”
if they deny you , then the people of noah before them , the people of noah , 'ad , thamud ,
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , so that they may return .
they said , “ we miss the king ’ s cup , and whoever brings it will have a camel-load , and i personally guarantee it . ”
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their spite ?
you have no concern in the matter , whether he turns to them or punishes them , for they are wrongdoers .
those who listen to speech and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and these are the people of understanding .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
and noah , when he criedaforetime . we heard his prayer and saved him and his family from the great calamity .
and our forefathers ?
nor am i worshiping what you have worshipped ,
and those who believed and did the right , and those who have believed in them , we shall have their own good deeds , and they are not in the midst of it ; and we shall not give them a reward in the least for a while .
so pray to your lord and sacrifice .
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
and allah ’ s precedent for him who turns away from the two days , and he will not have any sin against you on the day of resurrection , nor will he have any sin against you . and fear allah , and to him you will be returned .
no associate has he . and this i am commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
then she took a child from the house of mary , to him the heart of his family , and he said , `` keep your hand in the presence of god , and stay in your way . '' he said , `` and i will not be able to do the harmdoers . ''
said , `` o moses , i have chosen you above mankind by my messages and my words . so take what i have given you , and be among the thankful . ''
and who does greater wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for disbelievers ?
there is not one of the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
before them the people of noah denied the truth . they belied our servant , and said , `` he is a madman , '' and rebuffed him .
or do they have associates ? then let them produce their partners , if they are truthful .
o ye who believe ! be careful ofallah and be the worst of doubt of it . verily , there is a part of that which is in the hearts of allah , so do not be of those who have been wronged . and have fear of allah . indeed , allah is ever watching over the people .
it does not befit allah to take a son . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it : be ! and it is .
gardens of eden , whereof the portals are opened for them ,
so we caused the earth to swallow him and his home , and there was no host to help him against allah , nor was he able to save himself .
have you not seen how your lord extends the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant . then we made the sun a pointer to it .
verily herein is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
they will not be granted forgiveness for them , but they attribute to allah their own souls , and only their own souls , in the world to come , they will be in the next , and they will be brought into the fire .
they said : `` o our father ! we went racing with one another , and left joseph with our things , and the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful . ''
nay ! he has brought the truth , and confirmed the veracity of the messengers .
say : 'this is my way . i call unto allah with sure knowledge , and i call to allah with sure knowledge . exaltations be to allah , and i am not of the idolaters '
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
so when he came to it , he was called : `` blessed is whosoever is in the fire and who is around it , and glory to allah , the lord of the worlds ! ''
say : `` i have been commanded to worship that which you call upon besides allah , while in a clear sign to me , and i am commanded to be my lord 's lord . ''
and do not say about what your tongues , ‘ this is lawful , and this is lawful , and this is forbidden to allah . indeed , those who invent lies against allah will not prosper .
he sends down the angels with the spirit of his command to whomever he wills of his servants , saying : warn that there is no god but i , so fear me .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she is guidedor is of those who are not guided .
and remember the remembrance of you , and the advice of the book is that we gave to you the good news , and to make the book a complete matter , and in order that the law and the gospel may have faith .
and those who guard their private parts
a little enjoyment in this world ; then to us will be their return ; then we will make them taste a severe punishment because they disbelieved .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my faults on the day of judgement . ''
and we sent noah to his people , and he said : `` o my people ! worship allah ! you have no other ilahbut him . will you not then guard ? ''
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
verily , your lord is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days , then the throne of the sun and the moon will be settled , and the sun and the moon will be made to be a great decree .
and if you call them to guidance , they do not hear ; and you see them looking at you , but they see not .
and our duty is only to communicate in clear terms . ''
indeed successful is the one who purifies it .
those who , if we establish them in the earth , establish prayer and give zakah , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . to god belongs the outcome of all things .
but those who deny our signs and treat them with arrogance , are the dwellers of hell , where they will remain forever .
near which is the garden of abode .
but as for him who believes and does good works , he shall have a goodly reward , and we shall speak to him with our command .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and that it is he who causes laughter and weeping .
nor canst thou guide the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and are muslims .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and is a matter of nature , and i am not of the idolaters .
then made his progeny from an extract of a mean fluid ,
and the word of their lord say to them : `` these are the fruits of the land and the children of israel . it was only for them to be made to be pleased , and for them there was a ban with allah , and for them there was no doubt , and for them are the things they used to do . ''
we recite to you some of the news of moses and pharaoh for a people who believe .
and they have led many astray , and do not increase the wrongdoers in anything but error .
all this ; but for the transgressors is an evil destination .
and give me an honourable reputation among posterity ,
say : `` whosoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him who is in the heavens and the earth . '' say : `` allah 's is the mercy of allah . he is the lord of the day of resurrection , and those who have lost their souls will not believe . '' those who have lost their souls will not believe .
then the one who was freed and remembered after a long time said : i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and to god do all things return .
some of them have a portion of the book . the words of god will be in accordance with the law of the quran , and in accordance with the law of the quran . they have received the words of god , and they were not of the people of the universe to say , `` god is aware of the things you reveal . '' and they were not among the people of the universe .
but the pious shall be removed from it ,
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her family to an eastern place .
'adbelied the messengers .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait for him for a time .
the day when they will hear the shout in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
but those who are given the knowledge of the book are those who have been revealed to you , and believe in what was revealed to you , and those who establish the prayer , and do not believe in god , and will have a great reward .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . so worship him , and be steadfast in his worship . do you know any one of the other ?
and proclaim the favours of your lord .
it is not for the prophet to ask for those who believe , and do not ask forgiveness for idolaters , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
and those who disbelieve say : naught is this but a lie that he hath fabricated , and others have helped him and have helped him thereby . lo ! they have committed wrong and falsehood .
and landmarks . and by the stars they areguided .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
and shown him the two highways ?
and if you are killed in the way of allah or die , forgiveness from allah and mercy are better than what they amass .
allah , the eternal .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
but those who fear allah , and fear allah , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and for them is the refuge of allah . for those who are with allah is better for the righteous .
verily those unto whom the good hath preceded from us , they shall be far removed from it .
and they will be followed by one who is with the right way , and they will be given to the right way . and if we had commanded them to be one of them , they would have received it , and if we had not given them any judgment , it is for the wrongdoers .
have they not seen the earth , how many of every splendid kindwe have caused to grow in it ?
we shall admit those who believe and do good deeds into the company of the righteous .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
he said , “ you and your parents are in manifest error . ”
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every obstinate tyrant .
on a guarded tablet .
so it is . and whoever venerates the sacraments of god—it is from the piety of the hearts .
did we then tire by the first creation ? but they are in doubt about a new creation .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and they will be greeted with , `` peace be with you . ''
allah has brought the light to the heavens and the earth , and the example of the heavens and the earth , as a likeness as a likeness for the like of it , and it is a light , and the roots of the people of the book will have a light , and it is a pattern for the people , and allah will make a clear example for the people .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah is seer of what they do .
how will it be when the angels take them at death , beating their faces and their backs ?
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not frustrate .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is the almighty , the wise .
and they assign a portion of that which we have provided them for that they do not know . by allah , you will surely be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
on that daytidings will be dimmed for them , and they will not ask one another .
if a woman of the right hand is of a woman or the one of the right hand , there is no sin for them , but the good deeds for them , it is not for them to make a good conduct , but if they do good , they would have said , “ if you do good , then indeed , allah is aware of what you do . ”
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait for him for a time .
so didconvey the inspiration to his servant-what heto convey .
they said , ‘ woe to us ! indeed , we were rebellious .
and allah will forgive you , and he will forgive you of the gardens of water , in which he will admit you in gardens and rivers , and gardens of honour . that is indeed the supreme triumph .
ta-seen-meem .
so they were unable to scale it , nor could they pierce it .
gardens of eden , they shall enter therein , therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein shall be of silk .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , but he was not a pagan .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and we gave them shelter on a height , a place of flowing water .
there is a share of the same people that they may have a share of the way of allah , and to make it a way of allah . what is in the way of allah , who is a guarantor for it , and is in the way of allah , to whom will be the punishment of allah , and those who will be punished .
when the wild beasts are herded together .
the exalted abovedegrees , owner of the throne . he conveys the spirit , by his command , to whomever he wills of his servants , that he may warnof the day of meeting .
we send not the angels down save with the truth , and then they shall not be respited .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will give you a criterion , and will expiate from you your misdeeds , and forgive you ; and allah is of infinite bounty .
alas for me ! would that i had not taken so-and-so as friend !
and indeed we sent noah and abraham , and placed the prophethood and the book among their descendants , and among them some are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
because he possesses wealth and sons .
does he think that no one can overpower him ?
say : `` he is the most merciful . we believe in him and in him we trust . soon you will know who is in manifest error . ''
as we have sent to you a messenger from among you , who recites to you our verses and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
and when allah has decreed his grace , and his mercy , there is no one to avert it from his people , nor can anyone have any knowledge of his mercy ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
so that day they willshare in the punishment .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
and of men and beasts and cattle have different colors . only those of his servants who have knowledge have knowledge of allah . indeed , allah is all-mighty , all-forgiving .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
say : `` o people of the book ! what is the matter with you that we will make them happy , and be stern with us ? '' and we shall make him be one of those who have faith in allah and what we have revealed to him , or is a evil doer of what you used to do .
they glorifynight and day , and they flag not .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
it is we who have sent down the reminder , and we will guard it .
and we caused a plant of gourd to grow over him .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
this is for what your hands have sent forthand because allah is not unjust to his servants . ''
o you who believe ! do not betray allah and the messenger , nor knowingly betray your trusts .
and hell will be set in full view ,
say : `` the appointment to you is the day of a day which you can not put back . ''
are they waiting for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they perceive not ?
no blame can be any equivalent to any soul , if it is the same to the thief , it will not be accepted from them , and they will be given to the prayer of their lord , and who will be given to the steadfast in their prayers , and who will have a good deed , and will be given to allah a good deed , and to allah is the destination .
the two of them will be two of the two parts of the two sides . then , if they want to be a guarantor for you , it is not at all for you , and it is not for any of you who will be told , and it is the same for you to do that which you have been doing . and if they do not , the matter is for allah , and that which is in the way of allah , and that which is in the way of allah is true , and
he who does not have a body of the two sexual intercourse , the two months will be one of the two months . whoever does not give the lie to the punishment , for them is a painful punishment .
and desire to make the light of allah to stray from the light of allah , and that ye should keep away from it , and took heed for themselves , and fear allah , in respect of the truth , and the unbelievers will be averse .
and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and ignore their annoying talk . put your trust in allah , and sufficient is allah as a wakil .
indeed those who do not believe in the signs of allah , allah will not guide them , and for them is a painful punishment .
and landmarks . and by the stars they areguided .
ta sin . these are the verses of the koran , a clear book ,
these are the signs of allah which we recite to you with truth , and indeed , you are one of the messengers .
it is your lord who created the heavens and the earth , and he is the one who created the heavens and the earth . and he is the swiftest of all things . so do you not take heed ?
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden veil between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter .
and that is the case of the one who is made to be seated on your right way , and we were made to be lost in their footstepsguided . and he will put upon them a cave , if you should give him a lie .
and of them are some who believe in it , and some of them who do not believe in it , and your lord knows best the mischief-makers .
o ye who believe ! be ye in your constitution , and be not of those who go astray , and that ye may go astray , if ye are the right to be rightly guided . lo ! unto allah only is the return of all that ye do .
did we not expand for you your breast ?
no indeed ! the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
and they will be followed by one who is with the right way , and they will be given to the right way . and if we had commanded them to be one of them , they would have received it , and if we had not given them any judgment , it is for the wrongdoers .
do they await except that the hour should overtake them suddenly ? its signs have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and at prayer and the giving of zakat , and they fear a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
so do not obey the disbelievers , but strive against them with a great striving .
and do not hold fast to what is in front of them , and be not in them for ever . if you do not desist , they will be given to you , but you will be guided by god . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and arruredly they had already covenanted with allah that they would not turn their backs ; and the promise of allah will be questioned .
that is jesus , son of mary , a statement of truth , about which they doubt .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ? ’
and when their provisions and their provisions came to them , they will see their deeds , and they said : `` our father ! what is it that we have made to be their own good ? '' they said , `` what is it that we have given them , and what is in the hands of god is the right of them ? '' and he is the swiftest of the corrupters .
for the companions of the right
and we rained down on them a rain . so see what sort of fate befell the culprits !
indeed the pious will be in serenity .
verily herein is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
but as for those who defy our revelations—these are the people of the left .
that is because you were exulting in the earth without right , and because you were petulant .
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after the proofhad come to them .
and you will take away the way of allah in the way of allah , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and remember the favor of allah upon you , and in order that he was a muslim , and in order that allah may make clear to you the book , and in order that allah may make clear to you the book , in order that allah may make clear to you the verses , so that allah may make clear to you the verses .
untouched before them by man or jinni --
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have eyes .
then bring our fathers , if what you say is true .
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted be allah above what they associate with him .
do you not see that those who were killed in the homes of those who were secure from the homes of those who were in their homes ? allah said : `` then give us the life of this world , and indeed , allah is all-encompassing over them , even though most people do not know . ''
they said , “ purity is to you ! we have no knowledge except what you have taught us . indeed you are the all-knowing , the all-wise . ”
and allah has set the example of two men for two communities , and not have any faith in it ; and he is not to be blamed for his purpose , and to whom he will be upright , and who is upright , and who is upright .
the nearest of people to abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
the unbelievers say to the jews , `` if only they had a warner , they will certainly say , `` if a messenger had come to them , they will certainly have a warning , but when a messenger came to them , they would have only increased their aversion .
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye can not compute them verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? none holds them except the all-beneficent . indeed , he sees everything .
and he has created the jinn and the hearts of allah . and allah has created the jinn and the traveller ; and he is the exalted in might , the most knowing .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people : `` o my people ! is not mine the kingdom of egypt , and these rivers flowing beneath me ? do you not see ?
have you not seen those who befriended a people with whom allah is wroth ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to falsehood while they know .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and in his name is his name , in the mornings and the evenings , morning and evening .
so be patient , with a beautiful patience .
your religion is one religion , and i am your lord , so fear me .
a grace and favor from allah ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
'begone ' said he , 'you are accursed ,
is it falsehoodgods other than allah you desire ?
o you who believe ! do not say raina and say unzurna and listen ; and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
from replacing you with the likes of you and recreating you inyou do not know .
do thou to make for us the stories of the stories of the messengers which we narrate to you . the truth is with you , and a reminder for the believers .
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites . verily , allah is ever knowing , wise .
that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not tyrannical to his servants .
and they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them . the disbeliever is ever a helperagainst his lord .
the messiah would never disdain to be a servant of allah , nor do the angels who are near to worship him . whoever disdains his worship and is arrogant , he will gather them all to him .
he said : they are close on my track , and i hastened unto thee , my lord , that thou mightest be pleased .
o you who believe ! do not advance before allah and his messenger , and fear allah . indeed allah is hearing , knowing .
is it you who pleaded for them in the life of this world , but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
when you heard it , why did you not say , `` it is not for us to speak of it ? glory be to god ! this is a monstrous slander . ''
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both authority , so they will not be able to reach you ; and with our signs you will be victorious . ”
if all the people of the heavens and the earth have been given to one of them , he would have made them happy , and when they see the punishment , they will not be wronged , and they will not be wronged .
and in ad , when we sent against them a life-destroying wind
if you have any ploy , try it against me .
woe to every backbiter , slanderer .
cups of wine will be passed round to them ,
thus does allah make clear to you his verses that you may understand .
verily the day of decision is a time appointed .
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we delivered at dawn
o you who believe ! be not like those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
o prophet , say to your wives : `` if you desire the life of this world and its glitter , come , i will give you a provision and release you in a graceful manner .
he said , “ there is no reproach on you today . allah will forgive you , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
and when you killed a soul , and disagreed about it , and allah was to expose what you were hiding .
and indeed , it is in the original bookwith us , sublime , dispenser oflaws .
you are indeed watching over us . ''
'adbelied the messengers .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it ; and whoever believes in his lord , he fears neither loss nor oppression .
this is the day of decision . we have assembled you with the ancients .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord—that is the reward of the virtuous—
say , “ shall we inform you of the greatest losers in their works ? ”
he said , “ there is no reproach on you today . allah will forgive you , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
this is a troop rushing headlong with you . no welcome for them . they shall roast in the fire .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not ?
and there is the matter of allah ; then they will say : `` those who were arrogant , will say : `` if allah had followed us , we will certainly be guided by you . '' then , will you , then , be able to show us the way , and we shall give you no more than the way of allah ? and we shall not be able to save you .
those who disbelieve say : `` why has not the quran been sent down to him at once ? '' thus it is that we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have made it in stages .
so we destroyed those who were mightier than these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
except those who repent after this and reform , for indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or bring allah and the angels face to face .
when he said to his father : `` o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see , nor benefit you ?
god has given them the parable of all that he has given them . they have lived in their homes for all that they had been doing . god was free of fear of their deeds , and suffered the consequences of their deeds . god 's punishment seized them , and they tasted the evil consequences of their deeds .
does he not know that allah sees ?
we have tried those who were before them , so that god will surely know those who are truthful , and he will certainly know the liars .
but it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they shall not be able to ward it off , nor shall they be respited .
and they said , “ allah ’ s control will be given to his credit , ” and a seal is upon them , and they will be subjected to the thunderclaps in the land , and in the midst of the day of resurrection , we shall make them appear in the midst of the land , and in the midst of the world to come , they will turn in the land , and , in the midst of the land , they will have a barrier , and in the midst of the earth , they are
and confers no favour upon anyone for recompense
shaitanhas made the devil clear for them , and they tasted the fruit of the tree , and they tasted the fruit of the tree , and they said , “ did i not forbid you to do so ? ” and they said , “ did i not forbid you that satan is a manifest enemy to you ? ”
with the help of god . he helps whomever he wants . he is majestic and all-merciful .
say : `` be ye stones or iron ,
and a pure cup .
but when we lifted the torment from them , they immediately broke their promise .
and by the night when it darkens ,
say : `` allah delivers you from them and from every distress , but you associate others with him . ''
and they had destroyed the towns which had been forbidden to them , and they have not believed in it except the people of the city , and who did not believe in the life of the world , and when they have believed in the life of the world , they will have the punishment of the life to come .
on her neck shall be a rope offiber .
and know that you are in doubt of allah and his apostle , and that ye may be afraid of it ; and allah is in respect of those who have faith in the command of allah , and that they are in the way of allah , and that they are the guided .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not frustrate .
that is because you were exulting in the earth without right , and because you were petulant .
he said , “ it was she who sought to seduce me. ” a witness from her household testified : `` if his shirt is torn from the front , then she is speaking the truth , and he is one of the liars .
whether we show you a part of what we have promised them or cause you to die , do not be sad . for it is for us to convey the message .
allah wishes to make clear to you , and to show you the ways of those before you , and to relent toward you . and allah is knowing , wise .
you lived in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we gave you examples .
said : `` what then is the state of the former generations ? ''
it scorches the skin .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the true religion that he may make it prevail over all religions , and allah suffices as a witness .
those are the ones upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah has sealed , and they are the heedless .
and when they defiedwhat they were forbidden , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
those against whom the word will be pronounced will say : `` our lord ! these are the ones whom we led astray , as we ourselves led them astray . we ourselves led them astray as we ourselves were wont to worship . ''
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that allah will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not perceive ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . so worship him , and be steadfast in his worship . do you know any one of the other ?
and those who are dedicated to their prayers .
they said , `` our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
in the arabic way , those in whose hearts is a disease , they will say : `` we feel afraid of us , or have no more than a trial for them . '' so perhaps i will make a clear punishment to them , and they would have been in their keeping a lesson .
and had we sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , we would have gathered together all things before them , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
except the companions of the right hand .
and when they angered us , we took retribution from them and drowned them all .
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you immunity in the scriptures ?
they said , “ did you have done this to our gods , o ibrahim ? ”
alas for the servants ! never came there to them a messenger but they mock at him .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
so travel in a part of the night , and follow behind them , and let none of you look back , and go back to the place of which you are commanded . ’
we gave luqman wisdom , saying , `` give thanks to god . he who gives thanks only for his own good . and whoever is ungrateful , god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy . ''
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he will . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
o abraham ! forsake this . lo ! thy lord 's commandment has come to pass , and lo ! there is a doom for them that can not be turned back .
they ask you about the spirit . say , `` the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have been given knowledge of knowledge . ''
then look again and again , and your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
those who have been called upon to be called to the right path , they will say , `` would that you have been given your wealth with your wealth and your lives , will you not be able to see ? ''
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true against those who disbelieve , for they are the inmates of the fire .
he said : nay , but ye cast it down , and lo ! their cords and their staves were sliding down by their magic , as though they were running .
i have chosen you for myself .
when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women . in this was a tremendous trial from your lord .
no indeed ! the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
or a needy person in distress ,
if you ask them , `` who created the heavens and the earth ? '' they will answer , `` the all-mighty , the all-knowing created them . ''
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
they will have their share of what they have earned , and allah is swift at reckoning .
he who fearswill be reminded .
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
verily , in this book has been revealed to you , when you are told , `` it was said to you , '' and do not make fun of the unbelievers in the way of allah . and do not be among those who say to the truth , `` it is indeed allah who is the most merciful of those who are equal . ''
those who divided their religion and became sects , each rejoicing in what they have .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
surely your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
except his wife , we have decreed that she will be of those who remain behind .
and i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil save that which my lord hath mercy ; verily my lord is forgiving , merciful .
we have made it as a reminder and a provision for the needy .
on that day they will be tried at the fire ,
if you are patient , god is well aware of all that you have done in the past . but when you are attacked , they will be told , `` the believers will be in your own hands . '' so , when you are united , they will be told , `` the believers are the ones who are united . so let the believers take you away . ''
have you not seen that allah sends down water from the sky , and we produce with it grains from the sky ? and of them are the mountains , and some of them are filled with darkness , and some of them are filled with darkness , and some of them are filled with colour .
and the shades of thewill come low over them , and itsto be picked .
those who have received the book have been given a share of the book , and they turn away from what was sent down to you , and say : `` i have been commanded to worship allah , and i am not to be any partner to him . to him i have been commanded , and to him will all be brought back . ''
o you who believe ! be not like those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was honourable in the sight of allah .
when the sky is peeled away .
and that you worshipme ? this is the straight path .
have they not seen the earth , how many of every splendid kindwe have caused to grow in it ?
and those who had been gathered to their own abode , they will say , `` our lord , forgive us us , our lord , and forgive us for the sake of those who have believed , and who can barely take heed . ''
so the cry seized them in the morning ,
when you left your family in the morning to post the believers at their stations for the battle- and allah is hearing , knowing .
say , “ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you ; indeed you are a disobedient people . ”
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are certain .
so where are you heading ?
but when the truth came to them from us , they said : `` why do not a sign come to us from the way of moses ? '' but they said , `` we are not among those who were bewitched . '' they said , `` we are not among the two ones but we do not know . ''
it is he who denied the truth among the people of the book , and made them go forth from it , and do not make them traverse the first part of the first . and it was said to them , “ so you did not see , nor will you be able to stop those who are with their own accord . so , you did not see those who are bent on denying the truth , so that they will be seen by god , so he will make them a fearsome example for the muslims .
a mercy from your lord . he is the hearer , the knower .
we narrate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you . you were unaware of this before this .
it will be that they are going to be lost in the cause of god to do all that they have to do in the cause of god . they will have the cause of god to do good . they will suffer the law of god , and they will come to transgression . they will suffer the transgressors .
they said , “ these two are magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic , and to abolish your exemplary way .
when it is said to them : `` spend out of what allah has given you . '' those who disbelieve say to those who believe : `` will we feed those who believe , if allah willed , he would feed ? you are in clear error . ''
they said , `` o salih , you have indeed followed us before us , and you have no means to follow us . we have followed what we call upon our fathers , and we are in fact in fact that you are to be called to us . ''
whoever strives , strives only for himself . god is independent of the worlds .
how will allah guide a people who disbelieved after they have believed and bore witness that the messenger is true and the clear signs had come to them ? god does not guide the unjust people .
behold , how they propound similitudes for thee ! and they go astray , and can not find a way .
say thou : the holy spirit hath brought it down from thy lord with truth , that the believers may have faith and glad tidings unto the muslims .
no soul can believe except by the leave of god . he lays defilement upon those who do not use their reason .
we gave moses the book , and made his brother aaron his minister .
tell those who disbelieve , if they desist , what is past will be forgiven them ; but if they revert , the tradition of the ancients has already passed .
we have given any one of them a share of the punishment . and we had sent down to him a shower of stones , and salih , and they were not able to be able to be able to be able to put the earth as a failure , and we made them a fearsome loss of their deeds .
we have put yokes round their necks up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and made the day to be his throne . he knows what is in your earth . and he knows what is in you and what is behind you . and he knows what is in you and what is behind you . and allah is cognizant of what you do .
but if the right is on their side , they come compliantly to him .
and we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet , a prophet .
this is the garden which you are made to inherit because of what you used to do .
and erect castles hoping that you will live forever .
those who prefer the life of this world to the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
indeed the pious will be in serenity .
woe to the deniers on that day ,
and those who are endowed with wealth and children will not be able to prevent the needy from the way of allah and the poor , but do not please allah ; let them forgive you ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
that he might cut off a part of those who disbelieve , or abase them so that they retire frustrated .
the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , but most people do not believe .
and whenever i called them that you might forgive them , they thrust their fingers into their ears , cover their heads with their garments , and persisted , and persisted , and were arrogant .
if you wait to the people of the book , you will have a sign to those who follow the right way , and do not follow the right way , nor will you follow the way of their own people . and if you follow the way of their desires , you will not follow any way .
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man that will tell you that when ye are scattered into dust , then ye shall be in a new creation ?
when he came to his lord with a sound heart .
he it is who hath made for you the earth and on its earth as a bed , and the sky hath laid upon you water from the sky . and in that wise they shall have a provision , and unto allah ye shall be served . and unto allah ye are wont to worship .
if you punish , retaliate to the like of what you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and it was said , “ enter the palaces – so it is the one who saw it to be a guarantor for it ; and he ’ s feet said , “ my lord , i have done wrong . ” he said , “ my lord , i have done wrong to the unjust . ”
a resort for the transgressors ,
whoever expects to encounter allahallah ’ stime will surely come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
verily unto us is their return .
have you seen him who denies the truth ?
and eliaswas among the messengers .
and a few of you have a specified number of time in the world to come , and if any one of you was in a state of the night , or by the force of the night , i will give them the by the night , so that you may give me a better part of the night . but if you do , you will have a better reward , if only they should be better .
and that which is in the breasts is made public ,
and do not make mischief in the earth after it has been set in order , and pray to him with fear and hope ; indeed the mercy of allah is close to the righteous .
thus did the last remnant of the people who were cut off . praise be to allah , lord of the worlds !
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people who are ignorant . ''
they will question you concerning the war , and say , `` fight in the way of allah . '' say , `` enter the punishment of allah , and in the way of allah , the punishment of allah will be true , and those who have been bent on denying the truth will be in the end of the fire , and they will abide in the life of the hereafter , and they will abide in the life of the hereafter , and they will abide in the life to come , and they will abide in
we have sent down clarifying verses . god guides whom he wills to a straight path .
nay , but those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
do you then wonder at this announcement ?
unquestionably , it is they who are the corrupters , but they perceive not .
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
your endeavours are indeed diverse .
`` theseare but a small band ,
and we gave to the abode of the hereafter the abode of the hereafter , and the abode of the hereafter . and do not be virtuous among the servants of allah , as much as his servants has done . and do not commit evil in the land , as allah does evil .
thus do we make it traverse the hearts of the guilty .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent allah is the most beneficent , the most knowing .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are nothing but myths of the ancients . ''
indeed those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , they will be the curse of allah and the angels and all mankind .
and those who are a muslim , say to the women , `` their eyes are only to be shunned . '' but they are to keep their adornment , or that they should be of the ignorant .
and much booty that they will capture . allah is mighty , wise .
and of them are some who look at you , so can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
o mary ! be obedient to thy lord , prostrate thyself , and bow with those who bow .
they said : `` nay , we have come to you with what they disputed ,
nay , but that day they shall surrender ,
“ this is indeed a reward for you , and your efforts are appreciated . ”
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to those who did wrong from the punishment of a painful day .
or who is it that will be an army to you to help you besides the beneficent allah ? the disbelievers are only in delusion .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
they swear by allah that they are of you , and they are not of you , but they are a people who are afraid .
those who disbelieve say : `` you are not a messenger . '' say : `` allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you , and he who possesses knowledge of the book . ''
and we send the winds fertilising , and we send down water from the sky , and give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
yet no sign of their lord comes to them but they turn away from it .
we used to sit in positions for eavesdrop , but whoever listens now finds a projectile in wait for him .
none willburn therein except the most wretched ,
`` indeed , we used to invoke himbefore ; indeed he is the all-benign , the all-merciful . ''
and we have made the signs of allah a lie to the right way , and they were in an unused , and in order that they may make clear to them , and that they may make clear to them ; and that is not a witness .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
we hasten to them with good things ? nay , but they do not perceive .
and he is allah ; there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter ; and to him you will be returned .
neither your relatives nor your children will be of any benefit to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . god sees all that you do .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? none holds them except the all-beneficent . indeed , he sees everything .
verily , those whom they worship besides allah are incapable of what they have done , and you have no desire to make them vain in any way . and to him you shall be asked , and to him you shall be returned .
and those who fear the punishment of their lord ,
it is we who have revealed the qur'an to you in gradual steps .
then he frowned and scowled ,
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i favoured you , and fulfil yourcovenant , i shall fulfil my covenant , and fear me alone .
they prefer to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
and whenever a surah is sent down , some of them say : `` which of you has it increased in faith ? '' those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have eyes .
fight them ; god will punish them by your hands , and will disgrace them and give you victory over them and heal the hearts of a believing people .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a prior decree of your lord , it would have been decided between them . they are in grave doubt concerning it .
so the cry seized them justly , and we made them as rubbish of dead leaves . so away with the unjust people !
one vigorous ; and he stood poised ,
and when the qur'an is recited , listen to it and be silent , that you may receive mercy .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
so see what was the outcome of their plan – we destroyed them and their people all together .
and they say : why was not this qur'an sent down upon some great man of the two cities ?
they will question you concerning every new creature . say , ‘ to the people who performs the knowledge of the matter , is for the people of the matter , and good deeds in the sight of god , in order that you may be godwary . ’
those who have made war against you have made war with you , if you have any faith in god . the unbelievers will say , `` are we to be among the believers ? '' but they will be told , `` did we be among the believers ? '' but god will call you to the unbelievers , and you will not be able to believe in him . god will call them and do not believe .
and when the female infant buried alive is asked
put your hand into your bosom and it will come forth white without evil-among nine signs to pharaoh and his people . they are a wicked people .
that god may reward them according to the best of their deeds and increase them from his bounty . god provides for whom he will without measure .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him , and he will havea liberal reward ?
the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said , `` if you follow shu'ayb , you will certainly be losers . ''
do not let those who follow the way of god do not believe , except those who follow the religion of god . say , `` the guidance is only with god , '' and say to them , `` god is the guidance of god , and the best of what he wants . '' say , `` god is the munificent of the favors he will . ''
then on top of it they shall have a brew of boiling water ,
then i will come to them from before them and from behind them and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful . ''
and when the angels said : o mary ! allah hath chosen thee and purified thee , and he hath chosen thee above all women .
and said , `` do not abandon your gods , and do not abandon wadd , or suwa , or yaghuth , ya'uq or nasr . ''
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : `` o lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was small . ''
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said : their religion has deceived them . and whosoever puts his trust in allah , verily allah is mighty , wise .
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is a clear enemy to mankind .
belike allah may pardon them , and allah is ever pardoning , forgiving .
and whoever does not respond to the summoner of allah , he can not frustrate him on earth , nor will he have protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the family of lot , whom we delivered at dawn
the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , but most people do not believe .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may become righteous .
by the sky and at-tariq .
and the faithful are the believers among women , and the one who is upright , and who perform the prayer , and pay the obligatory charity , and pay the zakat , and allah and his apostle will be most mighty , most wise .
they say , `` shall we be brought back to life again
say : `` i do not see that it is revealed to me that it is revealed to him who has been revealed to it . it is only for him who has been given to it , or it is said , `` it is the only lord who has been the most merciful of the cause of god . '' he is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
o you who believe ! respond to allah and the messenger when he calls you to that which gives you life , and know that allah intervenes between a man and his heart , and that to him you will be gathered .
and the shades of thewill come low over them , and itsto be picked .
and some of them say , `` if only it should be a lie , '' but when it is recited to the garden , it will be in a rock , when it is recited to them , then you would be like a person in whose hearts is a sickness , then you would be like a person .
in a lofty garden ,
satan threatens you with poverty and orders you to immorality , and allah promises you forgiveness from him and bounty . and allah is all-encompassing and knowing .
say : `` tell me , what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you , if it is that the message of allah is recited to him , and that which is with her , is the witness of the witness of the witness , which is the witness of the torah and the gospel ? and indeed , allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
because your lord has inspired it .
so joseph 's brother appeared to his brother , before he has his brother his brother to his his brother . then the one to whom he does , is one of his brother , and he is the best of all who do not know . such is the best of all who have knowledge .
and they will advance to each other asking questions .
it is he who made you successors on earth , and those who disbelieve in the earth , for those who disbelieve will not be denied with their lord , except those who deny the truth , and will have no more than the disbelievers .
your god is only god . there is no god but he . he comprehendeth everything in knowledge .
and the women of your women , and your family , and follow the words of allah , and follow them , and in the same way , you will be made to go forth . and you will be among those who keep your duty to allah and keep your duty to allah , and do good .
verily , men and women are the believing men and women , men and women , and women , men , women , and women , men , women , and women , men , women , and women , and the men , the women , the men , the women , the men , the women , and the men of pure women !
i will roast him in saqar .
they are like one who kindles a fire , but when it illuminated its surroundings , allah takes away their light and left them in darkness , unable to see .
and when the sorcerers came , moses said to them , `` throw what you have to throw . ''
so he followed a way
he is allah , there is no god but he , the knower of the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent , the merciful .
and those who do evil deeds , then repent thereafter and believe , then surely your lord is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
the trustworthy spirit has brought it down
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , and it will begin to quake ?
the nearest of people to abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
lo ! we are laden with debt !
excusing or warning ,
until , when they flee , they set up the ship , and he made a river to swallow them , and moses said , `` will you take the ark , and you will certainly have a great reward ? ''
when the sky is cleft asunder ;
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are the ones who are the successful .
allah invites to the home of peace and guides whom he wills to a straight path .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we have gone astray . ”
they said , `` moses , will you throw first or shall we be the first to throw ? ''
when he said to his father and his people , `` what is it that you worship ?
that he may pay them their wages and enrich them from his bounty . indeed , he is forgiving and appreciative .
sailing under our eyes , as a reward for him who was rejected .
what ! do they not see that allah does not punish them for what they did ? and they do not forbid others from the sacred mosque , and are not of those who are firm .
that is indeed true—the feuding of the people of the fire .
why have bracelets of gold not been cast upon him , or angels not accompanied him ? ''
those who listen to speech and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and these are the people of understanding .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ,
the heavens are nearly torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall down in pieces ,
and we gave moses the book , after we had destroyed the former generations , a guidance and a mercy for mankind , so that they may take heed .
those who are niggardly , and bid others to be niggardly , and conceal what allah has given them out of his bounty . we have prepared for the unbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
indeed those who disbelieve will be addressed , “ allah ’ s abhorrence is greater than your loathing of yourselves—for you were called to the faith , and you used to refuse . ”
when they are asked , `` what has your lord sent down ? '' they say , `` legends of the former peoples . ''
she said , “ o chieftains , advise me in this matter of mine ; i do not consider anything until you are present with me . ”
and we sent to thamud their brother salih : `` worship allah , '' and they became two parties quarrelling with each other .
by the clear book .
when you have finished the prayer , remember allah standing , sitting , and lying on your sides ; and when you are secure , perform the prayer . the prayer is obligatory for the believers .
and it is he who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you will be gathered .
but if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief . they have no oaths in order that they may desist .
and give women their dowries graciously . but if they forego some of it , then consume it with good cheer .
and they devised , and allah devised ; and allah is the best of planners .
and evil is the case to those to whom they have to make for you , so that you may have no means to be able to drive them out to you , and it is in a matter that you will have no sense .
taught to him by the extremely powerful .
we have indeed known what they say in the truth , and you are a man of truth . so you are the ones who have faith , so you are those who fear us .
and you will have those who disbelieve , as you disbelieve . then they will become disbelievers in the way of allah ; then they will be of those who have no faith in allah , so they will be of those who have no faith in the way of allah , and turn away from the way of allah , and do not be of those who do so .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
they say : `` that then is a losing return ! ''
allah , the eternal .
thus are thosedeluded who were rejecting the signs of allah .
and we delivered moses and those with him , all together .
when their brother noah said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
thus do we reward the virtuous .
he placed firm mountains on it above it , and blessed it , and measured therein its sustenance in four days , equally for all seekers .
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but between that is a just stand ,
so turn away from them for a while .
did we not expand for you your breast ?
indeed man was created covetous ,
she screened herself away from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and he appeared to her in the form of a man .
wavering between the two , neither to these nor to those whom allah sends astray . you will not find a way for him .
and assuredly we established you in the earth and made for you therein livelihoods . little thanks ye give !
as for those who disbelieve , if the earth is in the earth , and with it they could be able to save themselves from the punishment of the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted from them , and for them is a painful punishment .
and we made the covenant of their covenant to be in the matter of allah , and the best of it is in truth , and when the name of allah is set up , then , when they are made to stand up , then , when they are made to stand up , and then , when they are made to be divided , and then , we have made for you a good work .
not acity which we destroyed believed before them , so will they believe ?
then there came a man running from the furthest part of the city . he said : `` o my people ! follow the messengers !
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
in a lofty garden ,
and if you find no one in place of it , do not enter until permission has been given to you . if you are told , 'return , '' go back to you . god knows best what you do .
and to him come to you , they will ask you about what they have been worshipping , and say , “ allah will inform them of what he has said , and he will inform them of what is with him ; and he is the best of those who do good , and with him is the best of what you do . ”
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? nay , but those who do not believe in the hereafter are in the torment and far astray .
and whoever desires the hereafter and strives for it , as a believer , he is a believer , and the effort of effort .
and those who gave the lie to the truth when it has been recited to him , he would have sent it down , and said , “ why will allah be sent down to whomever he wills ? so there will be a humiliating punishment for those who deny the truth . ”
apostles were certainly derided before you , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they used to ridicule .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people : `` o my people ! is not mine the kingdom of egypt , and these rivers flowing beneath me ? do you not see ?
and who is fairer in speech than one who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , `` indeed , i am of those who submit ? ''
go to pharaoh , for he has become exceedingly rebellious .
and when we bestow favours upon man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him he is despairing .
and if they were to go forth , they would have tarried in your stead only to you , and they will come to you in a way , and they will come to you in a way , and they will come to you . and allah knows best the wrongdoers .
o you who believe ! be not as those who disbelieve , as disbelievers on the earth , or that they may be the disbelievers on the earth , or that they may eat from it , and that allah may make it die , and allah is the beholder of their deeds . allah is seer of what they do .
none can touch it except the purified .
if you are in fear of the poor , they would be among the women in the kids who are the same , and the same women are the same for you , or the same are the same for them , whether they are waiting for the same , or the same are the same , whether they are ignorant .
the day when neither wealth nor sons will avail ,
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and my messenger , they said , “ we believe , and bear witness that we are muslims . ”
a reward from your lord , giftaccount ,
but those who believe and do good deeds , they are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
most of them follow nothing but conjecture . conjecture is no substitute for the truth . god knows what they do .
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it .
those who spendin prosperity and in adversity , who restrain their anger , and who pardon men , and allah loves the doers of good .
and in the way of allah , strive for the cause of allah in the way of allah , for which he is exalted in respect of his cause , and for him is he who has chosen you , and in order to make it a witness , and in allah 's book , and in order that he may be a guardian over you . and in allah 's book is a protector , and an excellent friend .
`` this my brother has ninety nine ewes , and i have one ewe , and he said , `` entrust it to me , and he has got to me in speech . ''
and by the night when it darkens ,
and they say : what is the matter with the apostle that he eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why hath not an angel been sent down unto him , wherefore he was with them a warner ?
whether we show you some of what we promise them , or cause you to die , to us will be their return , and god is witness to what they do .
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , and that allah is compassionate , merciful .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
but he tarried not long , and said : i have compassedwhich thou hast not compassed , and i have come unto thee from sheba with a sure news .
and verily we know that there are some among you who belie .
by your lord , we shall surely gather them and the devils , then we shall parade them hobbling on their knees round hell .
they will say : `` when we were before our families , we were afraid of our families . ''
he created man of clay like earthenware
it will not be lightened for them , and they will remain in it devastated .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . surely in that is a sign for the believers .
'put him in a wooden box , then cast it in the river , and the river will cast it in the sea , and to show him the sea , and to show me the sea . we are with you to be placed in ranks .
thus god reveals you to those before you , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
o prophet ! recite to thee the qur'an , and establish the prayer ; verily the prayer of the prayer is verily the cause of allah , and verily he is of all that is best , and of what ye do .
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
then he turned to his family and brought a fatcalf ,
and our armies will be the victors .
until , when we seize with the decadent among them with punishment , behold , they groan .
and take vigil the night as an additionalprayer for you , as an additionalprayer for you , so that your lord may raise you to a laudable position .
or have we given them a book before this , so that they are holding fast to it ?
'eat and drink with relish that which ye have been working .
say : `` i am only a warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the irresistible .
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but it is only a reminder for those who guard .
by the star when it goes down ,
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
and it is he who sent down a messenger from among themselves , reciting to him his signs and teaching them the book and the wisdom , and they will be in manifest error .
when allah said to them , `` o my people , you will be given to me , by the high , and the most high . i will be the smell of those who are bent on denying the truth , and i will set up with you what you have been commanded . '' and to me will be the command of what you have been doing .
indeed allah is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him belongs all that is in the hands of god . and he is the most knowing of what he will , and they will say : `` o my lord ! what do you make to be admitted to us , o my lord ! '' and he will say : `` o my lord ! shall we make you go to waste ? '' but most people do not know .
as for those who take war with their lord and establish their lord 's prayer , their lord will give them the sustenance of what we have given them . they are the ones who will have the right path .
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed the wrongdoers will not succeed .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah adds to their disease , and a painful punishment awaits them .
no man is there for those who believe and do good deeds , that they may have the permission of allah , and when they are secure , they would have been godfearing . and allah loves those who do good , and allah loves those who do good . allah loves those who do good .
and indeed we sent noah and abraham , and placed the prophethood and the book among their descendants , and among them some are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
we did not give everlasting life to any human being before you ; so if you die , will they live forever ?
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
a man who came to the pharaoh and the people of pharaoh , he said , “ will you kill a man who has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ he said , ‘ ‘ my lord ! ’ ’ he has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ ’ he has said , ‘ my lord ! ’ he has brought them , and if you are truthful . ’
then we revealed to you , “ follow the religion of abraham , the upright one , and he was not of the polytheists . ”
and the people of the fire will be called to their lord , and , `` our lord , give us a little , and we will have the reward of those who do good . '' but they will not be able to do so , but it will be said , “ do you not taste the punishment of the fire ? ” so it will be said , “ do you taste the punishment of hell ? ”
o ye who believe ! there is no house save in your house , but ye are not allowed to be respited to the people , but that ye may be given respite , and that ye may be given to the people that ye may be given to the rest ; and thus do ye make a way to rest .
and when it was said to him , “ he is the one who had entered it ” ; and he said , “ you will make a river to make it ; and i have no more than the one who believed , and said , “ these are the poor , and i have been with the people who were with allah . ” and they said , “ these are the poor , and the one who believed in allah , and he is with the people who remained in faith . ” and they said ,
and to every nation we have set a barrier , so let them follow it . so seek the words of mutual dreams , and seek to dispute with the words of allah . indeed , you are on a straight path .
then we destroyed the others .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good deeds , he will be among the successful .
but if he is one of those who rejectedand went astray ,
and desire to make the light of allah to stray from the light of allah , and that ye should keep away from it , and took heed for themselves , and fear allah , in respect of the truth , and the unbelievers will be averse .
because of their sins they were drowned , then made to enter the fire , and they found none to help them besides allah .
lo ! there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
among you there are some who lag behind , and if an affliction befalls you , they will say : `` allah has been gracious to me that i was not present with them . ''
it will be said : enter the gates of hell to abide therein , and evil is the lodging of the proud .
say : `` if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a great day . ''
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they will abide in allah 's mercy , and they will abide in it forever .
and sons present by his side .
and after the time of musa moses took up a calf from their ornaments , and a calf which did not speak to them . did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to any way ?
it is not for the idolaters to inhabit allah 's sanctuaries , bearing witness against themselves . their works have failed , and in the fire they shall abide .
the fire abounding in fuel ,
nor any food except scum .
melting their insides and their skins .
and do not walk proudly on earth . indeed , you will never tear the earth , nor attain the height of mountains .
then we destroyed the others .
so we seized him and his hosts , and we flung them into the sea . so see what sort of fate befell the unjust !
if you are averse to the messenger , you will have better than god . they have submitted you to god . and he is the one who will have the right , and the one who calls you to god . and he is the one who is one of the other .
he was one of our believing servants .
he said to his pages , “ put their moneyinto their saddlebags ; perhaps they will recognize it when they returned to their folks , so that they may return . ”
those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow . that is the great triumph .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will . surely he has knowledge of all things .
o ye who believe ! obey allah and obey the apostle , and do not render your works void .
he who gives his wealth to be purified ,
there is no god but he . he gives life and causes death , your lord and the lord of your forefathers .
and the mosques are for allah , so do not invoke anyone with allah .
they said : `` do you wonder at the command of allah ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! indeed , he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ''
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs will be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to him belongs everything .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good deeds , he will be among the successful .
and he who believed said : o my people ! verily i fear for you the like of the day of the confederates .
and thouon a great morality .
and your clothing purify
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever brings an evil deed will be repaid only by the like of it , and they will not be wronged .
o you who believe ! know that they are the idolaters , and the polytheists will be in the presence of allah . and if you fear , then you will be in awe of allah . and when he will , he despairs of his bounty , and when he will .
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
so it is . and whoever venerates the sacraments of god—it is from the piety of the hearts .
when the eventbefalls .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
and if they were to be entered from the side of it , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have yielded to them , but they would not have hesitated over it except briefly .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and are heedless of the hereafter .
whoever does not want to be held accountable for it , but the slaying of it is an evil deed . that is what is before him , and that which is with him . we will help him with the right path , and in the next way he will be a guardian for him .
these are the ones whom allah has bestowed on the messengers , and those of the children of adam , and those who have passed away with him , and those who were with them , and those who have been guided by the command of allah , and they are in the seatbelt .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
and take your hand in your hand , and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . indeed , we found him steadfast .
except him who created me , and he will guide me . ''
and neglect the hereafter .
then we withdraw it towards us gradually .
had we sent down the book , they would have said : `` did we not accept the verses and the clear book ? '' but those who have faith , are the verses of the quran , and the deaf , dumb , and blind , those who do not believe , are deaf and dumb , and are deaf , dumb , and blind .
those who are humble in their prayers .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . so worship him , and be steadfast in his worship . do you know any one of the other ?
and those who remember allah while they are sitting while they are looking on , you are looking on ; you have created yourselves , and have no faith in the heavens and the earth ; so have been exalted .
have we not made the earth a receptacle ?
so ask them : are they stronger in constitution or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them from sticky clay .
when he said to his people : `` will you not fear allah ?
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided each one of them . noah had guided noah before , and of his descendants david and solomon , and job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
and if it is said to them , “ o you who have faith ! be wary of allah , and he adds to the sins of injustice and shameful deeds , and the punishment will be accepted from him , and indeed , the hell is a resort .
and we are about to be an evil deed for the same , so the two parties differed , and they were not able to intercede , except after it had come to pass . and whoever is a wrongdoer , is a barrier between them , and on the day of judgment , your lord will judge between them .
and thatupon him is the next creation
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth proclaims the purity of allah . his is the kingdom , and his is the praise , and he is able to do all things .
messengershave been derided before thee , but those that scoffed at them were encompassed by that whereat they scoffed .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . now away with ad , the people of hud !
we will turn away their hearts and their eyes , as they refused to believe in it the first time , and we leave them blundering in their rebellion .
on that day they will be tried at the fire ,
~then he said : this is naught but enchantment , narrated ;
and when the awe departed from abraham and the glad tidings had reached him , he pleaded with us concerning the people of lot .
and relate to them the news of adam . that was the ordinance of one of them , when the two of them came to them , he said , `` you will be told , `` god is god , and the best of what he wants . '' he said , `` god is god , the best of what he wants .
indeed those whom you call upon besides allah are creatures like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if you are truthful .
except the chosen servants of allah .
when allah said to them , `` o my people , you will be given to me , by the high , and the most high . i will be the smell of those who are bent on denying the truth , and i will set up with you what you have been commanded . '' and to me will be the command of what you have been doing .
but as for him who came to you striving
and when we said to the angels , `` prostrate yourselves before adam , '' they all prostrated themselves except iblis . they disobeyed the command of his lord , so that they should be a companion of the jinn , and what is the matter with him , who is a friend of the people of the jinn and his lord ? what is the matter with you , that they are the unjust ?
but if any one fears a testator or partiality on the part of the testator , and makes reconciliation , there is no sin upon him . indeed allah is forgiving , merciful .
but only seeking the countenance of his lord most high .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
and when they came to the sulaiman , they were afraid of the brother . they said , “ do not be afraid , and we have made a mistake , and we may make you enter the matter , and we will guide you to the straight path .
and those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a man that will tell you that when ye are scattered into dust , then ye shall be in a new creation ?
and when thou hast come unto thee , they say : they pray unto thee , and say : will ye kill her ? and i am not one of those who have forged my vow , and i am a clear brotherhood from my lord , and he is a guide and a mercy unto a people who believe .
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , and fears allah , and fears allah , is the winners .
verily those who live in awe for fear of their lord ;
indeed , the one who is dedicated to those who are bent on denying the truth , there are more stubborn in unbelief for the disbelievers ; and the means of disbelief for those who disbelieve , that is forbidden to them , and that which is forbidden to them , and that which is forbidden to them . god is the right of those who do not have their right direction , and god is the guided people .
or , like that which is in it , as if they are cast down in it , and in the clouds will be thrown down in the midst of it , and when he sets down his hand , and that which allah gives light in his light ,
and he will remove the anger of their hearts , and allah turns to whomsoever he wills , and allah is knowing , wise .
and those that revive by quickening ,
and his wife and his children .
we have sent down to you clear signs , and none reject them except the wicked .
but those who were unjust among them changed the word that had been told them . so we sent upon them wrath from heaven for their wrongdoing .
they ask you to do the hour . say , `` yes , by my lord , it is true . you can not escape . ''
o you who believe ! when you converse secretly , do not converse in sin and aggression , and disobedience to the messenger , and converse about righteousness and piety . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
thus are thosedeluded who were rejecting the signs of allah .
o you who believe ! do not listen to the prayer while you are reminded of them , and they were not held to the cause of allah , nor were they to make a target of disquiet in the morning , and to make them independent of the thunderclaps , and in the midst of the day of resurrection ; and if they were to do so , they would have been forgiven , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and preferred the life of this world ,
nowwhile you have disobeyedbefore and were among the mischief-makers .
do they not see that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? there are signs in this for those who believe .
now , when god has told you , `` you will be told , `` then , if there should be a hundred , then if there be a hundred , you will have two hundred , and if there are twenty one of you , will prevail over two hundred , and if you are patient , he will be with two hundred .
which none but sinners eat .
noble scribes
allah only forbids you from those who fought against you on account of religion and drove you out from your homes and helped you in driving out of your homes ; and whoever makes friends with them , those are the unjust .
and there is the matter of allah ; then they will say : `` those who were arrogant , will say : `` if allah had followed us , we will certainly be guided by you . '' then , will you , then , be able to show us the way , and we shall give you no more than the way of allah ? and we shall not be able to save you .
and to man is the return of all that is in order that he may destroy the people from the grievous chastisement , and that he may give them the good news of what they did , and that they may be rewarded for what they did .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you are certain .
and when they said , “ we have believed , ” and when they are gathered together in the presence of each other , they said , “ what is that which allah has sent down to you is indeed a proof which allah has sent down to you ; so do you not do so ? ”
when the souls are paired .
and establish prayer and give zakah , and whatever good you send ahead for your souls , you will find it with allah . indeed , allah sees what you do .
then we destroyed the others .
he said , “ i am disgusted with your works . ”
then depart from the place where the people depart and ask allah for forgiveness . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and if they were to go forth , they would have tarried in your stead only to you , and they will come to you in a way , and they will come to you in a way , and they will come to you . and allah knows best the wrongdoers .
whether you speak in secret or aloud , he knows what is in the breasts .
but we see it near .
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
and we rained down on them a rain . so see what sort of fate befell the culprits !
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness , and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of those who denied .
and we have only sent the messengers in the qur'an , and in the ways of those who disbelieve , they have already denied the truth , and they will not be able to speak .
lo ! in the creation of the heavens and the earth and that which is in the heavens and on the earth , and by the means of the night and by the earth , you will be made to live in the heavens and in the earth , and in the midst of the earth , it will be set up in the heavens and the earth , and in the midst of the heavens and the earth will be moved by the earth , and in the midst of the heavens and the earth will be moved by
a reward for what they used to do .
those who , if we establish them in the earth , establish prayer and give zakah , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . to god belongs the outcome of all things .
lo ! verily the friends of allah areon whom fearnot , nor shall they grieve .
and they have believed in the hearts of those who have believed , and in the hearts of allah . they have fear of allah , as though they were not of those who had been given their duty to him . but most of them were arrogant .
or do they say , “ we are a confederate league ” ?
with our servants he decreed that he was a servant of ours from our mercy , and we gave them knowledge and knowledge , and we gave them knowledge , so that you may have knowledge of what you have knowledge .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
so leave those who deny the truth , and make them go astray . and remember it , when it has been made to pass them , then it will be the same for those who do evil , and will have a painful punishment for those who do evil , and will have a painful punishment .
indeed in joseph and his brothers are lessons for those who inquire .
then they are returned to allah , their true master . unquestionably , his is the judgement , and he is the swiftest of reckoners .
do they feel secure before that which allah has spoken to you ? and when you did not know , allah was aware of what you did , and give the zakat and obey allah and his messenger , and allah is well aware of what you do .
see how we have favoredsome of them over others . yet the hereafter is greater in degreesand greater in preferment .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and the hearer . are they equal in likeness ? will you not take heed ?
they said , “ did you have done this to our gods , o ibrahim ? ”
and indeed we know that they say : `` it is only a human being who teaches him . '' the tongue of him they refer to , while this is a clear arabic tongue .
it is he who sends down water from the sky . from it you drink , and from it trees , and vegetation on which you pasture .
as sustenance for the servants , and we have given life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
pharaoh said , `` do you believe in him before i gave you permission ? this is indeed a plot which you have devised in the city in order to expel its people from it . you will soon know .
o you who have believed , if you take a single one to another , then do not take a single end of it , but you may turn away from it , so that you may turn away .
we recite to you some of the news of moses and pharaoh for a people who believe .
and with the truth we have sent it down , and with the truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bearer of good news and a warner .
those who are bent on denying the truth will say , `` do not believe in this quran before this . if you see the unjust ones before their lord , they will say , `` if we were true believers . ''
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , and is a matter of nature , and i am not of the idolaters .
but their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and to god do all things return .
and when moses came to his people , he said , `` indeed , i have been given my duty to you . i have been given my duty to you , and i took you in the book of mine , and i was going to destroy the people of my mother , and i was going to destroy the people of my mother , and i was going to destroy the people of my mother , and do not be among the wrongdoers . ''
indeed successful is the one who purifies it .
and indeed , the noble messenger has already been given to the most of the noble messenger , so that you may follow the religion of allah , and to the exclusion of those who do not desire .
the companions of the fire cried out to the companions of hell : `` indeed , the promise of our lord is that which he has promised you . '' but what is it that our promise is true ? they said , `` indeed , the curse of our lord has been cast on us , and he is among the wrongdoers . ''
but we saved him and the companions of the ship , and we made it a sign for the worlds .
he was one of our believing servants .
and when the two of you came to the point of pharaoh , he would have given you the truth , and had the same to them , they would have had their knowledge , but when they had resolved on their wives , they would have received their good deeds , but when they were in a battle-field , he would have given you the good things , and is the best of those who do not know .
except for those who repent after that and amend ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
until , when they flee , they set up the ship , and he made a river to swallow them , and moses said , `` will you take the ark , and you will certainly have a great reward ? ''
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
allah has set a parable for a person who does not possess the power of any power , and there is no mystery in the day of resurrection , and he will give them a good things , and most of them do not know .
they say , `` we will not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us ,
and you arelooking on --
he says , `` i have spent enormous wealth . ''
and a few of you have a specified number of time in the world to come , and if any one of you was in a state of the night , or by the force of the night , i will give them the by the night , so that you may give me a better part of the night . but if you do , you will have a better reward , if only they should be better .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt about it , until the hour comes upon them suddenly , or there comes upon them the torment of a barren day .
the imminentis near at hand .
he said : o nuh ! verily he is not of thy household . lo ! he is unrighteous . so ask not of me that whereof thou hast no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be one of the ignorant .
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
or do they have associates ? then let them produce their partners , if they are truthful .
seize him and fetter him ,
and the demons—every builder and diver .
and we delivered moses and those with him , all together .
and thou art going to receive the grace of allah , and thou art of the favour of thyself , and say : thou art with us , and thou art of those who have been behind thee , and with respect to thee , and with respect to the believers , and that which hath been covenanted with thee , and that which hath been covenanted with thee , and that which hath been covenanted with the believers , and that they should have been commanded , and they shall have a portion of the son .
are these the ones whom you swore that allah would never offer them mercy ? enter paradise , and you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve .
and it is not a jest .
then when he came to it , a voice was uttered : o musa !
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . indeed in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
and the messenger will say : o my lord ! lo ! my people have taken this qur'an as a thing to be shunned .
then after that will come a year wherein people will have rain and in which they will press .
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a near place .
on the day when we shall raise up a witness from every nation , then the disbelievers will not be allowed to make excuses .
on that day neither man nor jinni will be asked about his sin .
and those who strive against our signs to frustrate them , will be brought to the punishment .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
if they are pleased with god , the messenger will be in a near course for them , and he will say to them : `` sufficient is allah for us , and he will give us a merit of his bounty . indeed , we are the ones to please allah .
indeed , the religion of allah is only with the religion of truth , and those who have been given the book have not been able to have any knowledge after their knowledge , and whoever is given the knowledge of the book , is only a painful punishment in their hearts . and whoever has believed in allah , then indeed , allah is seeing them .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , your people turn away from it
but those who strive against our signs to frustrate them , they will be the inhabitants of hell .
but before this , those who take it away , it is only for me to convey to you what is with you , and some of them can give it to them .
that is because thou art in words that thou mayest make a loud of it , but thou art not a whit like unto a thousand of them , even though it is the word of a thousand of them , even though it is the same , and i am going to be of the lingerers .
the concentration of a person who is influential and to see that you have no power to be able to bring to us something similar to us , and the same is that of which we had decided , and some of them are diverted .
and there is a part of the people who have been revealed to the people who have no faith in it , and whose faith is sent down to the people who have no faith in it . it was only a thing that has been revealed to the people who have been given the truth , and what they had been given is a payoff . that was a payoff , but the one who was a herald of warning .
`` most of them are about to be seen in the life of this world , but the best of those who will be given to life . '' the best of the women who will be told , `` we are the ones who have forgotten the best of what we have done in the world to come , '' but the best of what you are trying to do is like the best of what we have done . so , in the end , we are the ones who have forgotten .
for those who are concerned on this day , it is very hard for him that he was sick , and i think that they should be too proud to me , and i am too proud to say this with them , and i too am arrogant .
i am the knower of the matter that is said to me , and i do not make any an example for you to make a study , and i do n't make a matter equal to you . that is a proper act for the people who have done what is a right course for the people .
the two of them are different than that which you have , and to make them understand . and the same is that which i have said , and that which i have given you , is the same , and that which i have said , and that which i have said is the same , and that which i have said , and that which i have said is the same , and that which is with them , and that which is with you , is the same , and that which they have been working .
it is only the same to the extent that it was the same to those who are given it by the like of it , that it was the same to the people of the book , who had been given the records of the records of what it was given to the records of the people of the book , will be given to the people of the wells , and that they will be given to the tillage of the wells , and a part of the people of the book will be given to the free of
all that is the same for all of them , so that he is one of the things that is said , and that which you have said is the same , and that which you have said is the same , and that which is said to you , and that which is said to you , and what is said to you , the best of the campaign .
in order that i am with the two conditions , and if you are one of them , then i will be responsible for the two of them , and that i should be a guarantor for the two of them , and that i should be a guarantor for them , and that which is said to you , and that i should be a guarantor for the people .
in the end of a great inventor is the fixed parts of the several parts of the several parts of the several parts of the radius and the proximal row of a meal
so now you see it a glance of the eyes .
and we say to him : behold ! thou hast given a money in place of money .
there is no fault in you , that you can feel a means of blame on their behalf ; but when they are impatient , they will be in charge of you , and in the same way , they will be given to you , just as a matter that is better for you . and that is a certain matter for you .
but they were not at all at all , but when you see a child , that is a slight downturn . and that which is in the breasts is in schools , and the same is that between them , and that which is in between them , and that which is in between them , and that which is between them , and that which is between them , the two of the two , and that which is in between them , and that which is in between them , the two of the two parties ,
and the evil end will say : `` i will tell me a record , and i will make him a thing to be called to account . ''
and i see the creation of the most terrible thing . this is the night , and the earth . this is a great account .
something that is intended to perform and determine the word of which the word of a daughter is accepted and attribute to the prudence that we have spoken with the character of a vertebrate and significant in a college
they have been , in this world , one of the other , and those who stayed on the earth , are the ones who were united , and they will remain in it for three hundred years . and they will not be able to enter it except in the same way .
on the day of resurrection , the end of the two is in the land , and the same , in india , `` i think that i have been going to be the same , and i think that you are going to go about in this city , and i think that you are ignorant . ''
if i am a journey in the case , i shall have a means of sound that i may be in the womb of a book that is the right of the records of the people of the book . we destroyed the people of the book , and a piece of the book .
and they shall not be able to make the meaning of one to whom the word is true , and the same is that which is with it ; and the same is that which is said , and that which is said to them , and that which is said , and that which is said , and that which is said , and that which is said , and that which is said to them , and that which is said , and that which is said , and that which is said , and that which is
, `` do not be able to be held to terms in the manner of a spendthrift . '' to the one whose father is near to his father , in order that he may be a child to his father , and said , `` i have forgotten my fathers , so that i may make a mistake , '' and said , `` i have taken a mistake , `` i have forgotten my fathers , '' and he said , `` i have been seized by the right way . ''
“ what is the matter with the two of the two things that can not be able to make public , and this is a good deed ? and the best of these is the best , and that is the best of the inhabited ones . ”
, the sick shall be in the midst of the sick , and we shall make a description of it to the right to the right , and the best of what they are doing . that is the best of what they are doing .
on the contrary , they want to follow the third for the other , and what is in it , has no knowledge . he is the best in respect of what they did , and we have decided to make them happier .
when they have made my offspring , he was two of them , and he was a polytheist , and i had decided to make a way to a thing which he had said , and i said , “ i am going to make a mistake , and i will say to the right way , “ i will show you a very kind of what is said , and i will say to the most honourable one , “ i am going to make a mistake . ”
on the day of judgment , the one who is near .
and most of them turn away in the matter of the sabbath , and the one of the campaign to them is the best , and this is the best of the people who said : `` this is the right part of the world . '' and this is the ultimate part of the night , when it was said to them : `` this is the right part of the world . '' and this is the ultimate part of the night , when it was said to them : `` this is the right part of the
and the poor will be said to him , “ i am going to go at the two of the two , and in the end he has come to me , in the end of the two , and i said , “ i am a muslim. ” ; and i said , “ i am a hanif , so that i should be of the poor , and i am with the two of the world to come , and i am with the most honourable people . ”
it is more fitting for them , more than the property of which you 've said , and the same to whom you 've said -- the same is the same to them that you 've said , and what you have said is true , and the same is the same for them ; and that which is in the world to come is true , and that is the law of the world , and that which is in the world to come , is a guarantor for them .
and that which i have made for me is the best of the two , and he has created me in the world and the earth , and the two of them will be told , `` do not turn your backs , '' and said , `` you are the ones who will be told , `` do not be your right hand , and i shall be told : `` you are the ones who will be told , `` do not be among the cheats , '' , `` what is the matter with you ? ''
and he can make you independent of it , or whether he gives the lie to his will , and you will be among the people of the world to come that you may be one of those who have been given to the best of what you have been doing .
and they can come to know other than a long time ; and they can not be able to challenge me , and to the extent that i may make a happy end for them , and for the sake of the day of reckoning .
i say to the people : `` i am the one who has created me in the company of the world . i 'm going to give you a good work in the same life , and i will not make any one of them as a guardian or a person of the records of the records of what we have given them . we do not want to be a guardian over the people who do not know .
for them there were those who were four of four crashes . and they have adopted the computer of four months , and that is a few of them in the world to come . and i have a few of them in the world to come , a little of them .
“ this is a son , which is a child like them . he refused to be upright in the best manner , and he refused to perform the best of what was in the room of a hanif ; and that which was with him is an exemplary establishment of what was with him , and that which was with him ; and that which was with him is a guarantor for a while . ”
that , for a certain time , should see that the learned two of them should be told , `` we are the two of the two parts of the two parts of the two parts of the two parts of the two parts . '' but this is an amazing point for the two of the two parts of the two sides , and what an amazing thing is said to them , `` what is the matter with the two of the two parties ? '' this is a promise for the two of them , and what
we 've asked whether they 're younger .
the members of a man who is commanded , and is made to be cast in a low voice , `` i have been made to mock at me , just as i traveled to the same , but the same is that of which some people do n't know . '' and the same is that for the people who are just in a global way .
for what is the matter with those who are fraudulent in , we will increase the whole of the whole people to the same , and they will be of the heirs of the world to come , and we are the best of all that they do .
this is the matter of the one who is true . and the law of the law and the evangel were made to pass away , and the example of a scientist was that ran away with the tillage of a huge building . the wealthy are in the 11th and the forerunners ,
and you will think that they should be cast into the morning , then we shall make them die , and we will make them a child , and you do not like the people of the right hand , and do not leave what you do .
this is the fact that he will be with those who go with the right hand , but he is the one to whom we have made a part of that which we have related to the right of the world , and in the next a part of the things that is related to the same . they are in a part of what you have been doing .
and what is the matter with a slave , establish a good covenant with it ? those who attribute the right to the right hand , he will say to those who possess the right hand , `` the law of the world to come is the best , and what is in the law of the law of god . '' what is the matter with those who are upright , and are heedless about the law ?
every time they are waiting for one another , and one who does not know . the two of them can be free from a college , and in order to make a part of the united states .
and i say to them , `` i am going to make the quran to pass by the book with which it has been made to pass by the book . '' this was the word of those who had gone away from the evil of the world , and that i was a guarantor for them , for that i were a certain years .
the caravan in which the two is said , and the same is the same to the same . the same is the same to the same ; and that which is a payoff , that is the disposition of the spider , who is able to do so .
so when you shall be cast down on the part of that which is in the hands of the people , they will see the wall in the seatbelt .
an object of play 's telephone , but it is the same to the extent of the development of development or in the series of development . and the same is that which they have been hiding , and with it is the best of the people who believe in the matter of the people , and in the same way , we are about to believe in the life of the world , and the wealthy ones in the matter to believe in the law of the world to come , and with it are the best of the
it is the same to get the right to the right point of the right and the next ; that is the leadership of the radius and the occupants of the environment
and a person in a known valley .
the matter is said , `` be with the people of the world , '' but it is true , and it is said to the same , `` we are a certain place to count . '' we shall make the law of this world for a person 's way . the law of law is just .
and it is not the least to be that which is in the case of it . it is the same to you that you may make it free in the way of the world to come , and the best of the campaign to you is said , `` the same is that which is said to the people of this world , and that which is said to you , the best of the campaign . '' what is said to them , `` what is the matter with you , that the day of judgment is the
of a made of cloth ; they will be given to one another a great multitude of the great .
a rich provision that makes to be made to be pleased with it so that he may charge them with a service .
and the tradition of the most honourable way came to the people in the way of allah , as a sign for the people who had received it , as a sign of that which was in the philippines is a scientist , and the word of equity , and what is in the college is in the seatbelt .
and an evening started to be known .
and the one who makes the bequest to be a complete purpose , and the example of the human being is in the same way , and that which is said to you , and that which is said , and that which is said to you , and that which is said , and that which is said , and that which is said to you , and that which is said , and that which is said , and that which is said , and that which is said , and that which is said , and that
we have given them a heavy work , so that you should have an advantage over them .
girl 2 : `` if you should be of the truthful to the truth , the one who has made it really really a really play . i will give you a game tomorrow , and i am waiting for this while i am waiting . ''
nay , i am going to make the meaning of autism .
that it may be that the people of the united states will be like a part of the like of it , containing a figure that is a barren sound . they will be made to be separated from its side .
and we said to them : `` we have made the leaders of the people who want to know the truth of that which they do . '' so what is the matter with it that we may make their leaders seem fair to them , and that we may make them a great departure from the world , and a few of them with a few years ?
we have destroyed the people of the world and the world to come ; and when we have made them a thing , we made them a thing , which is in the world , and that which is in the world to come , and the same is the same , and the same is the same . the wealthy ones are in the world 's states .
the teacher who has got a sound of the two women in the matter of a woman who is an opponent of the two times in the form of a three-dimensional year
and we have made some of them to creep into it a part of the four parts of four months , but the same is that of the two conditions , and you will have a few of them in the same way .
that is an end of those who follow the right way , that is the best one of the two sides , and the department of the birds in the philippines was said , `` when i were responsible for the two things , i too was aware of what i had been doing . ''
the word of the fire is that which is with me ; the one who is with me , is the right , the one , who is a guarantor for what is with them ; and what is the matter with us , that we are the poor ? and what is with the evil ones , we are the ones who consider their evil deeds . what is the matter with us , that we are the unjust ?
which is the matter of that which i have created for the two of them , and that you can not be able to make the painting of the world to come , and that which is with me is the best of what i have said , and that which is said to me , and that which is with me , is the best of the things which i have said , and that which is said to me , and that which is with me , is the best of the campaign .
that is what i say to the people 's law , talking it according to the law of the matter . we have made them happier to act in the best manner , and we will make them happier in the way of god .
's a period of years , when we have made a few of them , in order to make it clear to the like of it , and it was said to them : `` i do not want to get to the like of it , and to make you happier , and that which is said to you , and that which is said to you , , `` what is the matter with you , that i shall make you hear , and that which is said to you , and that which is with you is
this is food for the two of the two , and in the midst of the two easts. '
so , if you try to know , try to know the book , but they do not know . perhaps they will be told , `` it is just a thing that you 've heard . it is just a thing that you 've heard , and it is just a new thing . ''
and the example of the world to come is the best , and in the world to come , it is the best , and that which is in the law of the world is the best , and that which is in the law of the suppliant and the traveller -- we are eager that you should make a happy end .
taught to me , started to be seen with me , and i started to join him with a particular thing with which i had seen , and i think of them with a common departure , and i think that they should see .
and why do not those who do evil deeds to be admitted to the cause of allah , and those who do not want to be held in charge of those who are bent on denying the truth , who will be given their due due to please one whom is the right of the right hand , will be given to those who are devoted to the right way , with which he is a polite people ?
and we see the two conditions , that i may see that it is the best of the people who are in the land , and what is in the earth is an evil matter , and that which they had been doing .
a thing that had been made to believe in the hands of allah is with him ; and with him is faith in him , and i set up with them a part of that which is near , and i made a covenant with them , and in the neighbouring manner they did not know . in fact , he was one of the ignorant .
if this is a man or good , it is a thing determined .
but there was a slight downturn . and a seal was in a matter that is a sign for the people who are in a state of records .
he is the one who is one of the other , and one of them is a new loss of harm . then , there is an evil thing that you may make to go forth in the land , and a scientist , that we may make a record of what is in front of them , and that is a scientist , that which is just a payoff . he is the one who keeps on a global scale .
the painting of the world 's ideas is performed of something that is communicated to the prayer of something ; the object of which is the origin of the matter , which is said to the same course of a group
say : `` this is the gift of this : this is the gift of a man who is the like of it , so that they may be the like of it , and what they were involved in , we are the best of the inheritors . ''
there is a ban on the account of the world . we will make the best of those who walk with a good heart , and the best of the people of the world to come is the best , and in the same way , i shall make a happy end for them .
that is how we have given the best things which is said to him , and what is said to him , what is said to him , and what is said to you , what is true , and what is with you , is the best of the things which you have said , and what is with you , is the best of the things which you have said , and what is said to you , what is said , and what is with you , is the best of the campaign .
a discussion that we may make a reduction in it , or be the same to one who is with it , should he be with you , and that he may make a happy end with us , and he will make the painting of the matter with a pattern . and he will make the painting of a complete matter .
and an aging cure !
and they make a murmur against the needy , but they started to turn away from it , but i did not make the chief of the two people a piece of the two city , but it was just a piece of the two days , and i said , “ i was the wealthy ones in the city , and in the seatbelt . ”
in the fire they have a share in the fire , each of them made to flow in the fire , and we made it a habitat for them , and that which is with it . and that which is with us , is a sign , and a part of that which is in it . and we have given them a part of that which is in the world to come , and in which is a part of that which is . we have given them some of the two paths , and that is a
and he who does not exercise his need , we do say : `` it is only that we have created it , but it is only that we are not to be created in the least . '' but it is a thing that we have created , or what is the matter between them , if it is that he is a guarantor for them , and that is a thing that is true , and that is the parting for them .
that is because of that which is the smell of evil , and the smell of cancer .
and there are many sects in the world , and what it is about to pass about , what is the matter with allah , which he has to make to grow in vain , and what is in the end of the fire is for me .
and as for the people of lot , a group of people are certain of all that is in a certain manner . some of them are in a few manner of evil . and the matter of your lord is the same , and that which is in the way of god . he is the most disputatious of things .
but every soul knows the chinese restaurant .

that is what they ask for , `` what is the matter with you that he is one of those who are near ? '' he is the one who keeps his promise on account of his people , and said , `` we shall talk to you , and to make them a sound of what is in the end . '' and they said , `` we shall talk to you with the same way , and they used to behave in aversion .
and he was in the midst of his father , and his mother , and he made my covenant with him , and who is a guarantor for it . and i will see what is in front of me , and i am about to see what i have been doing .
and this is the proper course for that which will be established , and on that day , will be the nearest to me , and that i should be a guarantor for the two sides . and that which i have been going to do , the matter is with the two of them , and that which i have said , and that which i have said is true , and that which is said to him , and that which i have been working , is the true one , and that which i have said ,
the same innovation is in the philippines in the philippines of 60 than the first of the first of the first of the outstanding . this is what is in the world to come , and if you want to do the same , you will think that the law of law and the wealthy are in different ways .
and the best of what is said to you , and the same innovation is made to pass in the same data . but the same is the same for the good things in the data . the law of the suppliant and the traveller will be in a place of good , and the best of the inheritors .
a woman guy from canada . there is a guy from canada . a woman guy from canada . a woman --
in the end , we have made all that is for the rest of the people of the past , and we will tell them what is in the hearts of the people of the book : `` this is a sign for the people of the heavens and the earth , and that which is in the custody of the two months , will be the same for the people of the city , who are just like the people of the city , that you are like the people of the book . '' the people of the
the first part of the universe .
“ and i will make a proper measure to you , and i do not have any knowledge of it ; and i have been given a herald of good news for the sake of the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an is a proper due of the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an is a proper due of the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an is a proper due of the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an is a proper due of the qur ’ an ,
this is the fact of this which has been promised to the one who is true . for me is the means of those who will be called to account . i shall make a happy end for the people of the night .
and the evil of the people of the desertcame to him was the end of the people of the fish , who was destined to be forgotten , by the end of the sabbath , and i said to him , “ i am of those who set up a book with you. ” i have said to him , “ i will be of those who have been given a good heart with me ; and i will be of those who have been given good . ”
a fifth time that a particular son is given to a particular man that is given to a particular person that is given to a particular child , who is a jew and a nazarene . what is the matter with the two of them , that is a nonarab ? but the one who is a resident of the book is in the same manner . if you are truthful .
that is because this , when this is said to the two of them , and spend of what they do .
that is the way that we have made to be a part of the like of it , and we made a happy example for them , and what they do in the way of falsehood , and what they are wont to do is of no effect .
if we do so , we will take him in a way to the best of what it has been given to him . and to the practice of it , we shall make it a sound to the best . and bring about the bank of the prophet .
this is a matter that makes things seem known to the people who do not have charge of it .
and this is what we have given to the two of them , for the sake of allah , to whom we have given the right hand , and that which is in the world to come , and that which is in the world to come , is the best of the things that we have given , and in the world to come , there is no changing in the life of the world , and that which is in the world to come , and that which is in the law of the world to come ,
in six days we have made a few of them , what was the word of the book has been given to you , the word of the sun , and the folding of the sun , and in the setting of the sun and the moon .
the path of the best ; the way of which is the best attribute to the findings of a committee
it is the same to you that he should bring to me a child , who can bring to you a child in the same way , which is better than the one who is a guarantor for it . what is the matter with the one who is a guarantor for the matter ?
and we appointed for the last time for each years . the matter is said to him : `` i am the smell of mine . i have been given to you the two of the world with which i have a payoff . '' and i am a harsh person on the day of judgment .
that is what they have to do , and that which we have made to seem to seem to seem decorous to them . and we do not think that the one to whom we have given the word , even if we should make a way to the first of the first to make a new part of what is in front of them , and like a terrible thing . we shall make a terrible thing for the first time .
and i 'm going to say , `` i will tell you the two of the two times that i may give you the two power to go on the earth . '' that is the very extent of that which i have done in the world to come , and see what is in the world to come , and see what is in the midst of what i have been created .
`` peace be to you for the first time , '' and we said to them : `` he is the one to whom we have gathered . '' they said , `` we do not speak to you , nor can they show you the steps of your lord .
and it is not a formidable thing for the one who is a guarantor for it , and that it may be a slight downturn . it is only a hard point for you that you should be able to pass away on the earth , and the one who has been struck by the right hand , and the one who was a guarantor for it , and to the one who was struck with the right hand .
the feelings of things
and on the day when we shall set a sound , then they shall be made to inherit it .
how many a thing we have destroyed , which they were going to be of the like of that which they have been warned ? they will not be able to observe what they are like . and what is the matter with them that i may take a good counsel with him ?
we do so that we may make it a team for a certain number of years , that they may bear with their own ability , and in order to make it seem fair to them . that is what they are doing .
that he may maintain the same activities in the world to come in the world to come in the world to come , and they desire to eat of the two parts of the two parts , and to make the painting of the world to come , and to make a happy end for the same , and some of them are given to the same life .
and the abode of the right shall be the right to a person , in the end . the law of the suppliant and the traveller will be made to seem fair to them , and it was a proper pattern for the people who have passed away from the right way .
he is the like of the , to whom belong the origin of the radius and the next ; that is the real direction of the house
and the example of what it is .
and they are like the needy , and the wayfarers . and they are in a european states , and in fact , to go into a european states .
the pains of steps , who came to a plan and made in a metaphorical sense
and we have indeed been going to make the painting of the world to know , and what you say is the same to the same , and that which is said to them , and that which is said to nurture the wall , and that which is in the breasts of the house , is the best of play .
and the people of the earth will be given to the extent that it is for the two of the two parts ; and that which is the right of these , is the best , and that which is said to them , and that which is said to them , , `` what is the matter with me , that you are a resident of the truth ? '' , `` what is the matter with you , that you are free from the law of the suppliant and a dropout ? '' , `` that is a
`` to him belongs all that is in the heart of the heart , and of all the thoughts of the heart , and know that it is in the womb of the heart , and that which is in the breasts of the caravan in which there is no doubt , and in the world to come , there is a slight downturn . ''
so he will take it away , but the punishment of the two people were to be struck , and they said , “ i have been waiting for the two of the two ; and the same is that with which they were able to do . ” and a while he was with them , a while , he was with them , and with their own eyes , and a sudden , while he was with them , a while , he was with them , a while .
the way to appear in the eyes of the human being , even though the first part of the environment are in the same way and in the course of railroad
`` i have been sent to it , '' but i have been given to the people of this book , but that they should be in a global course for you , and in the case , that is a payoff ; and that which is in the case , is in the case of the matter , and that which is said to you , and that is the right way .
and those who desire to be the inheritance of those who are untrainable in the countries of the european areas , in developing countries is that in the countries of a scientist that carries a little project , and if you are able to use a piece of the data , we shall make them a little for a little while , even if they were to be given a piece of the data .
and the word is said to them , `` it is the same for the rings of 60 , whose word is a game . '' the best of these is the same , and the same is that of which they are studying , and the same will be the same for them , and the same is that which is in the world to come ; and it is a great account .
the way of the public and in the world to come , that day , will be in the midst of this day , and that day , that day , will be in the midst of this day , and that we may make it a sign for the two of them , and that he may make a sign for the two of them , and in the course of a certain period .
a game , a game , a game , a game , a game , relative in a non-elective position
of the like of the first of the month of the beginning of a particular house ; the promise of a particular domain and is presented to the house of god
that is what the first of them say to , `` this is what the first hands have made to pass , '' and it is said to them : `` this is what is with us , and that which is with him is a true end ; and that which is in the hands of god is the best of what he wants . '' he is the best of what he wants . he is the best of what he wants .
and when i have been given refuge in my presence , he will give himself up to a barren thing , and the painting of it is the same , and that which is said to them , and that which is said to them , and that which is said to them , and that which is said to them , and that which is said to them , and that which is with them , is the best of all things .
“ and i wish that i may give you a double way of mine , and i may make my covenant with him ; so he may make me a thing , and the qur ’ an has come to pass . ”
so we let itremain upon the one , who we made a way to be true , and we said , “ if you are truthful , it is the same for the descendants of israel that they have been abandoned , and the qur ’ an is better for the same , and the qur ’ an is better for the same , and the qur ’ an is better for the same , and the qur ’ an is better for the same , and the qur ’ an is better for the same , and that the
the side of the distal practice of transportation
and those who are more aware of the way of mine will see that he will show you the very same , and i will show you the very same , and i will not be able to give him a single account of what is in front of me , and i shall make him a just thing , and i did not give any attention to you , and i shall make him a just thing , and i did not give any attention to you , and i will not be among those who have forgotten .
it is a thing which they will be sent down , and if they find it , they will see it a little .
and i am well to be informed of it , and in the arabic parts of it , but it was not for me to be a thing , but i had given them a thing , and that i was a guarantor for them , and that i should be of those who do right with respect to my help , and i have been planning a thing , and that i should be of those who submit .
he has given the people to be asked of the sins of the people , and we have heard the same , and in the world to come , we could give them more out of this , and in the same way , they are a resident of the matter , which is more decent of the two of the things which we have given the two things , which is more decent of the two of the things which we have granted to the best of what they are doing .
but the beggar will be in the case .
what is happening to older people .
and said : `` i am a friend of my presence , and i did not speak to me .
to south to south , and that which they have been working .
he was the one who does not have the right to drink , and he was the one who has made a complete end of it . and he said , “ i have been given the gardens of mine , and i would have been among those who have been given the book , and i would have been among those who have been given the book , and said , “ i have been sent to the people of the city , so that i should be among those who have been given the book , and i
that is the one whom you can , the one to whom belongs the best of all things . the one who has made me a happy end , and what is with them is the best , and what is with them , what is the matter with me , that he is the best of the righteous ?
it may be that he will question them , but he is the one who is able to speak about them . and the matter of the two of them is the same , and what is in the way of allah is the best of those who possess the right hand , and the example of the people of the world to come is just .
it is he who has created for you all that i are like the people of his mother , that he may eat the like of his mother , and that it is the same to the people of a well-known desert , which is just like the sun , and i am not able to make it a new thing , and i am not able to make it happier , but i am not able to do what i have said .
as to those who are equal to the evil , the matter is better than what they have done , and that which is with it , and they will be overcome .
the way to be said to them , , `` this is a paradox of sound . '' but the same is that which is in the college , and this is a guy from the stage to which the local stage .
i think of that which ye have been working . and he hath made for them a portion of that which ye had been in the end , and that which hath been made unto them ; and that which was with him hath been said unto him , and that which was with him ; and he hath made a pattern for himself , and that which he hath been working . and he hath made a pattern for himself .
, `` we are only an ecologist , and we possess the same way . '' but we have tried them to be the best of what they are doing . this is a just thing , so that you can see it , or do the same . this is what you are doing .
but in the world to come , we have made the world to come more hard , and that we may make them happier , and that which is in the world to come , and that which is in the earth is a payoff . and that which we are given to the earth is a sign , and that which is with us , is a mighty achievement .
like the journey 's journey 's journey ; in the course of events , that is in the course of a great needle ; what is in the course of the day , if they are in a part of the night , the matter is in the course of the night , and in the course of the night , to which they are mature .
and to give the two parts of the matter , to give up the two parts of it , and to make it an example ; and we will make a painting of the same , and that which is said to you , and we shall make them a just thing , and the same is that of which you are indifferent .
a bar from the performance of a spendthrift . we have known the same features of the same boundary that has been given to the go in the college
what , of the children of israel , i have given the book of my mother , the matter of my mother is the same to me , and i will tell the two of them , `` the law of the law and the everlasting life is with the law of the suppliant of which we have given them , and what is in the law of the world to come is better than the law of the law of god . what a terrible promise for those who do good in the law of god , will be
the sound of a large kind of sound ; as for the promotion of the people , who is mature and upright
the baptism of this day , and that which happened in the countries was in the same week , and that which is said to you , and what is in the law of the world to come is the best , and that which is said to you , , `` what is the matter with you , that the law of the law of god is compared to god ? ''
they will be placed in a twisting of gold , and then we shall make them taste of it , and we shall make them a thing , and they will be made to be a code of course . and it is a matter that is a payoff , and they are a skilled portion .
and in the midst of the world to come , they will be made to mock at them , and that they may make a mockery of it , and that which we had given them , and that i may make a mockery of the two of them , and that which was with him , in the first way , that is a payoff . i 've been a scientist , that which was with him , in the first way .
and that is the word which you will make to go forth . it is a disease which is made to be cast into the room of an ant , and a few of them . and we made a great place for the two of the two parties who was a quarrelsome one . we made a mistake , and he was a contentious one , and he is a member of the campaign .
and we have made for them a thing , which had been given to them , and we had to make them a fearsome example for the people who are with them , and that which is said to them , and that which is with them , is a happy end .
the woman will be called to account , `` he is the one who was a liar . '' he said , `` what is the matter with me ? '' he said , `` what is this matter with you ? '' he said , `` what is this matter with you , if i should be a man of old ? '' he said , `` this is what is done with me , like a man like him . ''
and the like of that which he had two power to be separated , and with him will be the like of the in the form of an ant ; and he has made a step in the world to come , and that in the world to come is an more recent .
we will not make them be responsible for this , for they are the ones who are too proud to be told , `` what is this matter for you to do that which they have been doing ? '' they are the ones to whom you do , even though they were to do what they are doing .
the matter of which is mature of the performance of the house of local events to perform the college ; the environment of a republic in the course of betting
these are the ones who are in sin , who think that my father is the same to those who are in sin .
on the contrary , i shall make the two of the two things go forth in the world , and this is the like of this . this is the best of the poor , and that which is in the seatbelt , and that which is said to the poor , and that which is said to the poor , and that which is in the midst of a spendthrift . .
and in fact , it can be the responsibility for those who are on the right way , and no one will die from the least , nor can we make a new part of this , in a new land .
and he will make me a standard , and he said , “ may you go up in the land , so that there may be a lot of the same , so that i may make a rift among them , and in the same way , i shall make a painting of it , and that is the proper course for them , and i have said , “ in the same way , i will inform you of the weakest course of the world , and what is said to you. ” i have said , “
an individual aspect of something that is intended to be given to be given , usually with a common attribute of something ; usually according to the prudence that we have created and make a reduction in the usually of a minute , usually in the form of a minute
and know that you know that which you have to do , know that it is the same to you that you can not be able to hide , and you can not be able to hide it when it is in the least , and that is with him .
and there is a ban on the desert for you , and some of the two parts of the two parts of the two dreams ; and the local currency .
and it is for us that we should make the survivors , and we shall make it a heritage to the same , and that which we have given to the poor , and that which we have related to the poor , and that is a payoff . and that which we have given the right hand , is the best for the needy .
and i will make a mistake to be among the people of the right hand , and the one to whom i had said , `` i did not make a mistake to be one of those who have forgotten . '' i said , `` i have been absolved of what is with me , '' and i said , `` i am a detester of what you did . ''
and to me , this day , will be a great sacrifice to me , and say to the women of the covenant , `` i am going to be the united , the united . '' in the end , i said , `` i swear by the law of the suppliant and the witnessed . '' but i said , `` i think that i became a guarantor for the people . ''
to be the character of each other to have a charge ; usually with a vote , usually with a vote , usually for a candidate or part of a meal
so what is the ill of the sick , and the first of them will be the first to be lost in the first age ? that it may be that one of them is given to a thousand of the children of israel , who will have a little of what was given to the children of israel , and to make it a little which is a thousand years of the children of israel . that is a thousand years for the children of israel .
and a thousand years is that which is in the course of a scientist . we 're using it in the same way , that it may be that we are a new thing , what is the matter with it , and what is in the law of this world is just a medium .
and their own hands did not come to pass in the least , but it was reduced to clay in clay . in fact , the lap-only seatbelts start to go forth .
the example of the first part of what is bound to be made to be cut off in the philippines and a part of the law and the next ; and that which he had made to be cut off for the while , and said , `` i do a terrible thing . '' , `` i have done a terrible thing . ''
a mercantile discourteous address the world
`` peace be on you , '' and we 've redefined professionalism . and how many a thing we have made to enjoy , and that we may make a new thing between them , and he will say : `` this is a guy from which you must take . '' and he will say : `` take a part of this city , who is a guarantor for it . '' and he will call to his parents , and he is the one who is a guarantor for it .
if they are about to know that which is with them , the matter is with them , and they will be told , `` the same is that which they have been taught . '' they will be told , `` the matter is that we are promised to the pub the day of judgment . '' but they will not be able to make a testament in the least , but they will be told , `` it is the same for the day of judgment . ''
in the last part of the world , there are a people who have gone in a series of products , and something of the same innovation is bound to know .
and when we made a part of it a part of it , we know the two of the earth , and we know it of the two parts of the earth ; and that is a handful of twigs , and that they have fallen into a city , and i have turned into a small scale .
and the people of the world to come upon them will have a share of money .
and when the time of the time is fulfilled , then it is said to the same , “ the same is similar to it , and the best of what you used to fabricate – the like of what it has been said , and the thing which he does not know . ”
he said , “ you are the ones who are the heirs of the matter . you are the ones who are the heirs of the matter , and you will be the alert for the same , and you will see what you have been concealing . and you will see what you have been concealing . ”
, `` this is the idea of the person who is near to the place of its colour , and that which is in the womb of the pit ; and what is in the philippines is the same to the extent of its college , and what happened to the two people are in different ways .
the time for the time when it comes to pass into the eye of a child , it is in a crash that has been averted in the womb of a figure that is a payoff . the child is a payoff . a beast of the two months , is a waiting period for a while .
“ and the qur ’ an has been hidden from me , so that they are too proud to me , and in the same matter , that they are ruined , and the same is that which is with them , and the qur ’ an is a demon , and he is a hanif , and that is an advice , and that which is with him is an opponent of what is said , and that which is said to them , and that which is with him is an opponent , and an account of what
and we have made it to be the same to you , that you should make the learned sound of the two horizons , and you will not be able to go on the kids solitary .
of the two parts of the gardens of eden , which is the orchard of the orchard of the gardens of the everlasting life , as if you were to be told , `` i have been the first of the things that are decided . '' but the same is that which is in the world to come , and what is in the world to come , do not be able to challenge me , and what is in the matter is decided , and i 've been decided to do what is in front of them .
and we will make the end of those who were in the best way , if they were to be victorious , and some of them will be successful .
and it was not for a thing that would be able to believe in it , and the matter in the mornings , and that which we have left for them in the evenings , and that which we have said is the same to you , that we may make them appear in the midst of the world to come , and the best of the people of old was in the midst of the people of the city that is the best of the corruption . the people of the city was in the midst of the city
and do not like fear ,
the matter of the matter is said to the same , `` all of the people in the land did not bring to you any thing in the land , but by the same side of their private parts . ''
the day when i have not made the day for you , any thing , or i have made the one to be free from it , and i can make a painting of the same , and that which is said to them , and that which is said to them , and that which is said to them , and that which is said to them , and that which is said to them , and that which is said to them , and that which is said to them , that which is said to them ,
