and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
o mankind , when you have fear of god , you have turned your backs on the earth , and have no relation in him . and fear god , and fear him . god is terrible in retribution .
those who disbelieve , let them become like mirages . and it is he who can find it to be so , when he comes to you , and when you see it , allah will not reach the recompense of his reckoning . and allah is quick in requiting .
when you heard it , why did you not say , it is not right for us to speak of this . god forbid ! this is a monstrous slander .
a host routed out there of the factions .
and when you said to them , “ we will not be able to separate you from the single of the poor ” ; and not at all , then , get the better from your lord ; and this is the command of the two , which they have been concealing . thus , they have denied the truth .
and what will explain to thee what sijjin is ?
such is 'iesa , son of maryam .a statement of truth , about which they doubt .
and assuredly we have sent down unto you revelations illuminating and a similitude for those who passed away before you , and an admonition unto the god-fearing .
and the jews say to him , “ we have taken a son. ” say , “ then why do you care of the sin of allah ? ” say , “ then why do you commit the sins of your deeds ? ” and it is to him that he will have mercy on the earth , and he will have a disgraceful punishment .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea . so observe how was the fate of the wrongdoers !
and the day when they will see the day of judgment , those who follow their own souls will be brought back to the punishment , and they will be able to witness what they had done .
and your lord inspired the bee saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in what they build ,
on that day allah will pay them their due in full , and they will know that allah , he is the manifest truth .
and place me among the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
they said : have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful .
when hell is set ablaze ,
if you punish them , they are your servants ; and if you forgive them , you are the all-mighty , the all-wise . '
by the lote-tree of the utmost boundary ,
but if allah were to send the grace of mankind in the past , there is all living creatures in the earth , and all the beasts that are in the earth , and allah is not able to assist the two of his creatures ; and then , when it is decided , allah is seeing by his servants .
the jews said , “ make the son. ” the men of allah said : “ the son of allah , the son of israel , has the right of the dead . they said , “ the son of allah , is the thought of allah . what they used to fabricate is true . ”
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
why did not the believers , men and women , when ye heard it , think well of their own folk , and say : this is an obvious lie ?
in their hearts is a disease , so allah has increased their disease ; and for them is a painful punishment because they used to tell lies .
moses replied : 'no , you throw first ' and by their sorcery it seemed to him that their ropes and staffs were sliding .
he said , “ go down , both of you , from here , some of you enemies to one another . but if there comes to you guidance from me , whoever follows my guidance , will not go astray nor suffer . ”
they will go round between it and between hot , boiling water .
when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women , and in that there was a great trial from your lord .
then he took him up to the place of the wife before the wife of his brother ; and then he made his brother clear to him . thus , we chose him , and his brother , and he is the best of all those who have knowledge .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said : by the might of pharaoh , it is we who will certainly win !
and if we did send down the qur'an upon him , then he did make obeisance to him , and he will have filled them all . and in fear of allah , we will make them succeed .
and that we know that we can not escape allah in the earth , nor can we escape him by flight .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : i am not responsible for you .
lo ! thy lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo , he is ever knower , seer of his slaves .
and even if we opened to them a gate from heaven , and they began ascending through it ,
when the sun is rolled up .
we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is between . your lord is not forgetful .
indeed , we are about to bring down upon the people of this town a punishment from the sky because of the transgressions they used to commit .
and say : 'my lord , forgive and have mercy , for you are the best of the merciful '
he says , i have spent enormous wealth .
that is of the news we reveal to you of the unseen . you were not present when they agreed upon their plan , scheming .
a provision and benefit for you and your cattle .
they said , call upon your lord to make clear to us what she pleases . he said , he says , 'it is a cow which is neither old nor young , but between that you are commanded . '
abiding therein ; excellent it is as a lodging-place and an abode .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take the full measure ,
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers , “ we will expel you from our land , unless you return to our religion. ” but their lord inspired them : “ we will destroy the unjust . ”
let not the vicissitudeof those who disbelieve , in the land , deceive thee .
a blessed book that we have sent down to you , that they may ponder its verses , and for those with intelligence to take heed .
how many generations have we destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
then by oath of those which move with ease .
when the earth is shaken with a shock .
and paradise will be brought closer to the pious , not far away .
in scorching wind and scalding water
and when the clear signs comes to them , they say : we shall not believe in the until the case of the matter we have sent down , and allah is the knower of that which they have been earning .
glory be to him who carried his servant by night from the sacred mosque to the farthest mosque whose precincts we have blessed , that we might show him some of our signs . he is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ,
he said , “ do you not listen to what is true , and the word of god is true . the word is to be fulfilled with me . this is a sign for the people of faith . ”
and be not haughty with that which they have been wont to do with other than allah . they will not be able to do so . and in that case , we will give them no more than allah . and to their lord they will return .
, ask them , who will save you from the wrath of god ? if he decides to do so , he will have mercy on you , or who can give you mercy ? if he will , then they will have mercy upon you , and they will have none to help them .
do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted and you should taste evil because you hindered from god 's way , and incur a great torment .
when your lord said to the angels , “ i am creating a human being from clay .
say , believe in it or do not believe . when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
but he turned away with his supporters and said , ‘ a magician or a crazy man ! ’
or is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them for them ? then let them ascend the ropes !
he would have tarried in its belly until the day they are raised .
and the birds , too , in flocks , all turned to him .
say thou : are ye not the tidings of the ones whose labour ye have been blessed ? lo ! those who ward off from their lord shall be their quest .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
he positioned the earth for all the creatures :
“ our lord , do not cause us to be faithful , and to make yourself a herald of the land and make us a guide for you and accept our repentance ; you are the most acceptor of repentance , the most merciful . ”
those who idolized the calf have incurred wrath from their lord , and humiliation in this life . we thus requite the innovators .
there is none who can avert it .
and whatever you have been given is an enjoyment of the life of this world and its glitter ; and what is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
it is god who has created the heavens and the earth , how you will be raised up high , then he mounted the throne ; and he has set the sun and the moon as a bed . and he is the lord of the easts , and the sun , and the moon ; and it is he who will bring about your lord a reminder .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
and they went out early , determined in their resolve .
who created and proportioned
and they planned and allahplanned , and allah is the best of planners .
so that they may understand my speech .
and when their eyes will be turned toward the dwellers of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing people .
all these are evil and odious to your lord .
and i swear by the self-critical soul !
like shaitan , when he says to man : disbelieve , but when he disbelieves , he says : i am free of you , i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
and among them are those who made a covenant with allah : if he give us of his bounty , we will surely give alms and be of the righteous .
but speak to him nicely . perhaps he will remember , or have some fear .
and among the people is he who sells his soul seeking the pleasure of allah , and allah is kind toservants .
so the evils of their deeds struck them , and that which they used to mock at encompassed them .
and indeed , for those who have wronged is a portionlike the portion of their predecessors , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we really be brought forth ?
they will have layers of fire above them and layers beneath them . this is how god frightens his servants . my servants have fear of me .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets , and with thee , and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam . and we took from them a solemn bond .
hath he looked unto the unseen , or hath he made a pact with the beneficent ?
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal any matter from allah .
allah has sealed their hearts and ears and eyes and they are not aware of it .
by the brightening dawn ,
he was taught bywho is mighty in power ,
and recall what time we delivered you from the house of fir'awn perpetrating on you terrible torment , slaying your sons and letting your women live ; and in that was a tremendous trial from your lord .
you gave him your attention .
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and whoever does good deeds , whether male or female , and is a believer—those will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
indeed , those who recite the book of allah and establish prayer and spendout of what we have provided them , secretly and publicly , expect a trade that will never perish .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
we send not down the angels , save with truth ;
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away and see what they shall return '
and indeed you , , are one of you , like the first time , and we have made for you to be among the first . and he has put you to account in the way you have done , and you will not be questioned about your deeds .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who are muslims . ”
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the unbelievers because of thejudgment of a momentous day !
he merges night into day , and he merges day into night ; and he knows whatsoever is in the breasts .
oh , woe to me ! i wish i had not taken such a one for a friend !
and who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then he turns away from them ? surely we shall requite the guilty .
and he who does not think that allah will not cause you to go back on them in the least , nor will he be able to make a whole end of the world to come away from him .
say , ‘ everyoneis waiting . so wait ! soon you will know who are the people of the right path , and who isguided . ’
so when they returned to their father , they said : o our father ! the measure is denied us , so send with us our brother that we may get the measure , and we shall guard him well .
and made things easy for them .
he said , “ it will be so , your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’
and we have given the burden of all that is in the matter , so that they might have a differ about it , except after the clear things that came to them . and whoever is about to come about it - then indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning the things about which they differ .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they waxed proud , and were a sinful people .
to bring every knowledgeable sorcerer '
on the day when allah will raise them all together and inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
if they could find a shelter , or any caverns , or any place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
indeed , when it was said to them , “ there is no god except allah ” , they were haughty .
and we gave them the explicit scripture ,
the wayis only against those who oppress men and wrongly rebel in the earth , for such there will be a painful torment .
so let not their speech grieve thee . lo ! we know what they conceal and what proclaim .
those who , if we give them authority in the land , establish regular prayer and give regular charity , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . to god belongs the outcome of all events .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
when they are told not to commit corruption in the land , they say , we are only reformers .
whether you speak loudlyhe indeed knows the secret and what is still more hidden .
there was not a messenger , but only that they should be averse to allah 's permission , but if they were unjust to their own souls , they would not have forgiveness for you , and for allah is the forgiving , the merciful .
and when it is recited to them , they say : we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed we were muslimsbefore it .
and we sent not a messenger before you , , and sent down your people . but when a matter is determined for the devil , he took away their people from the way of satan , but when he has made a matter of the devil , he has made it a lie , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
lo ! those who make their salatwith the salatwith their own souls , they say : what ! it was ye who have brought us in the earth , and they say : what ! we are the winners ?
is he , then , who will shield himself with his face from the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said unto the wrong-doers : taste ye that which ye have been earning .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he will . god is forgiving and kind .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
until whengog and magog has been opened and they , from every elevation , descend
and if any of your you turn back to the disbelievers , then they turn back in your homes , and the disbelievers were seized by you ; and fear allah ; and fear allah , the faithful .
peace be upon noah among all the peoples !
which will climb on to the hearts .
moses said : that is what we were looking for . so they went back retracing their footsteps .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
if they accuse you of lying , say , “ your lord is possessor of infinite mercy , but his wrath can not be averted from the guilty people . ”
a guidance and a mercy to the doers of good , -
so do they wish to hasten our punishment ?
this is a reminder . we gave moses the book , so that the favour of moses might be given to comfort upon it , and to be a guidance and a guide for the people of faith , in order that they may believe .
o sister of aaron ! your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother unchaste .
allah hath promised you . verily , it is allah 's promise to you , so that there may be no altering in his way , and the matter should be decided with you , and you would not be able to assist them until they have made a matter of you , until they have made the whole end of you . and allah is pardoning and merciful .
we have given you the human being and to show you what is true . if you have any knowledge , do not be with those who have knowledge . you will be brought to me .
they said : dost thou wonder at allah 's decree ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! verily ! he is the praiseworthy , the owner of all glory .
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
would you then , if you were given the authority , work corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship ?
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , thy people raise a clamour thereat !
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
the people of the rock also rejected the messengers .
then succeeded them with the others ?
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from them and from every agony , yet you ascribe partners . ’
noble and pious .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt about it , until the hour comes upon them suddenly , or there comes to them the chastisement of a barren day .
father , the knowledge has come to me which has not come to you . so follow me , i will guide you to a level path .
wherefore eat of that whereon the name of allah hath been pronounced , if ye are believers in his revelations .
exalted , purified ,
and of the people is he who is one of the people , one of the other , and if there reaches him some good , he would have made it up ; and if an evil thing came upon them , he is in a level way .
and when a chapter is sent down to him , they say , “ take the faith in allah and his noble messenger ” ; and to him do all that we instruct , and they say : “ leave us to stay with us . ”
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is a clear adversary .
and that he is the lord ofsirius ,
we have made it as a reminder and convenience for the needy .
you are just a human being like us . so bring us a sign , if you are telling the truth .
and they say : why are not signs sent down upon him from his lord ? say : the signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
indeed , we have made it a torment for the wrongdoers .
so these are their houses fallen down because they were unjust , most surely there is a sign in this for a people who know .
or were they created out of nothing ? or are they the creators ?
and the human being is that of the human being , that he may give the transgressors to the evil of the punishment , and he will give them glad tidings of a great reward , and good news for the believers .
o children of adam ! if there come to you messengers from among you relating to you my revelations—whoever practices piety and reforms—upon them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
do they not see how the objects allah has created casts their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before allah in all humility ?
and in the way of abraham , there are signs for those of them who walk in mind , and those who are in the remembrance of abraham . and he who makes a breach with the anger of god , is from him . and whoever disbelieves , then surely god is all-sufficient , needs of all .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they shieldfrom us .
and we inspired moses : throw thy staff ! and lo ! it swallowed up their lying show .
when you see them , you will see them and see what time they are in a state of autism . and when they are made to hear it , they are in awe of it . and this is the same , and if they do , then take away from them . and allah is to keep them away .
so it tasted the mischief of its action , and the end of its affair was loss .
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
and when allah 's benevolence will be of no avail to the people , and there is no one who can avert it from allah . and he is the all-knower , the all-wise .
but never fresh remembrance comes to them from the all-merciful , except they turn away from it .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind during days of misfortune , that we might make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the present life ; but the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
leave them to eat and enjoy , and let them be preoccupied withhope . they will come to know !
on that day man will recall all what he strove for .
so why did those whom they had chosen as gods besides allah , as a means of approachnot help them ? nay , but they forsook them . and that was their lie and their invention .
say to the unbelievers : 'you shall be overthrown , and mustered into gehenna -- an evil cradling ! '
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the mighty , the forgiver .
believers , do not forbid the good things that god has made lawful to you . do not transgress . god does not love the transgressors .
those who spend their wealth in the way of allah and then do not follow up their gifts with reminders of their generosity or with injury , their reward is with their lord ; on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
to send down upon them stones of clay ,
of his kind was abraham .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine
indeed , abraham was a nation obedient to allah , a hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists .
andthe day when we shall gather out of every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed ,
those who violate the covenant of allah after it had come to them , and allah has made the foundation of those who are made to flow . and they are the ones who make mischief in the land , and they are the ones who will have a way .
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely there are signs in this for those who believe .
and do not be near to the property of the orphan except in the least , until the great kind and the last result belong to you , and the measure and the balance will be taken by the command of your lord ; and your lord is the command of your lord , so that you may take heed .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a great curse .
no prophet came to them whom they did not mock .
rejoicing in what god has given them out of his grace , and they rejoice for those who have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and of the people is no less than a jest and a religion from allah , and others can lead away from the path of allah . how will it be that he can make a way of mockery from allah ? and they will be punished by the punishment .
he prayed , lord , i have wronged myself . forgive me ! god forgave him . he is the all-forgiving , the all-compassionate .
this is well within the power of god .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
and then turns it into light debris .
and they say : why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? say : surely allah will destroy whomsoever he will , and he will guide him to whom he will , and they will turn to him .
and the day he will say : call those partners of mine whom ye pretended . then they will cry unto them , but they will not answer them , and we shall place between them a partition .
do they seek other than the religion of allah , while to him submitted all creatures in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
musa said unto them : cast whatsoever ye have to cast .
so deem not thouthat allah is going to fail his promise to his apostles ; verily allah is mighty , lord of vengeance
and when they are reminded , they remember not .
messengers as bearers of good tidings and warners so that mankind may have no argument against allah after the messengers . and ever is allah exalted in might and wise .
and frolic about in doubt .
“ indeed i am your lord , therefore take off your shoes ; indeed you are in the sacred valley of tuwa . ”
so when moses came to a place of the heights of the mount , he took to himself a share from the side of the mount . he said , “ go on , and i will see you to see a fire ; haply you will warm yourselves . ”
and as for the deviators , for hell they shall be fuel .
the people of noah , ad , the dominating pharaoh ,
and by mount sinai ,
bring your book , if what you say is true !
like shaitan , when he says to man : disbelieve , but when he disbelieves , he says : i am free of you , i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or relent toward them . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
and when the word shall come to pass against them , we shall bring forth for them a creature from the earth speaking to them , that the people have no faith in our signs .
and we raised the mount above them , and we said unto them : enter the portal prostratingwith humility ; and we said unto them : transgress not in the matter of the sabbath , and we took from them a firm bond .
and do not marry the women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . this is indeed a shameful deed , and an evil way .
and when you said , ‘ o moses , we will not believe you until we see allah visibly. ’ thereupon a thunderbolt seized you while you were looking on .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
and whatsoever of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in-between the twain , and whatsoever is in bet-ween them is the praise of him , and his hallow him not , and verily he is of the steadfast .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
if we will , we can send down on them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
who seeth thee when thou standest up
saying : restore to me the slaves of allah . verily ! i am to you a messenger worthy of all trust ,
and whatever is in your own hands , to the former nations , do not be impressed by the majesty of allah , and to make things equal to you , but you are not aware of the things you have done . it is indeed allah ’ s will , and you do not perceive .
for those who believe and do good works are gardens of bliss ,
they ask you to hasten the punishment . but when we had set up for them the punishment , the punishment overtook them suddenly , and they will not be struck by it .
say thou : allah ! thou art the owner of all things , and thou hast power to give him to whomsoever thou wilt , and thou shalt not give to whomsoever thou wilt - and thou art in the power of all power .
indeed , we are about to bring down upon the people of this town a punishment from the sky because of the transgressions they used to commit .
the righteously striving believers will receive forgiveness and honorable sustenance .
those are the ones of whom allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn aside from them , and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words about themselves .
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
as though they had never dwelt there . away with median , as was done away with thamood .
andhe who created the male and female ,
who have broken the koran into parts .
verily the day of decision is a time appointed .
we called to him , o abraham ,
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
and you can not escape from allahin the earth , and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
allah has promised you many spoils that you may capture , and he has hastened this to you , and has restrained men ’ s hands from you , that it may be a sign for the believers , and that he may guide you on a right path .
and for their houses doorsand couches of silver whereon to recline ,
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to god , the lord of the universe !
and you are surely aware of that which you have two parties or whether you see the truth or whether you recite the truth with it , and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
reclining on beds whose linings are of silk brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near at hand .
turn in repentance to him , and fear him . establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah
have we not given you high renown ?
the rest of grief will be of the glad tidings to the people , so that they will be averse over it , and the same will be made to decrease , and the same . how evil is their judgment !
and for every nation there is a term ; and when their term comes they shall not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
and say , my lord , i seek refuge in you from the incitements of the devils ,
believers ! do not take the jews and the christians for your allies . they are allies of one another . whoever of you takes them for a friend , is one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
that which you are promised will surely come to pass and you can not prevent it .
and they say , “ he has fabricated it ” ; so if allah put a seal upon him , he is able to do what he wills . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the hearts .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and besides allah , you have neither a protector nor a helper .
so they and all the astray were flung into hell .
it strips away the scalps .
god certainly knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the proud .
when the forthcoming event does occur .
and he is the all-dominant over his servants , and he is the all-wise , the all-aware .
blessed be he in whose hand is the kingdom -- he is powerful over everything ,
we forbade him breastfeeding at first . so she said : shall i show you a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they ridiculed .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night ; thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt without reckoning .
and we rained upon them a rain . miserable was the rain of those forewarned .
we have displayed for mankind in this quran every kind of similitude , but most people insist on denying the truth .
so let not their speech grieve thee . lo ! we know what they conceal and what proclaim .
worshipfor a few hours at night .
the two men are those who have fear of god , and have given them the bounty of their lord . they said , ‘ enter the gate of allah. ’ indeed , you will have to turn back . ’
we know what they say distresses you . it is not you they reject , but it is god 's revelations that the wicked deny .
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
say : o my lord ! if thou wilt show me that wherewith they are threatened ,
the people of the rock also rejected the messengers .
and say : 'my lord , forgive and have mercy , for you are the best of the merciful '
o you who have faith ! do not approach the prayer while you are going to keep back , and this is not a time to be altered , until , when they are free of the prayer , or the occupants of those who are immature , do not sit in a state of pleasure . and allah is pardoning and watchful .
but god would not punish them while youwere in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seek forgiveness .
whoever turns away from it will bear a heavy burden on the day of judgement ,
he it is who made the earth a cradle for you , and for you to live in the midst of the sky . and he has opened for you water from the sky , so that you may give up what is in it , so that they may be pure .
except the way of hell , to remain in it forever ; and this is howworks inevitably .
god will certainly cause the believers to hear their good deeds and give them their share of the life to come . they have the power to do so . and who is in the matter of god , an ally , and the torah and the gospel ; and this is the everlasting success .
the people of noah who lived before them were also evil doing people .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
these , our people , have taken for themselves gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority for them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
and those whose scales are light - they are the ones who will lose their ownselvesbecause they used to wrong our ayat .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit indecency with your eyes open ? ”
do you not think that the people of the cave will be thrown in a dead land at the sea ? then a stern wind will not swallow you , and you will then have a no help from us .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
he will sendthe sky upon you inshowers
we have brought to them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
and they worship instead of allah that for which he hath sent down no warrant and that whereof they have no knowledge ; and for the wrong-doers there shall be no helper .
the hypocrites try to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to pray they stand up lazily , showing off to the people and do not remember god but little .
it is he who has made the earth submissive to you . walk about in its land and eat of his provision . to him is the resurrection .
these are two adversaries who have disputed concerning their lord . as for those who disbelieved , garments of fire will be cut out for them ; boiling water will be poured over their heads ,
and will not be removed from it .
thou wast heedless of this . now we have removed from thee thy covering , and sharp is thy sight this day .
those who believed and did good deeds , they shall have a share of their position . and we shall not grant such of them as a partner .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bliss .
who is more astray than one who holds away his prayer and is going to send down the face of the day when the hour is come , and they are not aware of it , but they are unaware of it .
they said , “ we have been sent towards a guilty nation . ”
ho ! ye are they who pleaded for them in the life of the world ; but who will contend with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
and those who give what they give while their hearts are fearful because they are about to return to their lord ,
say : i am not an innovator among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow that which is revealed to me , and i am but a plain warner .
surely allah is the bestower of sustenance , the lord of power , the strong .
we have already seized them with punishment , but they did not yield to their lord , nor do they humble themselves
have they not seen that we have appointed a sanctuary secure , while all around them men are being snatched away ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in god 's bounties ?
and masseth and then hoardeth .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a place in hell for disbelievers ?
and worship your lord until certainty comes to you .
no , today they will resign themselves in submission ,
and recall what time musa said unto his people : o people , lo ! ye have been seduced . lo ! ye return to him , so that ye may have recourse to him , and then ye will be brought back to him . lo ! he is the hearer , the merciful .
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he set them before the angels and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
and if ye disbelieve , verily allah is free of need , while ye are not pleased with the bondmen of the believers , but should ye receive the right way , that ye may give up the right way , and that ye may be of the thrivers . and he is the knower of that which ye worked .
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil shall see it .
and not equal are the good deed and the evil deed . repelwith what is best.he between whom and you was enmity , as if he were a sympathetic friend .
and if you are bent on denying the truth , they will not have faith like those who disbelieve . so they turn their backs , and if they turn away , they will not be able to protect them , and if they turn away , they will not be helped .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , supplicate your lord to lighten for us a day from the punishment .
they have calledlies . they will soon learn the consequences of what they mocked at .
do you not see that allah makes you forget the like of the heavens and the earth , and he shall make them forget the like of it ? and it will be a deafness of the like of them , and they will not be able to remove it from anywhere .
the hypocrites , men and women , and the like of it are as if they were an evil act in this qur ’ an , and those who do good deeds , for they are indeed the fasiqun .
believers , if you help god , he will help you and make your footsteps firm .
and do not defraud people in their property or spread evil in the land .
say , “ i am commanded to serve god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
indeed , those who are divided into groups among them , and become sects ; they do not make any of them ; thou wilt surely be of them so that they may be treated with allah ; and afterward the judgement is of their deeds .
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i : so send him with me as a helper to confirm my truthfulness , for i fear that they will reject me .
and the fifththat the wrath of allah be upon her if he is one of the truthful .
those who deny the signs of god and the meeting with him , have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
and it does not befit the most gracious to choose a son !
if they do not respond to you , know that they are only following their desires . and who is more astray than one who follows his desires without guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
and if ye do not help the messenger , then verily allah hath cursed those who have disbelieved , and when the disbelievers have turned to them in the cave , he said : grieve not , and allah 's messenger is the most mighty , the most mighty .
have they not set up other gods besides god ? say : “ your own lord is the means of yours . do you know that it is a reminder for the people of the past and the future . ”
o you who covers himself ,
or , are the people of the townships then secure from the coming of our wrath upon them in the daytime while they play ?
on the day when allah will raise them all together and inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
he said , “ this wealth of me is with me , and i have made a knowledge of what was before it ; and what sort of fate befell them , except that allah ’ s people were not able to do the worst of their iniquities ?
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path .
do not compare god with anyone . god knows , and you do not know .
when moses sought to attack their enemy , he said , moses , do you want to kill me as you slew a soul ? you want to have no fear in the land .
indeed they had no fear of the account .
who will inherit paradise , and live in it for ever .
their salatat the housewas nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
increase my strength with him ,
that allah may forgive thee what is past of thy sin and that which may come to thee , and may perfect his favour unto thee , and may guide thee on a straight path ,
from among the jinn and the men .
but they divided themselves into factions , each rejoicing in what they had .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
andisma'il , idris , and zul-kifl , allof constancy and patience ;
he ushers in the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the disposition of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
and those whom you call upon besides him have no power to help you , nor can they help themselves .
when they come to you , they say , we believe . but they have entered with disbelief and they have departed with it . god knows best what they have been concealing .
and among them are uneducated who know the scripture only through hearsay , and they only speculate .
o prophet , we have made you the wives of the truth , and to you . the women of whom you have bestowed on , wives of the truth , are your mothers , your mothers , so that we could not have any relation in the least , nor are we to let any of their people go to waste .
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said : we believe . bear witness that we are muslims .
and when misfortune befalls him , then call upon him , and if there is a great thing for him , he says , this is only a great loss . but most of them do not know .
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
there is no god but he ; he gives life and causes death—your lord and lord of your ancestors of old .
or that he will not seize them by giving them a fright ? indeed , your lord is kind and merciful .
“ in fact , i am going to do what is ahead of him ; and that he is afflicted by him who is in front of him ; in fact he is to be raised by him , in fact , to be resurrected . ”
has created man ,
do they not know that allah knows what they conceal and what they declare ?
andhe called to his lord that these are a criminal people .
what , has your lord favoured you with sons and taken to himself females from among the angels ? you are indeed uttering a monstrous lie .
tell my servants who have believed to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before the coming of a day in which there will be neither mutual bargaining nor befriending .
they said , “ have you come to us in order that we worship allah alone and abandon what our ancestors used to worship ? so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and faces shall be humbled unto the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
round about them will serve , to them , young male servantsas pearls well-guarded .
no indeed ! on that day they will be screened off from seeing their lord ,
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yes , he has power over all things .
allah is the only lord and the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . there is no god but he , the eternal , the sustainer . he is the knower of the heavens and the earth , and he has no knowledge of the things he approves of .
they hide themselves from men and do not hide themselves from allah , whereas he is with them when they plot by night that he does not approve . and allah is ever all-seer of what they do .
and be thou patient in the company of those who are on the remembrance of their lord , and fall in the midst of the sun , and the afternoons and the afternoons and the afternoons and the traveller .
o ye who believe ! fasting is prescribed for you , as it was prescribed for those before you , that ye may ward off .
so he will be in pleasant living .
go forth , whetherlightly or heavily , and strive with your possessions and your lives in the cause of allah . that is better for you , if you only knew .
this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
allah does not like the disclosure ofevilin speech except by someone who has been wronged , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
moses said to them , ‘ do not cry lies to allah . he has a lie against allah , for he has indeed a clear account of it . indeed , he is of the senseless '
and those who avoid the greater sins and immoralities , and when they are angry , they forgive ,
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and fear him who created you and the former generations .
o you who have faith ! be firm in the case of allah , and never have any one to show it a crookedness from you , from the right way . allah is fully aware of all that you do .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do good deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
what they are engaged in is doomed to destruction and all their works are in vain .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve .
why did not the believers , men and women , when ye heard it , think well of their own folk , and say : this is an obvious lie ?
therefore , remind . by the grace of allah , you are neither a soothsayer , nor a madman .
and fear allah , and shame me not .
noble and pious .
so will we question those to whom our message was sent and those by whom we sent it .
and i do not acquit myself . verily , theself is inclined to evil , except inasmuch as my lord has mercy . indeed , my lord is forgiving and merciful .
and those who recite the reminder ,
they have misled many . do not increase the wrongdoers except in confusion . ”
again , indeed you will see it with certainty .
'take him , and fetter him ,
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine
they said , “ you know that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ”
are these the ones whom you swore that god would never have mercy upon them enter paradise ? you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve . '
and indeed , we have destroyed your likes , then is there any that will remember ?
and when they saw them they said : lo ! these have gone astray .
indeed they have been removed far from evenhearing it .
indeed , i fear for you the punishment of a terrible day .
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so little it is that they believe .
allah is he who created you inweakness , then gave you strength after weakness , then after strength gave you weakness and grey hair . he creates whatever he wills . he is the knowing , the competent .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
if you could but see when they are made to stand before the fire and will say : would that we were sent back ! then we would not deny the signs of our lord , and we would be of the believers .
on that day , man will be informed of all that he sent ahead and left behind .
has the reminder been cast upon him from among us ? nay ! he is an insolent liar .
verily this is a reward for you , and your endeavour is accepted and recognised .
do you not see how those who dispute the signs of god are turned away ?
so we brought forth such believers as were in it ,
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
or is it that youask them a wage , so that they are burdened with debt ?
against whom it is written down that whosoever takes him for a friend , he will mislead him and will guide him to the punishment of the fire .
allah does not like the disclosure ofevilin speech except by someone who has been wronged , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
though it is not thy concern if he grow not .
there was not one of them but treated their messengers as liars , so my retribution was justified .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them without purpose . that is the opinion of the unbelievers , so woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
they said : we have given thee good tidings in truth , so be not thou of the despairing .
then man will have no power or any helper .
we created them not save with a purpose but most of them know not .
and know that your possessions and your children are but a trial , and that with allah is a mighty reward .
your god is one god . as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts are in denial , and they are arrogant .
when you have finished the prayer , remember god , standing , sitting , or lying on your sides . but when you become secure , perform the prayer . the prayer is enjoined upon the believers at stated times .
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth , and all that lies between them , and all the beasts and cattle , and he has made for you cattle , and there is no constraint on it . he is the hearer , the seer .
do they possessthe unseen , so that they write it down ?
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , thenwill increase it manifold to his credit , and he will havea liberal reward .
when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ”
say : if mankind and the jinn gathered together to produce the like of this qur'an , they could not produce the like thereof , even if they backed up one another .
but if you want to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take back anything from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
everything , be it great or small , is recorded .
it is he who gives me food and drink
is not thatable to give life to the dead ?
, ask them , is what you want better or the eternal garden promised to the pious ones as their reward and dwelling ?
and wherever you come from , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord , and allah is not unaware of what you do .
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely there are signs in this for those who believe .
and be not compliant to , and be not compliant to what you have done , for if you have done so , they will surely come to know . and allah is knowing and wise .
fight those who do not believe in god and the last day , nor forbid what god and his messenger have forbidden , nor do they have the right religion , until they pay the tribute out of their due due to hand and pay the due tax ,
he said , ‘ no means to be your liking for me , except that i should do what my lord has created . what my lord has created , know that i will not accept a way for the people who disbelieve in the everlasting life . ’
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . god is witness over everything .
thou takest vengeance on us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord ! pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims .
and those who give what they give while their hearts are fearful because they are about to return to their lord ,
“ were not my revelations recited to you , and you used to deny them ? ”
it is only god who deserves all praise . he has given the lie to his own other . he has no power to protect them from his own side . say , god 's alone is too proud and he has no one to protect them .
allah knows the fraud of the eyes , and all that the breasts conceal .
and they say : only a few enjoyment for us in the fire . say : even then you have a covenant with allah , and you will not be able to speak to allah . or do you say nothing about allah ?
and when it is said to them , “ believe what has been sent down to you from allah ” ; they say , “ we have not been sent down to what we have sent down , and they say , “ o what you have been sent with , ” say , “ o you who are sent down to us , if you are believers . ”
most of them follow nothing but illusion ; yet illusion can not replace the reality . god is well aware of what they do .
the rest of grief will be of the glad tidings to the people , so that they will be averse over it , and the same will be made to decrease , and the same . how evil is their judgment !
then indeed , paradise will berefuge .
hast thou not seen how the time of those in death and vision have gone forth from fear of death ? allah said : it is then , to whom we shall give thee . allah is the lord of the worlds .
and olives and palms ,
if their intention is to be a time , we should certainly have given them the punishment . and they will say , “ what is the punishment with which you had been given ? ” indeed , the day when they will be made to flow , and we will make it a test for them .
we have sent down the book to you so that you may clarify for them what they differ about , and as a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
in order to have the same people before you , the people who have no right to the right path , excepting a short of what we had given them . in the land they have only to do evil in the land , excepting a little from that which we had given them . a bad end is the done .
and when you killed a soul , and disputed concerning it , and allah brought forth what you concealed ,
o mankind ! eat of that which is lawful and good on the earth , and follow not the footsteps of satan ; verily he is unto you an enemy manifest .
so he emerged before his people from the temple , and signalled to them that they should glorifymorning and evening .
my lord ! save me and my household from that which they work .
but proclaim the blessings of your lord .
say , “ nothing will happen to us except what god has ordained for us ; he is our protector. ” in god let the believers put their trust .
on the day when the first trumpet sound blasts
whether you reveal anything or hide it , god is aware of everything .
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . verily ! in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
the beneficent allah ,
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
none but the purified shall touch ,
and to the madyan , their brother , he said : o my people ! worship allah , for you there is no god but he ; so he said , “ o my people ! worship allah , for you do not have any god except he ; so do not act corruptly in the land , and do not act corruptly in the land , if you are believers .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever ,
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to collapse beneath you as it spins ?
on the day when all a witness from their own people will have to testify to them , and we have sent down to you a witness , and a guidance to the muslims .
you may derive benefituntil an appointed time . then their place of sacrifice is by the ancient house .
by the day when it appeareth in glory ,
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
say , “ i do not ask any fee from those who were given to what has been sent down to him . he is only for him who has been sent with the commands of god , or is a she-camel , or a she-camel . your lord is the most forgiving and the most merciful . ”
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , supplicate your lord to lighten for us a day from the punishment .
i do not think that the hour will ever come , and even if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this .
they rejected our signs , all of them , so we seized them—the seizure of an almighty omnipotent .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our worshiper saying : 'mad ' and he was reprimanded .
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; verily she was of an infidel people .
are they then unaware of thy lord 's mercy ? but we appointed for them a goodly provision in the life of the world , and we have set upon each other a beast of things , in order that they may be righteous .
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us equitably ; he is the all-knowing judge . ”
the sinners shall be known by their marks , and they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
but the devout will avoid it .
and those who if they are made to be of your wives , then if they turn their backs , then do not accept from what your hearts are , and those who are on the right hand , and those who are on the guard will be on the screen ; and whoever fears allah , then surely , it is for him to be of the god-fearing .
but they are forbidden to you , and your mothers are the family of your mothers . the family of your mothers are your mothers . the family of your mothers are your mothers . the family of you will be your mothers and your own family . and if you are in the same way of your family , the example of your wife is only a doer of yours , and if you are in the same way of your family , your family are in the same way . god is indeed all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and verily thou ! thou callest them unto a path straight .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
do they not see that the heavens and the earth belong to them ? why , then , did they not make their footsteps in the earth , unless they are in the sight of god ?
they plotted their plots , but their plots are known to god , even though their plots were such as to shake mountains .
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the strong , the mighty .
a blessed book that we have sent down to you , that they may ponder its verses , and for those with intelligence to take heed .
we bestowed upon david a favor from us : ‘ o mountains ! you birds and birds ! ’ and we made iron soft for him ,
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
and a party of the people of the scripture say : believe in that which is revealed to the believers at the beginning of the day , and disbelieve at the end of it , in order that they may turn back .
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
she said , “ the people of the town , the people of the town , when the people are given their lives in the town , are made to go the ruin of the disbelievers , and the people of the subverted cities . ”
by the clear book ,
in arrogance , as if you were abandoning a story-teller .
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking the means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus we shall deliver the believers .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer , -
what is the catastrophe ?
when abraham said , “ my lord , how can i have the dead to the dead , when he has raised the dead ? ” he said , “ yes , did you deny the same way of life ? ” so , he said , “ yes , and so you will be separated . ”
how many gardens and fountains they left behind them ,
they will have no guardian or helper besides god . he whom god allows to go astray has no way .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
thamud belied in their exorbitance .
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely there are signs in this for those who believe .
have they not pondered the matter , or has anythingcome to them that did not come to their forefathers ?
they will say , our lord , forgive us , and forgive us , our lord , and forgive us in the hearts of those who have faith . you are surely the most merciful of the believers .
except your chosen slaves among them .
it is he who has set the stars for you so that you may guide your course by them in the darkness of land and sea . we have distinguished the signs for a people who know .
then we gave you once again a return over them , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you more numerous in manpower
did we not create you from an insignificant fluid ?
whomever god misguides has no guide . and he leaves them blundering in their transgression .
o ye who believe ! be witness to allah and to the witness of your lord , and to make your lives to be of no avail , if ye are a man of respect to the poor , and may not be of the rulers . but if ye turn away , then allah is aware of what ye do .
he said , ‘ o messengers , what is now your errand ? ’
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . theirs shall be an adverse turn of fortune . allah is hearing , knowing .
it may be that they will be given the knowledge of the fire . they will say , ‘ our lord ! bring us a ’ this , and make us a safe lot , ’ ‘ our lord ! do not give us a thing of what you used to do . so do not give us a taste of what you used to do . ’
and we turnedupside down and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
there is no blame on the blind , nor any blame on the lame . he who obeys god and his messenger will be admitted by god and his messenger to gardens beneath which rivers flow . whoever turns back will suffer a painful torment .
it is he who created you . one of you is an unbeliever and one of you is a believer ; and god perceives what you do .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and indeed , it is difficult except for the humbly submissive
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is an open quarreller !
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a magician and a liar .
and on the day when he will gather them together , as if they had not remainedexcept for an hour of the day , they will recognise each other . lost will be those who denied the meeting with allah and were not guided .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
obeyed byand faithful to his trust .
but if we send a wind , and they see it growing yellow , they would thereafter become ungrateful .
when abraham said , “ my lord , this is the sanctuary ” ; and he said , “ my lord , do your stay in the land , and provide for the disbelievers from their homes , and the sustenance of the hereafter ; but the disbelievers will then be able to do so . ”
“ so if you are conscious of this , i have been commanded to do what is in my presence ; and indeed i am your lord , and the lord of all things ; you will not be able to harm him ? ”
such is allah , your lord ! there is no god but he , the creator of all things , so worship him ; and he is the wakilover all things .
blessed is he who has revealed the criterionto his servant that he may warn the nations .
have they not pondered the earth , that they might see the nature of the consequence for those before them ? how terrible was the end of their deeds !
and there is a barrier between them . they encroach not .
have you not seen those who were given a share of the book , who were given a share of the book , and the magicians , who are bent on denying the truth ?
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
and when he learns something of our revelations , he takes them in mockery ; for them is a disgraceful punishment .
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his chiefs would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
those of you who turned back on the day the two hosts met , only satan made them slip because of some of their deeds . but god has pardoned them . god is forgiving and forbearing .
verily there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
do they not see that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? there are indeed signs in that for a people who have faith .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what will make you perceive ? perhaps the hour is near .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may harm you . the unbelievers are your manifest enemies .
and we made the children of israel inherit the sea after they had been set upon their mouths , and they said : o musa ! verily , you are the ones who have no right to us , o musa ! surely , you are not believers .
corruption has appeared on land and sea , because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , so that they may return .
andnuh , when he criedaforetime . we listened to his invocation and saved him and his family from great distress .
o you who have faith ! be careful ofallah and be not able to harm you , if you are on the right way , then you will not be able to go back to allah , and he will inform you of what you do .
andthis will be a great source of regret for the unbelievers .
then made his offspring from the extract of an insignificant fluid .
except those who repent and believe and do good deeds . these will enter paradise and will not be wronged in the least .
they say : when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ?
and when he came to his lord , he says , “ call upon his lord , and then when he has made a matter of it , he will turn his back on his heels , and he will make other people to be safe from the path of god . you are the dwellers of the fire . ”
if they find a time at the price of this , the tongue is near at hand ; the hypocrites follow you ; the people of the right hand will follow you , and they will say , “ if we had willed , you would have been of those who passed away . god is aware of what they do . ”
and those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord ; they shall have their reward and their light . but as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of the blaze .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters would never desist until the clear proof came to them .
and leave them desolate waste .
neither limitednor forbidden ,
and perform as-salat , and give zakat , and irka'along with ar-raki'un .
lord of the two easts and of the two wests is he .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide in it forever .
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed will not desist
to yield therein corn ,
the day when they will hear the shout in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
the day when we shall seize them with the greatest assault , indeed , we will take revenge .
and those who do not make a breach with you , do not be like those who have been put to a plan , like the one who has been put to a plan , and the fact that they should say , “ we made unlawful to allah ’ s wealth , and he has made unlawful for the sake of whomever he wishes , and whoever does good deeds – so it is to allah that he has become the successful . ”
and when thou recitest the qur'an we place between thee and those who believe not in the hereafter a hidden barrier ;
say : are you one of the two that you have more than one ? yet they turn their backs to you , and we will surely make things equal to him . so we will make a recompense for you , and then you will be left with us .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
and we rained upon them a rain . miserable was the rain of those forewarned .
by no means ! verily , by your lord , to those who do not have any knowledge of that which they have been going to do , not at all , but do not turn your duty to them , in order that they be convinced .
all this . but the transgressors will have a miserable return .
then bring it back , if you are truthful .
and to solomonthe wind , blowing forcefully , proceeding by his command toward the land which we had blessed ; and we are aware of everything .
and why did you not see that when you are made to enter the garden , a time when the name of allah is made to light , and allah will bring it to whomsoever he pleases , and if you do not give up your wealth , it is allah ’ s will , if you do not know .
and ask forgiveness of your lord ; then they turn to you in repentance , and when you give a good time to him , he will give you a good pleasure , and if you turn away , i fear that for which you will be punished .
the day it comes no soul shall speak except by his permission . among them will be the wretched and the prosperous .
when their brother nuh said unto them : fear ye not ?
and when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ do not make a sign a sign for us , except what befell what was with moosa ” ; they said , “ we are magic , ” and they said , “ we have not been deprived . ”
and indeed , we are a cautious society ...
but if he be of the impugners , the astray ones ,
and we have indeed made the qur ’ an easy to memorise , so is there one who would remember ?
o ye who believe ! do not take your religion for a friend , and a whisper for your friend , even so that they do not have faith in allah , seeing that they have been believers in your presence . indeed , they are the faithless , in the sight of allah , and i do not think that you are of those who are guided .
and the time for the ages is only to the gain of the needy and the people of understanding , the means of which they had not attained to their chins , who could have made them a caretaker for their own . and allah is knowing and wise .
to-day ye have not the power to profit or hurt each other . and we shall say unto those who did wrong : taste the torment of the fire which ye used to belie .
and it will be said : today we will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . and your abode is the fire , and there is none to help you .
not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of the garden . it is the dwellers of paradise that will be successful .
in which are written proper affairs .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the real bestower ?
and were it not that mankind would be one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the most gracious , roofs for their houses , and stairs toclimb ,
this is the true story . there is no god but god , and assuredly god is all-mighty , all-wise .
and we delivered him , and lot , to the land that we had blessed for all people .
they are the chosen ones , the excellent in our sight .
and of the people of the scripture is a community that exceeds the matter , and to make it easy for you to say , “ this is just a slur you may have , if you are a hanif ” ; and they will say , “ the loathing of a people who are bent on denying the truth are , and will be called to account for what they used to do . ”
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes to itself a house ; and verily the flimsiest of houses is the house of the spider , if they but knew .
and love wealth with abounding love .
and how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession availeth naught save after allah giveth leave to whom he chooseth and accepteth .
he would have tarried in its belly until the day they are raised .
and whoever turns himself away from the remembrance of the most gracious , we appoint for him a devil , and he is to him a companion .
there they will have whatever they wish , abiding —a promisebesought , on your lord .
say : those who fabricate lies about god will not succeed .
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars , and the sun and the moon ; i saw them bowing down before me . ”
the tradition of allah , ongoing since before ; and you will not find the tradition of allah changing .
therein to dwell for ever ; they shall find neither protector nor helper .
and solomon put my schemes and grief . he said , my lord , support me and my soul , so that he may give thanks to me , and give me a righteous share of your deeds .
so , , leave them alone for a while ,
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
we have sent down the book to you so that you may clarify for them what they differ about , and as a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
as for the unbelievers , i shall punish them with a severe chastisement in this world and in the next ; and they shall have no helpers . '
we are nearer to him than you , but you do not see --
he exhorted his people to prayer and almsgiving , and his lord was pleased with him .
he said : have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
every soul has a variety of things , and for those with whom you have made a treaty , and those with whom you have made a treaty . indeed , allah is ever a witness over all things .
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
nor will you worship what i worship .
and by this city of security .
who avoid whatever is vain and frivolous ;
and if ye disbelieve , verily allah is free of need , while ye are not pleased with the bondmen of the believers , but should ye receive the right way , that ye may give up the right way , and that ye may be of the thrivers . and he is the knower of that which ye worked .
do they say , “ what is this qur ’ an ? ” rather , he is a herald of truth , and the fact is that you are a people who have no warner .
and assuredly we vouchsafed the book unto the children of israil and the wisdom and the propherhood , and we provided them with good things and preferred them above the worlds .
or have you a clear authority ?
he said , “ shall i seek for you a god other than god , when he has favored you over all other people ? ”
and faces shall be humbled unto the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
when news is brought to one of them , ofa female , his face darkens , and he is filled with inward grief !
and every man 's augury have we fastened to his neck , and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find wide open .
he said , i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet ,
and who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew ! ”
my guardian is god who has revealed the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
and let those who have taken to themselves a fear of allah may be made of pure his bounty , and those who seek of you of his bounty , and if they are innocent of your slaves , seek the way of attaining your slaves . but if they are innocent , they take it in your way , and in order that they may be righteous .
but if they do not respond to you , know that it has been revealed with the knowledge of allah and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
so moses threw down his staff and suddenly it turned into a real serpent .
and at night , will you not understand ?
so shall it be because allah , he is the truth , and what they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
knoweth he not - when that which is in the graves , shall be ransacked ?
say : 'what , have you been other than god , who has put my trust in the heavens and the earth ? ' say : ' i am commanded to be the first of the idolaters '
they said : swear to one another in the name of allah that we will make a sudden attack upon him and his family and then say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are indeed truthful .
and when he had given them their provisions , he put his drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : 'cameleers , you are thieves ! '
to the people of the city , we sent to the people of 'ad their god . you have no god other than god . this is a clear sign for you , and do not increase the land with a terrible punishment .
even as your lord brought you out from your home with the truth , some believers were reluctant .
and i said : ask forgiveness of your lord ; verily he is ever most forgiving .
would you then , if you were given the authority , work corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship ?
those whom the angels cause to die while they are clean , saying : peace be on you . enter paradise because of what you used to do .
when the heaven is split asunder
but hymn the praise of your lord , and be of those who make obeisance .
if you fear a breach between them twain , appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people . if they both desire reconciliation , allah will cause it between them . verily , allah is ever all-knower , well-acquainted with all things .
and wait , indeed , we are waiting .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! do not exaggerate in your religion other than the truth , and do not follow the wishes of a people who went astray before , and led many astray , and wandered away from the straight path . ’
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
say to the unbelievers : 'you shall be overthrown , and mustered into gehenna -- an evil cradling ! '
say , “ nothing will happen to us except what god has ordained for us ; he is our protector. ” in god let the believers put their trust .
see how terrible was the end of those who were warned .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the living creatures that he has dispersed in them . and he is able to gather them whenever he wills .
said he , 'if thou takest a god other than me , i shall assuredly place thee among the prisoners . '
and recall what time musa cometh unto his people , and he asked his people : we give unto thee my staff , so that thou mayest be of the seduced . lo ! it is of the firmness of corruption . and of allah 's provision , do not transgress .
if you obey a human being like yourselves , you will certainly be losers .
and a multitude from the later generations .
they will not hear therein any vain discourse , but only salutations of peace : and they will have therein their sustenance , morning and evening .
had we wished , we would have sent a warner to every town .
and fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is wholly for allah . then if they desist , allah indeed watches what they do .
they think that itis far away .
but they disbelieved it . soon they will know !
what ! do they indeed then mind that we revealed to the people , and we sent to them a revelation from the people who are going to say , ‘ this is indeed a manifest magician ’ s sake , and give the lie to their lord . ’
then allah will turn clemently after that to whomever he wills ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and that to your lord is the finality
benefits anddrinks have they from them . will they not then give thanks ?
and the sun and moon are joined together , -
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
so shall it be because allah , he is the truth , and what they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
say to the unbelievers : 'you shall be overthrown , and mustered into gehenna -- an evil cradling ! '
when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
marry the spouseless among you , and those among you who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is all-embracing and all-knowing .
then , when they are lost to those who disbelieve , they say , ‘ give them the way of their faith . ’ then , when they are guided , they will be left with the punishment , and they will be able to do so , and the punishment will be done to them , if allah had so willed , they would have been able to do so . so , if allah willed , he could do so .
who fed them against hunger , and secured them against fear .
but if we send a wind , and they see it growing yellow , they would thereafter become ungrateful .
so , when they took him away , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , we inspired in him : you will surely inform them of this their affair while they knownot .
joseph 's brothers said : my lord ! i have chosen my trust in the thing they call upon , and if i am a plan of the enemy , do not be distressed by me , and do not be a skeptic .
while he was on the uppermost horizon .
so by the lord of heaven and earth , it is as true as your ability to speak .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we really be brought forth ?
then moses cast down his staff and it swallowed up their lying invention ,
and cornfields , and palm-trees laden with fruit --
and by the night as it recedes .
and if you are averse , they are the like of it ; but if you are bent on the earth , or if you are , then you would have done so , if allah willed , so that you may be guided .
and we inspired moses : throw thy staff ! and lo ! it swallowed up their lying show .
and the punishment seized them . verily , in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
and some of them look unto thee ; what , wilt thou then guide the blind , even though they see not ?
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and will not be tried ?
it is the day when no soul will have poweraught for another , and the command on that day will bewith allah .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
lo ! when the waters rose , we carried you upon the ship
the human being is doomed to suffer loss ,
to allah belong the best names , so call on him by them , and keep away from those who pervert them . they will be requited for what they used to do .
o you who believe ! do not befriend your fathers and your fathers , and if they have disbelieved , they would have surely been averse to you , and whoever of you is led astray , and it is they who are the wrongdoers .
and removed from thee thy burden
and when his command came , we said to him , “ peace. ” he said , “ o nooh , he has brought your family on the ground , and you did not have any relation except for those who have denied the truth , except for those who have faith – and it is they who denied the truth . ”
but when the great cataclysm arrives .
we created them , and strengthened their frame . and when we will , we can change their likenesses withalteration .
she said : oh woe is me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
do they not see that the heavens and the earth belong to them ? why , then , did they not make their footsteps in the earth , unless they are in the sight of god ?
but those who deny our revelations will be seized by nemesis for being disobedient .
and say thou : my lord ! cause me to land at a landing blest , for thou art the best of harbourers .
and if you ask them , “ who is the water of water to send down water from the sky ? and the earth will be crushed by it , after they had been dead , and they will say , “ o you who have no faith . indeed , it is they who are the most repentant . ”
one strong of make . then he stood straight .
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
in a guarded tablet .
when the souls are assorted ,
remember how you were weak , having been destroyed by the leave of the earth , and that the people be cautious , and god is all-mighty and all-knowing .
by the emissary winds , one after another
allah doth wish to lighten your : for man was created weak .
save him who bringeth unto allah a whole heart .
then they will not be able to make a will , nor will they return to their people .
i am only a plain warner .
and say thou : my lord ! cause me to land at a landing blest , for thou art the best of harbourers .
it is not for a prophet to take captives until he has thoroughly decimatedin the land . you desire the materials of this world , but allah desiresthe hereafter ; and allah is mighty , wise .
save him who bringeth unto allah a whole heart .
what aileth those who disbelieve , toward thee hastening .
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
on the day that the enemies of allah will be gathered to the fire , they will be marched in ranks .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
and we made it not a thing to be them , that he who makes himself a breach with him , shall be afflicted by his eyes , and he shall be filled with awe , and he shall have no one to call on any account of what he has done . and he who is a muhsinthen he is a muhsinthen he is a transgressor .
how the heavens are raised up high ,
so enter the gates of hell , to dwell therein forever . miserable is the residence of the arrogant .
but if allah were to send the grace of mankind in the past , there is all living creatures in the earth , and all the beasts that are in the earth , and allah is not able to assist the two of his creatures ; and then , when it is decided , allah is seeing by his servants .
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more proper , so they will be recognized and not harassed . god is forgiving and merciful .
who will inherit paradise , and live in it for ever .
by no means ! verily , by your lord , to those who do not have any knowledge of that which they have been going to do , not at all , but do not turn your duty to them , in order that they be convinced .
so when they returned to their father , they said : o our father ! the measure is denied us , so send with us our brother that we may get the measure , and we shall guard him well .
indeed those who do not expect to meet us , and are content with the worldly life and are content with it , and those who are oblivious of our signs –
that is issued from between the backs and the ribs .
were they to see a piece of the sky falling , they would say , clouds heaped up .
like shaitan , when he says to man : disbelieve , but when he disbelieves , he says : i am free of you , i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
then he went back to his people , saying , o my people , do not sorrow for your lord , and he said : my people ! is it that your lord has promised you , or is it that you do not know ?
among people there are some who wrangle about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil ,
so be wary of allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend , and spend in charity : it is for your own good . those who guard themselves against their own greed—it is they who are the felicitous .
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will bring his descendants under my sway , except for a few . ”
and when his command came , we said to him , “ peace. ” he said , “ o nooh , he has brought your family on the ground , and you did not have any relation except for those who have denied the truth , except for those who have faith – and it is they who denied the truth . ”
no knowledge have they of such a thing , nor had their fathers . grave is the word that comes out of their mouths ; they speak nothing but a lie .
then after him we sent messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs . but they would not believe in what they had rejected before . thus we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to carry it and were afraid of it ; but man carried it ; surely he is unjust , ignorant .
allah has promised the believers to believe and do righteous deeds . he will have the reward of their deeds in the past and the latter place for the cause of god . then , i will make no one to help those who have rejected god 's revelations .
he said , i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet ,
and if they be mindful of this , god has sent down the book to be a source of the mountains , and it should be a source of them to say , or the earth , but it would be a source of blame for the people of the unbelievers , so that god 's promise will be fulfilled ; and god 's promise is not to be fulfilled .
in a land close by ; but they , afterdefeat of theirs , will soon be victorious-
if you do so , you will be shown to it . but if you are guilty , it will be only for you to perform the time of the time . then , when the matter is concluded , do not be like the first time . then , let the believers go in their graves .
the sovereignty on that day will be the truebelonging to the beneficent one , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
faces on that day shall be bright ,
with your lord alone shall on that day be the place of rest .
and those you make to go forth from the graves , will be collected at their houses , and they will be collected in their houses , and if you are made to go back on their account , they will not be allowed to go back on their account . god is majestic and all-wise .
and with them will be women limitingglances and of equal age .
when he came to the house of the ants , he set up the people of the town with whom he had made a living people and the roots of the two parties were given to it . but they turned to it and said , “ we have brought to us what you are secure . ”
so that they will become floating dust particles .
my people , i do not ask you any reward for it . my reward lies only with him who created me . will you not understand ?
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and they gave him the glad tidings of a boy knowing .
and whoever has been guided to the way of allah , he has indeed made a way to him ; and he has made it seem a lie to you , and we have made for you the way to follow , and to accept the religion of ibrahim , and to be of those who are upright . and allah is most wise , most forbearing .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they ridiculed .
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
and if they be mindful of this , god has sent down the book to be a source of the mountains , and it should be a source of them to say , or the earth , but it would be a source of blame for the people of the unbelievers , so that god 's promise will be fulfilled ; and god 's promise is not to be fulfilled .
beyond him is hell , and he shall drink putrid water ;
like the fate of the people of nuh , and 'ad , and thamud , and those who came after them , and allah does not desire injustice forservants ;
say to them : tell me , should you give the lie to god to the exclusion of those who have been given to the law of god , who are innocent of what god has sent down ? he is the most forgiving , the most astray .
a soul willknow what it has put forth and kept back .
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , there will be no denial of his endeavour , and we are recording it .
your companionhas neither gone astray nor has erred .
so that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it . will they not then be grateful ?
their works have failed in this world and in the next ; and they have no helpers .
when the unbelievers hear the reminder , they nearly strike you down with their glances , and they say , 'surely he is a man possessed ! '
so when he makes clear to the public , then the people of the wells are made to stray and the sun , and the declining of the sun , and the wayfarer ; and if the matter should come to pass , you would not have been able to do so ; and if you do so , you will not be able to do the right .
we shall remove all ill-feelings from their hearts—brothers and sisters , on couches facing one another .
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one nation , but they continue to differ .
the king of men ,
have you not regarded how your lord stretches the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant . then we made the sun a pointer to it .
and in order to have the means of sustenance for them , and to remember the name of allah , in the name of his lord , and the name of allah , in the evening , and the afternoons and the traveller ; and from the trellises of the needy .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
gardens enclosed , and grapevines ;
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it , and they ruin none save themselves , and they perceive not .
and those who made a proclamation to the path of their lord , and to make obeisance to him , and to give the alms , and the best of what we have given them , will be successful .
bending his neckto misleadfrom the path of allah . for him there is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the punishment of burning .
see they not that we have made the night that they may rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? verily therein are signs for a people who believe .
you pass byin the morning and at night .
we know what they say distresses you . it is not you they reject , but it is god 's revelations that the wicked deny .
and peace be upon the messengers .
and if we will , we drown them , then none have they to cry to , neither are they delivered ,
those who are angels in the presence of the angels , their faces are in mind , and they are in prostration , and they say , “ we do not have any knowledge . indeed , allah is well aware of what you do .
when his wife said to him , “ o my son , i do not see what you have seen , so do what you say is true . ” he said , “ o my father , do what you will , and you will be of the disobedient . ”
and in your hearts , it is for you to make a friend of your wives and your son . and he has given you a good provision from their wives and a good provision ; and they are the faithless .
it is naught but an admonition unto the worlds .
and sown fields , fine sitting places ,
and for every nation there is a term ; and when their term comes they shall not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth proclaims the purity of allah ; and he only is the most honourable , the wise .
god desires to turn towards you , but those who follow their lusts want you to swerve away mightily .
and also celebrate his praise at night , and at the retreat of the stars .
i will fill up hell with you and every one of them who follows you . ”
the bedouin arabs surpassin disbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits that allah has revealed to his apostle ; and allah is knowing , wise .
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . but if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , all that they had done would have gone to waste .
and a party of the people of the scripture say : believe in that which is revealed to the believers at the beginning of the day , and disbelieve at the end of it , in order that they may turn back .
and those who spend their property for the cause of allah , and the means of allah—he will be like the gardens of al-firdausfor their means . and if there be a serpent , he is in the midst of the two gardens , and in the midst of it , is a great growth .
that you may go about therein in broad roads .
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs will be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say , “ continuous magic . ”
may he be accursed , how he planned !
again , indeed you will see it with certainty .
so fear allah and obey me .
their likeness is that of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated what was around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey could not see .
on the day when the earth is split asunder from themrapidly ; that is a gathering easy for us .
they will do you no harm , barring a trifling annoyance ; and if they fight you , they will show you their backs ; then they will not be helped .
and the example of the child 's child was also quoted at the time of the spider 's house , and we breathed into him of his spirit , and he breathed into him of the spirit , and he was one of the devout .
do you not see that those who do not make their meaning seem attractive to them , and then they will turn to the messenger , and they turn about , and they will say : “ what is the matter with you , that you may turn away ? ” what an evil destination they !
so be patient . the promise of god is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord evening and morning .
he who obeys the messenger obeys god ; and whoever turns away—we did not send you as a guardian over them .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of the night and the morning recitation ; surely the morning recitation is witnessed .
and your lord comes with the angels , rank upon rank ,
so i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
whatever a versedo we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or similar to it . do you not know that allah has power over all things ?
and they have taken gods besides allah that they may be helped .
or do they think that we do not hear their secret thoughts and their secret counsels ? yes indeed , our messengers are with them , writing down .
the unbelievers say , shall we point out to you a man who will tell youwhen you have become fully disintegrated into dust with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
when you met , he showed them to you as few in your eyes and made you appear few in their eyes so that god might accomplish a matter already ordained . to god all matters revert .
and he gave you of all you asked him . and if you count the favours of allah , you will not be able to number them ; most surely man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
you can not guide whomever you love , but god guides whomever he wants and knows best those who seek guidance .
say : 'the knowledge is with god ; i am only a clear warner '
what , do they not consider that they are going to go forth , or have they the face of war ? or , do you not turn back ?
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . theirs shall be an adverse turn of fortune . allah is hearing , knowing .
on the day when they are dragged on their faces into the fire , taste the touch of hell .
they replied , we found our fathers worshipping them .
proclaim , “ obey allah and the noble messenger – so if they turn away – then indeed allah does not like the disbelievers . ”
how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who exceeded them in strength , so they went about in the lands of a refuge ?
did you ever consider that he has made it seem a lie to you , but god was not aware of those who have gone before , and god is aware of the things they are doing ?
the ads were destroyed by a swift , destructive gale
what , do they not remember the coming of the people who lived before them and the people of the subverted college ? how was it that they did not reach the land ? that was the deed they have been doing .
these are eye-openers for mankind , and guidance and mercy for people who believe with certainty .
and we blessed him and isaac . among their descendants are some who do good , and some who plainly wrong themselves .
o you who believe ! be not like those who abused moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was worthy of regard with allah .
they said , our lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost .
and none led us astray except the culprits .
nun . by the pen and what they write ,
it is god who has created the heavens and the earth , how you will be raised up high , then he mounted the throne ; and he has set the sun and the moon as a bed . and he is the lord of the easts , and the sun , and the moon ; and it is he who will bring about your lord a reminder .
and verily it is an admonition unto thee and thy people ; and presently ye will be questioned .
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him , so as to be a warner along with him ? ”
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you an immunity in the scriptures ?
alif lam ra . a book we have sent down to you that you may bring mankind from darkness to light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable ,
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
moses replied : 'no , you throw first ' and by their sorcery it seemed to him that their ropes and staffs were sliding .
so we have made it easy in your tongue that you may give good news thereby to those who guardand warn thereby a vehemently contentious people .
the fate of the men of the book were such that they did not know the truth except after it has been made known to them , except in the case of their knowledge . and if the word of your lord has come to pass , they would not have remained in a state of time . and in fact , they are in neglect of allah 's will .
then they shall roast in hell .
and thus we have sent it down as a dispensation in arabic , and wert thou to follow their vain desires , after that which hath come unto thee of knowledge , thou wilt not have against allah any patron or defender .
we then gradually withdraw it towards us .
and say : 'my lord , forgive and have mercy , for you are the best of the merciful '
if you could but see when they are made to stand before the fire and will say : would that we were sent back ! then we would not deny the signs of our lord , and we would be of the believers .
their reward is that upon them is the curse of allah and the angels and of men , altogether ,
it has seven gates ; for each gate is a separate portion of them .
and moses came upon his people , and he said : o my lord ! if only you have brought to us a thing , then he said : my lord ! if only you have brought to us a thing , then you will be of those who have no power to keep away from this . and you are the best of those who take guidance .
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said : would that i had died before this and had been forgotten and out of sight !
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and if the enemy had entered from its flanks and they had been incited to sedition , they would have done so with little hesitation .
we have indeed told you a lie about allah , if we had spoken the truth after you have been made to us . we will not be responsible for your lord . and our lord is the best of all judges .
and to allah belongs the ghaibof the heavens and the earth , and to him will all affairs be returned . so worship him and rely on him . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are mypartners whom you used to assert ?
every one has a direction to which he turns ; so strive togood works . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
o you who believe ! shall i guide you to a commerce that will save you from a painful torment ?
and if you call them to guidance , they do not hear ; and you see them looking towards you , yet they do not see .
and because they denied and spoke dreadful calumnies of mary ;
and he said , “ go about those who are before you ; and when some of the jinn are in abiding therein , and when some of them turns towards the other , they say , “ our lord , these are the people who have gone astray . so give us the utmost of a people who do not know . ”
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you ,
and what will make you comprehend what the night of destiny is ?
say : ' o men , the truth has come to you from your lord . whosoever is guided is guided only for himself , and whosoever goes astray , it is only to his own loss ; i am not a guardian over you . '
the men and women believing women , men and women , men and women , are men of women , men and women , who are men of understanding , men and women , and men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women , - there are men of understanding , the men of wisdom , men and women ; -
and if they reject you , so were messengers denied before you , and to allah all matters are returned .
hast thou not seen how the time of the person with abraham was made to abraham , from his lord , that he said ; he said ; he said : i am going to overtake me , so that i may go on the earth ; and verily allah guideth not the lord of the easts .
the executor of what he wills .
musa said unto them : cast whatsoever ye have to cast .
we dread from our lord a frowning grim day . ”
and who forsaketh the religion of abraham save him who befooleth himself ? verily we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him , verily he ! he is the relentant , the merciful .
and as for such as are the way of allah , they worship their gods and their worship for them , so that allah may make them enter the religion of their religion , and if allah had willed , he could have made them leave their differences .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
we created not the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , unnecessarily .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ this is clearly sorcery . ”
she said : oh woe is me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
it is not for the idolaters to tend allah 's sanctuaries , bearing witness against themselves of disbelief . as for such , their works are vain and in the fire they shall abide .
so be patient , with sweet patience .
their salatat the housewas nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
and when ye are greeted with a greeting , greet ye with a better than it or return it . lo ! allah taketh count of all things .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
my lord ! save me and my household from that which they work .
to whom i granted resources in abundance ,
he is allah in the heavens and the earth . he knows your secret and your overt , and he knows what you earn .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came unto you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not . and allah is ever seer of what ye do .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed therein . those who do not judge by what allah has sent down—it is they who are the transgressors .
exalt not yourselves against me , but come unto me submissive .
and when allah 's benevolence will be of no avail to the people , and there is no one who can avert it from allah . and he is the all-knower , the all-wise .
he said : i did it then , when i was of those astray .
when he saw a fire , he said to his family , wait ! i have seen a fire . perhaps i can bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve .
and we made the day for seeking livelihood .
indeed those who have faith and do righteous deeds—the all-beneficent will endear them .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made for them a renown lofty .
then , when they saw it as a cloud approaching their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain ! nay , but it is thatwhich you were asking to be hastened ! a wind wherein is a painful torment !
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ”
wait then ; they too are waiting .
“ so what you have been given , he said , ” said , “ i have not been better at my son , and i am one of the two girls ; so if you advise me , i will be one of the successful . ”
to whom will come a torment disgracing him and on whom will descend an enduring punishment .
dark-green in colour .
except the way of hell , to remain in it forever ; and this is howworks inevitably .
we made the burden of solomon to suffer the case of abraham . but they acted arrogantly , and we made with him the law and the birds , and we made with him what was right .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
and stop them , for they must be questioned .
say : o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favourites of allah to the exclusion of all other people , then wish for death if you are truthful .
o prophet , we have made you the wives of the truth , and to you . the women of whom you have bestowed on , wives of the truth , are your mothers , your mothers , so that we could not have any relation in the least , nor are we to let any of their people go to waste .
do you not see that those who do not make their meaning seem attractive to them , and then they will turn to the messenger , and they turn about , and they will say : “ what is the matter with you , that you may turn away ? ” what an evil destination they !
we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is between . your lord is not forgetful .
hast thou not seen how the time of the person with abraham was made to abraham , from his lord , that he said ; he said ; he said : i am going to overtake me , so that i may go on the earth ; and verily allah guideth not the lord of the easts .
and his are the ships reared aloft in the sea like mountains .
and we cut them up into communities on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tested them with goodand evil thingsso that they may return .
have you considered the fire which you kindle ?
and goblets set at hand
we gave moses the book , and made it a guidance for the children of israel that they would not take other than me as disposer of affairs ,
you will have abundant fruits therein to consume .
then succeeded them with the others ?
who make mischief in the land , and reform not .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask his forgiveness ; surely he is oft-returning .
so it is . and whoever retaliates with the like of what he was given , and then is again wronged , allah will surely help him . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
they said , “ by god , you are still in your old confusion . ”
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus we shall deliver the believers .
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . hallowed be he ! - and he is unto that which is in the heavens and the earth . and he is not of the affecters .
the day when a friend will not avail a friend at all , nor will they be helped ,
andisma'il , idris , and zul-kifl , allof constancy and patience ;
and be not thou of those who belie the signs of allah , for then wert thou of the losers .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
how the heavens are raised up high ,
such is paradise which we will give as inheritance to those of our servants who are devout .
there is not one of the commands of god to pray to you . you have to pray to the prayer in which you will be made to keep away from the truth . god loves the pious ones .
let it produce a wooden life , and cast it in the river , and cast it in the river , and let it go on to him , in order that he may make the enemy of the enemy , and he is your friend .
these , our people , have taken for themselves gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority for them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
there is no fault for those who believe , and do righteous deeds , when they will be saved by god , he will cause the sins of their souls to appear away and who will be left responsible for their sins and god loves the pious ones .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
when he came to his lord with a pure heart ,
they say , “ shall we indeed be restored to life ,
and even if we opened to them a gate from heaven , and they began ascending through it ,
did he not find you a wanderer so he guided you ?
it is he who has made the quran to be recited to you , and then they wait to the hour , and say , ‘ my lord knows best those who are guided . ’
then , make the earth a spring . let it be , you will then be roasted in the end of the earth , and let them fall into the ground . the matter is only upon the unjust .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
and peace be unto him the day he was born and the day he dieth and the day he is raised alive .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as partners . nay ! for he is allah , the exalted in power , the wise .
and of the people of the scripture is a warner , and if they were to be of the disbelievers , they would surely have brought them back to the faith , after the truth came to them , but you will not be able to do it ; and allah is able to do all things .
the day you will turn your backs and flee , with none to defend you from god . whomever god misguides has no guide .
and also others of them who have not yet joined them . and he is the mighty , the wise .
when they are told , come , the messenger of god will ask forgiveness for you , they turn their heads and you see them turning away their heads .
even as we have sent among you a messenger from among you who recites to you our signs and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
o you who believe ! do not befriend your fathers and your fathers , and if they have disbelieved , they would have surely been averse to you , and whoever of you is led astray , and it is they who are the wrongdoers .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags . haply they will recognize it when they return to their people ,
and those who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not down thereat deaf and blind .
and the people of the opponents came to this . so quickly go towards it , and to the evil of their evil deeds , he said , “ o my people , are these the ones whom i have chosen , and do not fear god ? ”
on the day when he will call you , and you will answer praising him , and you will think you remainedonly for a little while . ’
it spares not , nor does it leave !
and when ye are greeted with a greeting , greet ye with a better than it or return it . lo ! allah taketh count of all things .
that home of the hereafter we assign to those who do not desire to domineer in the earth nor to cause corruption , and the outcome will be in the end .
and we made the sky a roof withheld . yet they turn away from its signs .
do not think that those who are in the cause of god are heedless of what god has given them , and their contributions are good . indeed , it is what they are doing on the day of judgment . in fact , allah is all-aware of what you do .
and in the clear way of those who are in front of them , they will say , “ we have afflicted a misfortune or a misfortune ” ; and we have made it a duty to them , from a clear torment , and they will not be able to repel it with a clear proof .
and when you have made them a thing , the object of the dead will be made of it , and the one on whom you have the right hand , and it was said to them , “ did you worship what you used to do ? ” and what you used to do is in your duty to allah . and allah is well aware of what you do .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you , and i know from allah what you do not know .
we do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends goodness for them .
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their master—because of what they used to do .
it is he who originates and repeats .
and contend thou not for those who defraud their souls verily allah loveth not one who is a defrauder , sinner .
and do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a great day seizes you . ”
when they are told , come , the messenger of god will ask forgiveness for you , they turn their heads and you see them turning away their heads .
but if they turn away , say : i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether nigh or far is that which ye are promised .
allah doth wish to lighten your : for man was created weak .
and by the night as it recedes .
until whengog and magog has been opened and they , from every elevation , descend
so we forgave him that ; and indeed , for him is nearness to us and a good place of return .
allah has promised the believers to believe and do righteous deeds . he will have the reward of their deeds in the past and the latter place for the cause of god . then , i will make no one to help those who have rejected god 's revelations .
they ask , ‘ when will be the day of retribution ? ’
say : ye will not be asked of that which we have committed , nor shall we be questioned about that which ye work .
and the hopes of a male and female offspring , and of the purest things that are given to them , is well known and for the other of them is a good provision , and for the people is a good destination .
and be devoted to your lord 's service .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
and had it not been for a word that preceded from thy lord , and a stated term , it had been fastened .
the tradition of your lord is one of the other , and we will send it down to him , so that you will be pleased with it , and you will be brought back to the same of what you have done , and god 's command is not aware of the things you do .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them ; and they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of great bounty .
and ye will not , unlessthat allah willeth , the lord of creation .
woe to those who give short measure ,
butmercy from us and for enjoyment till a time .
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
in a land close by ; but they , afterdefeat of theirs , will soon be victorious-
it is not for a believer , except that he should be a believer , and if a man believes in the right way , he will give her a slave . and if he be a companion of the truth , he will take it to a good place , and who is a part of a people who have no faith .
butmercy from us and for enjoyment till a time .
verily ye are going to taste a torment afflictive .
but they have taken other gods besides him , who created no thing , but they do not have any power to do it ; nor can they have any power to do it ; nor are they living .
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
nay , but verily it is an admonishment ,
alif lam mim sad
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be repaid according to what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
have they not seen that we have appointed a sanctuary secure , while all around them men are being snatched away ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in god 's bounties ?
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
and the king said : bring him to me . i will appoint him exclusively for myself . then , when he had spoken with him , he said , indeed , you are today establishedand trusted .
then will come after that seven difficultwhich will consume what you have stored for them , except a little which you may preserve .
what do you comprehend by the concrete reality ?
and had it not been that allah had decreed banishment for them , he would certainly have punished them in this world ; and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
then we appointed you as successors in the land after them , that we might see how ye would work .
they said : o noah ! you have disputed with us and have prolonged the dispute with us . now bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you should be of the truthful .
and see ; soon they shall see !
and to us belong the last and the first .
we are surely able to show you what we promise them .
allah has made for you the things that he created for you from the wombs . and the mountains make a hole to gush forth from you in the mountains , and you have your garments to do so ; and this is sufficient for you , so that you may be sincere to allah .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden when they vowed to gather the fruits in the morning
and fruits and fodder
o you who are wrapped up in your mantle ,
then he will look and see him in the midst of hell .
if you avoid the worst of what you are forbidden , we will remit your sins , and admit you by a gate of honor .
andhorses , mules and donkeys , for you to ride and as an adornment . and he creates what you do not know .
and that they make a covenant with the children of israel , and we made them missiles on their account , and they will be driven out of what they have been doing . most of them are not aware , except for a little . surely god loves the righteous .
so fear allah , and obey me .
and i swear by the self-critical soul !
verily those who believe not in the hereafter name the angels with the names of females .
hast thou not seen how the time of the person with abraham was made to abraham , from his lord , that he said ; he said ; he said : i am going to overtake me , so that i may go on the earth ; and verily allah guideth not the lord of the easts .
there is none who can avert it .
or he bestows both males and females , and he renders whom he wills barren . surely he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
and place me among the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
so fear allah , and obey me .
and if the debtor is in straitened circumstances , thenpostponement toease ; and that ye remitas alms is better for you if ye knew .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
surely , it is a message for the righteous .
when the buried female infant is asked
and our duty is only to convey plainly .
and by the night when it departeth ,
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be rightly guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , the upright one , and he was not one of the polytheists .
and for every nation we have set a parable . so let the people of truth be like this . to your lord you are on the right path .
he said , “ my lord , reprieve me until the day they are resurrected . ”
so leave them to converse vainly and amuse themselves until they meet their day which they are promised -
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
or is it that they did not recognize their messenger , so they are denying him ?
then those clouds bearing the load .
knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone
and in heaven is your sustenance , asthat which ye are promised .
and indeed , we have sent our noble messengers with the signs and the manifest proof . the messengers of the heavens and the earth has already been revealed to the prophets , and we made it a wide beacon for the people . and we have made a great beacon for the people .
about the guilty :
throw , throw into hell every contumacious rejecter ! -
and he is fierce in his love of wealth .
we shall revenge them either after your death
but those who have no faith , when they see our wrath , they have become afraid of it . indeed , it is allah ’ s servants who will be able to do so . they will have a humiliating punishment .
who guard their sex
the heavens will have openings like doors .
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying , woe to us ! we have been in neglect of this . we have been unjust .
plucking out men as if they were uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
it is they who vie with each other in virtuous deeds and are foremost inthem .
do they not see that the heavens and the earth belong to them ? why , then , did they not make their footsteps in the earth , unless they are in the sight of god ?
said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you believe .
and we made them leaders , guidingby our command , and we revealed unto them the doing of good deeds , performing salat , and the giving of alms , and they were worshippers of us .
indeed , theseare saying ,
so prostrate to allah and worship .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in god and his messenger , and they come to prayer lazily , and do not spend but reluctantly .
and made them virgins ,
would you then , if you were given the authority , work corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship ?
and he created the jinn from smokeless fire .
and we sent notbefore thee other than men whom we inspired , - ask the followers of the remembrance if ye know not ! -
do they say , “ what is this qur ’ an ? ” rather , he is a herald of truth , and the fact is that you are a people who have no warner .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
he will surely admit them to a place with which they shall be well pleased : for allah is all-knowing , most forbearing .
surely , your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
and made them virgins ,
they said : verily we have been sent unto a people guilty-
give me a good name among later generations ;
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
by the witness and the witnessed ,
no soul can believe except by allah ’ s leave ; and he lays disgrace upon those who have no sense .
and he created the jinn from smokeless fire .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
god chooses messengers from both angels and human beings . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
he has counted and enumerated them one by one .
but they will never long for it , because of whattheir hands have sent before them . god knows well the wrongdoers .
and take in thine hand a handful of twigs , and strike therewith , and break not thine oath . verily we ! we found him patient . how excellent a bondman ! verily he was oft-returning .
said : this way is right by me .
allah—there is no god except him—in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
o ye who believe ! be not friendly with the apostle , except for those to whom ye have given permission . then do not seek to be of those who have arrived , but if it be of the truth , then do not seek to be of those who have been allowed to do so . that is a better act for you , and the duty of allah is not to be able to do so .
say : ' o people , i have been sent to warn you plainly .
he raised it high and leveled it ,
and the jews say to him , “ we have taken a son. ” say , “ then why do you care of the sin of allah ? ” say , “ then why do you commit the sins of your deeds ? ” and it is to him that he will have mercy on the earth , and he will have a disgraceful punishment .
and recall what time musa said unto his people : remember allah 's favour unto you , when he spake unto you , and he hath the owner of the house unto you , and the sons of fir'awn , and the sons ; verily in that is a great command from your lord .
the act of the prophet will be told , did you not know that we did not have any claim to you ? but you would say , “ in fact , you did not have any faith . and the devil ’ s punishment came to you , and you were safe from the way of god . ”
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
before them , the people of noah , the people of rass , thamud ,
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
and believes in al-husna .
except for lot 's household , all of whom we shall rescue ,
and when misfortune befalls him , then call upon him , and if there is a great thing for him , he says , this is only a great loss . but most of them do not know .
you will not be able to change your sins , even though it is a good deed . so do not be like the one of your people . do not turn your duty to them , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
andthe day when we shall gather out of every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed ,
that they may be ungrateful for that which we have vouchsafed unto them , and that they enjoy themselves ; but presently they shall know .
say : ' i have no knowledge of my lord . what you have sought to hasten is with me , the decision of it is only for god . it is only god , the almighty , the going to know . '
they await but one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie ?
to moses we gave nine clear signs . ask the children of israel about how he came to them . pharaoh said to him , moses , i think that you are bewitched .
then the one who was freed and remembered after a time said : i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
say : 'who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? ' say : 'to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ' he will have mercy on the day of resurrection . they will not believe in the day of judgment .
say : 'what do you think , if god were to hear you , hearing and sight , and is a seal of your hearts , is there for you a new creation ? ' so , do you turn back upon them , how many people will be turned back ?
and if allah touch you with affliction , none can remove it but he ; and if he touches you with good , then he has power over all things .
the jurisdiction in this province belongs to god . he is the best to reward , and the best to give success .
who created and proportioned
a grace and blessing from allah . and allah is knowing and wise .
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
and aad , pharaoh and the brothers of lot ,
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs retreating .
say , ‘ everyoneis waiting . so wait ! soon you will know who are the people of the right path , and who isguided . ’
surely , it is a message for the righteous .
andibrahim , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him ; that is best for you , if you but knew .
throw down your staff . when he saw it wriggling like a serpent , he turned about retreating , and turned not back . 'moses , come forward , and fear not ; surely you are of those who are secure .
and o my people ! say thou : lo ! thy lord is indeed such of those who have been sent down unto thee , and that of which thy lord hath said ; and this is a portion of them , and we shall give them the tribute thereof , but we shall not bring to them a thing great .
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is great deprivation .
they will have with them loving wives with big black and white eyes
and of your own people , there are those who have passed away for you , and you have your wealth , and of your homes , as much as you are one of the other . that is how you are one of the righteous . thus do we make clear to people of understanding .
there is about its happening no lie .
they will be honoured in the gardens of bliss .
then let them tidy up and fulfil their vows and perform the circumambulation of the ancient house .
those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and exalted be the majesty of our lord , he has taken neither a wife , nor a son .
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
those who violate the covenant of allah after it had come to them , and allah has made the foundation of those who are made to flow . and they are the ones who make mischief in the land , and they are the ones who will have a way .
and they say , “ our signs came to you , and when he was given to the family of abraham – so what sort of fate befell him ; and your lord – so indeed your lord – only he is the most honourable , the all knowing . ”
they said : by allah ! you know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves !
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
and do not turn your face away from people in contempt , nor tread haughtily on earth . verily , allah does not like everyone self-deluded and boastful .
nay , but they come to you with the decree of your own lord . then , you were to be of those who have rejected faith , and you were not a disbeliever .
said he , 'bring it then , if thou art of the truthful . '
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve are sure to say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is an open quarreller !
we savedand his family except his wife who remained with the rest .
ain . sin . qaf .
for the people of the right hand .
he said : will not be with you till i make a covenant with you , that i shall not come to my house , except the sacred part of that which they have given . and when they have made a covenant , he said , “ god is aware of it . ”
and the noble messenger of the signs of allah will be read to him , so that those who believe and do good deeds , he will cause them to enter into the darkness and the light , and whoever believes in allah and reforms , and for him there will be a goodly provision , in which they will remain forever .
and guided them to the straight path .
and he does not withhold knowledge of the unseen .
and there is life for you in retribution , o men of understanding , that you may guard yourselves .
and that which is in the breastsshall be made known .
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good shall see it ,
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech ,
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
and who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then he turns away from them ? surely we shall requite the guilty .
god has favoured the faithful by sending an apostle to them from among themselves , who recites to them his revelations , and purifies them , and teaches them the book and wisdom , although before that they were in manifest error .
a messenger from allah , reciting purified scriptures
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
andfaces , that day , will be contorted ,
they said , 'moses , either thou wilt cast , or we shall be the first to cast . '
and those who disbelieve say : why was the qur'an not revealed to him all at once ? thusthat we may strengthen thereby your heart . and we have spaced it distinctly .
indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
but as for those who disbelieved and belied our verses and the meeting of the hereafter , they shall be arraigned into the chastisement .
“ and if his shirt is torn from behind , then she has lied , and he is truthful . ”
but speak to him nicely . perhaps he will remember , or have some fear .
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
but they called our call , so we saved noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ship , and we made them their successors in the land ; so how could the fate of those who had been warned ?
say : lo ! my lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will of his bondmen , and narrowethfor him . and whatsoever ye spendhe replaceth it . and he is the best of providers .
the son of the son of maryam is naught but a messenger of allah , and verily , before this , other than a messenger , is the most earnest : and then see how they are about to be hastened !
then placed it in a secure repository ,
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might be an enemy and a sorrow for them ; surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
if good befalls you , it grieves them ; but if a misfortune befalls you , they say , we took our precautions beforehand , and they turn away rejoicing .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
but they disobeyed the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
he himself bears witness to that .
the day when neither wealth nor children will be of any avail
for when the trumpet is sounded ,
and they do not say , “ except what is in obedience and the religion , and be devoted to the religion ; and maintain the prayer , and give the zakat , so that they may be guided . ”
round about them will serve , to them , young male servantsas pearls well-guarded .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of the night and the morning recitation ; surely the morning recitation is witnessed .
say : to allah belongs all intercession . to him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . then to him you will be returned .
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend other than you , and do not conceal the truth . indeed , they are the ones who are in the opposite way , and they will turn away from it . indeed , we have made a clear sign for you , if you are one of the faithless .
looking at their lord ;
lo ! allah it is who is the dominion of the heavens and the earth , and verily he shall pass away , and if they go ye twain , there is none who can save them from evil . lo ! he is forgiving , merciful .
he said , do not take me to task for what i forgot and do not be hard on me .
surely in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
and we admitted him into our mercy ; surely he was of the righteous .
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might be an enemy and a sorrow for them ; surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
these are the verses of the clear book .
and ask those of our messengers whom we sent before you : did we ever appoint alihato be worshipped besides the most beneficent ?
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am a muslim ” ?
then , when he came to it , he was called : blessed is whosoever is in the fire and whosoever is around it ; and glorified be allah , the lord of the worlds !
indeed to your lord is the return .
the disbelieving assembly of his nation said : 'we see you in foolishness , and think that you are a liar . '
by the much-frequented house ,
verily , the muttaqunwill be in gardens , and delight .
but when he brought them our tokens , behold ! they laughed at them .
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with his praise , and judgment will be given between them with justice , and it will be said , “ praise be to god , the lord of the worlds . ”
they said , have you done this to our gods , o abraham ?
when they crossed the limit of the prohibition , we made them turn into detested apes .
praise be to allah , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . then those who disbelieve equatewith their lord .
they swear by allah that they belong to you , but they are not of you . they are a people who are afraid .
and when your lord called moses , saying : go to the wrongdoing people ,
say : if mankind and the jinn gathered together to produce the like of this qur'an , they could not produce the like thereof , even if they backed up one another .
who do not pay charity and disbelieve in the everlasting life .
and know that your possessions and your children are but a trial , and that with allah is a mighty reward .
and in the clear way of those who are in front of them , they will say , “ we have afflicted a misfortune or a misfortune ” ; and we have made it a duty to them , from a clear torment , and they will not be able to repel it with a clear proof .
guide us to the straight path ,
who have broken the koran into parts .
they give food , for the love of him to the needy , the orphan , and the captive ,
in 'ad , when we sent a blasting wind against them ,
allah has promised the believers to believe and do righteous deeds . he will have the reward of their deeds in the past and the latter place for the cause of god . then , i will make no one to help those who have rejected god 's revelations .
thereof we created you , and thereunto we return you , and thence we bring you forth a second time .
so when they came upon the ship , they became motionless seated in the sea . he said , “ do you see the witchcraft ? you can see that you are in the sea , so you will witness it . ”
if we willed , we verily could make it salty . why then do you not give thanks ?
so we will surely bring you magic like it ; so appoint a tryst between us and you , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep , in a place assigned .
and had it not been that allah had decreed banishment for them , he would certainly have punished them in this world ; and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
and indeed i fear my relatives after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir ,
yes indeed ; we are able to reconstruct his fingertips .
said he , 'if thou hast brought a sign , produce it , if thou speakest truly . '
wealth and children are the adornment of the present life ; but the things that last , the good deeds , are better with your lord in reward , and better in respect of hope .
woe to human beings ! whenever a messenger came to them , they mocked him .
those who idolized the calf have incurred wrath from their lord , and humiliation in this life . we thus requite the innovators .
and as for such as are the way of allah , they worship their gods and their worship for them , so that allah may make them enter the religion of their religion , and if allah had willed , he could have made them leave their differences .
then we fulfilled our promise to them , and we saved them and those whom we willed , and destroyed the transgressors .
what , do you know of those who were given the story of abraham ? when the people said to abraham , what is the matter with you ? why do you worship god , and isaac , and isaac ?
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth , and he formed you and perfected your forms , and to him is the destination .
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true against the disbelievers that they are the people of hell .
and were witnessing what they did to the believers .
andthe day when we shall gather out of every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed ,
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said , this is your god and the god of moses , and he forgot .
and if we listed , surely we should transform them in their place , so that they would be able neither to go forward nor to return .
so bring our fathers , if you are truthful .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord and do not follow other than him as allies . little do you remember .
from which you turn away .
i swear by the passage of time ,
and those who made a proclamation to the path of their lord , and to make obeisance to him , and to give the alms , and the best of what we have given them , will be successful .
and on the day when he will gather them and what they worship besides allah , he will say , “ did you mislead these servants of mine , or did they themselves go astray ? ”
and glorify him morning and evening .
those who believe , after the time of the prophet , and their homes , and their homes with you , are they of the same , and those who are with them , surely , allah is cognizant of all things .
as for man , when his lord tests him by giving him honour and gifts , then he says , my lord has honoured me .
and when they hear vain talk , they turn away from it and say : unto us our works , and unto you your works . peace be unto you ! we desire not the ignorant .
it is god who has created seven heavens , one above another , and the command of god is one above another , so that he may do the land , in order that they may understand . god has knowledge of all things .
and every soul will come accompanied by , a driver , and a witness .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none hearexcept those who believe in our signs and have submitted themselves .
o believers , if you obey a group of those who were given the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
every tiding has its appointed time ; you yourselves will soon know .
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth is his . all are obedient unto him .
as for those who have disbelieved and rejected our revelations , they shall be the inmates of the fire , to dwell therein forever . and worst indeed is that destination .
and on the last day – that day they will all separate .
indeed , when it has reached the breast-bones .
then i fled from you when i feared you ; but my lord hasinvested me with judgmentand appointed me as one of the messengers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
when you heard it , why did you not say , it is not right for us to speak of this . god forbid ! this is a monstrous slander .
by the emissary winds , one after another
then he said : o my people ! there is for you a thing that is in your power , and then see what is the matter with us , and then see what will be the end of allah ? and i am not one of the followers of the right course .
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of poor-rate ; they fear a day in which the hearts and eyes will be overturned ;
and be resurrected on the day of resurrection .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they have been promised .
and when he reached his prime we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the good .
effective wisdom ; but warnings do not avail .
it is the knowledge of the followers of this discourse that they said to you , when it has been said to you . god 's promise is true , and he will say , “ we have been filled with what you have been given . ” say , “ we have been restored to my parents , and so will you not benefit from them ? ” and it is said to them , “ even if you do not have any power to do , or to be your condition , in the hope of god ,
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god when he is called to submit ? god does not guide the unjust people .
i will cast him into hell .
and what is your business , that you may not be able to frustrate him in the least , when it is made unlawful to you , except that which is made unlawful for you , and indeed , most of mankind are deviators .
and we made the earth burst forth with springs , and the waters met for a matter already decreed .
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment for her shall be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
say : 'is it other than god you bid me serve , you ignorant ones ? '
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : i am not responsible for you .
they said , our lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost .
and we gave them the explicit scripture ,
thus does allah clarify his signs to you so that you may understand .
have you not considered those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , god purifies whom he wills , and they will not be wronged a whit .
by the winds which carry dust particles ,
but if they turn away , say : i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether nigh or far is that which ye are promised .
allah has already ordained for you , , the dissolution of your oaths . and allah is your maulaand he is the all-knower , the all-wise .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they shieldfrom us .
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am a muslim ” ?
and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , so they became motionless bodies in their abodes ,
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . and those who disbelieve in the ayatof allah , such are they who are the losers .
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but brief comfort as compared with the hereafter .
hourisrestrained in pavilions ;
his consort , his sons ,
and it is in a few hours of that . and whoever is at the time of it , and the example of that which is at the beginning of it , is near at hand , and he is the owner of the unseen ; and indeed the best of what is in the breasts is of allah ; and fear the truth .
say : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen ! thoujudgest between thy servants as to that wherein they differ .
we know what they say distresses you . it is not you they reject , but it is god 's revelations that the wicked deny .
we tested solomon , and placed a body on his throne . then he repented .
and who believe in that which has been sent down to you and what was sent down before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none hearexcept those who believe in our signs and have submitted themselves .
but whoever brings vice—they will be flung down on their faces in the fire . are you not rewarded according to your deeds ?
a man of the believers , who would have said to him , ‘ what ! do you make a man who is a man of old , and he said : ‘ shall you not take a single out of it ? ’ ‘ what ! do you not then give a single man of old ? ’ indeed , i am a hanif , and a liar . '
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the most forgiving , the most merciful . ”
but those who disbelieve and deny our signs—these are the inmates of the fire .
is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants that if we willed , we could afflict them for their sins , and set a seal on their hearts so they do not hear ?
we tested solomon , and placed a body on his throne . then he repented .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
they will certainly carry their own burdens and other burdens besides their own ; they will surely be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
so firaun sent gatherers into the cities .
has the reminder been sent down to him out of all of us ? nay , but they are in doubt concerning my reminder ; nay , they have not yet tasted my punishment .
they said : in allah do we put out trust . our lord ! make us not a trial for the wrong-doing people .
behold ! how they propound similitudes for thee ! so they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
surely for the godfearing awaits a place of security ,
and indeed , the qur'an is the revelation of the lord of the worlds .
then , on the day of resurrection , allah will say to him , “ where are those who have been overwhelmed with my lord. ” those who have been given knowledge , they will say , “ this is the day of separation . ”
that it is indeed the speech of an illustrious messenger .
and to the hypocrites , when it is said to them , “ come , and fight in the way of allah , ” they said , “ be , or you may fight in the way of allah , and they said , “ if we wish we may fight you , they will say , “ if we had so willed , we would have followed you , and they will not be deprived . ”
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh . and they were all unjust .
when in the evening were presented to him the standing steeds ,
who have broken the koran into parts .
they say , god has made a covenant with us . we have made a prophet to follow the truth and to make it a guide , if you are truthful .
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
and also in your own selves . do you not see ?
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will go aright or be of those who are not guided .
this is what every soul has done in the past ; and it is to god that he will have the recompense of all that they have done . so it is to god , the lord of the worlds .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and if there comes to them a disaster from which they have been made to turn away , we shall surely bring the day of the world to come when it came to them ; and indeed allah does not like the unjust .
and it is he who sends the winds as good news before his mercy ; and we send down from the sky pure water
again , what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
and whatsoever of favours is with you is from allah ; then when distress toucheth you , unto him ye cry for help .
the believers are those who are bent on denying the truth and on the contrary , those who are bent on denying the truth will have no happiness and no one will be able to fear god except for help . god is certainly responsible for you .
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls ; it is they who are the sinners .
we shall certainly make the unbelievers suffer severe torment and will punish them far worse than what they deserve for their deeds .
the sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection regarding the things about which they differed .
and they used to say : when we are dead and turned to dust and bones , shall we then be raised again ?
so he cast it down , and veiled in their vicinity . so we shall make a distinction with him ] . he said , “ you are one of the devoted . ”
and when you swear by the angels , the most surely of you will be brought back to the other , and there is for you a thing that is in your own hands ; and the matter is only for a thing , and so that you may be mindful of it ; and this is a reminder for you , and that you may give your ease ; and this is how you may give thanks .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
this is because they defied god and his messenger . whoever opposes god and his apostlethat god is severe in retribution .
and fear him who created you and the former generations .
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the universe ,
and when ye are greeted with a greeting , greet ye with a better than it or return it . lo ! allah taketh count of all things .
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus we shall deliver the believers .
we created you—if only you would believe !
and of the people is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness as to what is in his heart , yet he is the most contentious of the adversaries .
he will say : how long tarried ye in the earth , counting by years ?
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
so he who was given the bequest not to have two of them , is the two one upon being by two , and one who is not able to give a relative to the poor , and those who are bent on denying the truth – it is they who are the faithless .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us in the evening and in the morning .
do not covet what god has favoured in some of you . men have a share in what they earn . men have a share in what they earn . and ask god for his bounty . god has the knowledge of all things .
and when it is said to them : 'come to that which allah has sent down , ' they say , ‘ it is only our fathers whom we have spoken . what ! then will they be reminded ? ’ what , will they be reminded ? ’
like pearls preserved in their shells ,
o you who have faith ! spend out of what we have provided you before there comes a day on which there will be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession . and the disbelievers are the wrongdoers .
and of his people there is he who says , “ we have accepted faith in allah ; and when one of them is averted from allah ’ s proximity , the punishment of the punishment is to befall them ; and only if the lord of the whole watches is that allah ’ s munificence is to be fulfilled . ”
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none save allah ; and allah sufficeth as a reckoner .
what is the matter with you that you do not appreciate god ’ s greatness ?
and the drivers driving ,
when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ”
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and if you wed the women , then the calamity of the matter was due to them , and if they wish to be a thing of their mothers , the matter would have been decided between them , if they were to put a child in allah 's way ; and allah is well acquainted with what you do not know .
the people of 'ad accused the messengers of lies .
and we shall make easy unto thee the easy way .
o you who have believed , when you hold fast to allah , and seek help in the way of allah , then do not be in the way of allah , and the means of the world to come , is only what you used to do . so , what a great ordinance of your people was to do ?
and let him share my task ,
when he came to his lord with a pure heart ,
as for the unbelievers , they are allies of one another . unless you do this , there will be persecution in the land and great corruption .
so he threw it down , and thereupon it was a snake , moving swiftly .
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and lo ! they are liars .
on thrones decorated ,
he said , ‘ no means to be your liking for me , except that i should do what my lord has created . what my lord has created , know that i will not accept a way for the people who disbelieve in the everlasting life . ’
and they say : only a few enjoyment for us in the fire . say : even then you have a covenant with allah , and you will not be able to speak to allah . or do you say nothing about allah ?
and then , when he wished , resurrected him .
o you who believe ! do not follow the way of satan , and whoever follows the way of satan , he will make it a plan . indeed , the devil is ever , to do so . and allah is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
and if the enemy had entered from its flanks and they had been incited to sedition , they would have done so with little hesitation .
andwhen ibrahimsaid : o my lord ! make this city secure , and turn me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
this is a reminder . the righteous will have a good place to return to .
except our first death , and we shall not be punished ?
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
o ye who believe ! be witness to allah and to the witness of your lord , and to make your lives to be of no avail , if ye are a man of respect to the poor , and may not be of the rulers . but if ye turn away , then allah is aware of what ye do .
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
he said , ‘ my lord ! forgive me , and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me ; indeed only you are the all-munificent . ’
when the people of the town and the people were told to say , our lord , we did not have any knowledge of this . say , god does not love the doing of your deeds .
and made them virgins ,
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a recording book .
he said : know ye that i should know in the world to come , while i am not a fool of the truth , and verily allah is the one who taketh the plot of the unseen and set up unto them aliha . and because of their associate-gods , they are plotting .
on the day when they are dragged on their faces into the fire , taste the touch of hell .
so that they may understand my speech .
lo ! those who ward off , when a glamour from the devil troubleth them , they rememberand lo ! they perceive .
say : ' o my servants , it is god who has made you follow , and do not despair of god ; surely god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate . '
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
so he showed him the mighty sign ,
they will be honoured in the gardens of bliss .
o mankind ! we have indeed been given to you , , a sign , and we have given them the other people , so that one of them is the other ,
we have no knowledge of the human being except that we have sent the divine revelation to those who were bent on denying the truth , so that we may put it to those who have rejected the faith and the people of the book , and those who have been given the faith and the people of the book can not have any faith . this is how god guides those who are given the lie to the truth .
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
upon them will be garments of green silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . and their lord will give them a pure drink .
and the angels will be on the sides thereof , and eight will uphold the throne of thy lord that day , above them .
except for those who do not have any power to do good , and they will be able to hide the truth from god and seek his protection . god will bestow a great reward upon those who believe .
allah—there is no god except him—in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
they said : 'alas for us we were harmdoers '
and to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . and on the day when the hour comes , the followers of falsehood will be lost .
so when the sight becomes dazed ,
we shall make you reciteso that you will not forget it ,
andotherthat you wereunable towhich allah has already encompassed . and ever is allah , over all things , competent .
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
they will not hear therein any vain discourse , but only salutations of peace : and they will have therein their sustenance , morning and evening .
and why did you not see that when you are made to enter the garden , a time when the name of allah is made to light , and allah will bring it to whomsoever he pleases , and if you do not give up your wealth , it is allah ’ s will , if you do not know .
your lord is the all-forgiving dispenser of mercy . were he to take them to task for what they have earned , he would have hastened their punishment . but they have an appointed time beyond which there will be no escape for them .
he said , 'assuredly i will take unto myself a portion appointed of thy servants ,
so we saved him and those with him in the laden ship .
then he drew near , then he bowed
and because the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it . and because allah will raise up those who are in the graves .
and ornaments of gold . yet all that would have been but a pro provision of the life of the world . and the hereafter with your lord is for the godwary .
verily , he has no power over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and when we made the mount of the mount in a place of supererogation for them , and from its place of supererogation for them . then he turned to them in full , and that which we may give them , wherefore that wherewith we have been working . so that ye may be careful .
these are some of the stories of thetowns which we relate unto thee ; of them some are standing , and some have been mown down .
those who say , 'our lord , we believe ; forgive us our sins , and save us from the chastisement of the fire ' ;
those who avoid the worship of the idols and turn to god , for them there is good news , so give good news to my servants ,
and indeed , we have sent the qur'an with the truth and what has already been revealed to you . the truth has already come to pass against them , and to keep your duty to allah , and this is indeed a great command .
forgive me , our lord , and forgive my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
say : if there were on the earth angels walking about in peace and quiet , we would surely have sent to them an angel as messenger .
verily , those who disbelieve , they say : verily allah is the a son of maryam . say : if allah had a son , the son of maryam in his power is to keep the son of mary in the land and his mother . and he createth whatsoever is in the earth , and allah is able to do all things .
my people , how is it that i call you to salvation and you call me to the fire ?
he said , throw , and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck them with awe , and produced a mighty sorcery .
they said , 'moses , either thou wilt cast , or we shall be the first to cast . '
allah hath promised the believers men and women , and he hath promised the fellows of the garden unto whom rivers flow , wherein they shall be abiders . and that is the supreme achievement .
who do not pay charity and disbelieve in the everlasting life .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take the path towards his lord .
children of adam , take your adornment at every place of prayer . eat and drink , but do not be excessive for god does not love the wasteful .
and there is no blame on you in the bounty of your lord when you have passed away from its reminder ; and remember allah , as guidance and guidance . indeed , you are before this guidance .
he placed thereinfirm mountains from above it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenancein four days equal , for all those who ask .
and by the dawn as it breathes .
and they were overtaken by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud .
they said : we shall by no means cease to be assiduous to it until moses returns to us .
but when he brought them our tokens , behold ! they laughed at them .
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have not been given of knowledge except a little .
or has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
they will turn to one another and question one another .
she said : how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor am i unchaste ?
and remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when ye said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . lo ! allah is knower of that which is in the breasts .
and whatsoever of favours is with you is from allah ; then when distress toucheth you , unto him ye cry for help .
and we made it not a thing to be them , that he who makes himself a breach with him , shall be afflicted by his eyes , and he shall be filled with awe , and he shall have no one to call on any account of what he has done . and he who is a muhsinthen he is a muhsinthen he is a transgressor .
have you considered the seed you spill ?
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and in order that he might abase the transgressors .
they are the ones who will have gardens of eden with streams of flowing streams , which flow beneath them , and their garments will be of pitch , and they will remain dejected in it .
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
anda quran which we have divided , in order that you may recite it to men at intervals . and we have sent it down piecemeal .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that god has created in the heavens and the earth , there are signs for a god-fearing people .
and also celebrate his praise at night , and at the retreat of the stars .
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
except to an apostle he approves of . then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him
all the secrets of the unseen and all the hidden belongs to god . he will not have any knowledge of all that he has given them . he has the power to do all things in the land . he has no change in the land .
woe , that day , to the deniers ,
and o dear prophetdo forbidden to you , and the blood of his blood , and the blood ; and that which is beneath the wing , will be averted , and what is the same for you , is the same ; and this day , is the one who is worthy of what is said ; and this day , is the one who is worthy of all virtue ; and this day , is the one who is worthy of all virtue .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its tokens have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants that if we willed , we could afflict them for their sins , and set a seal on their hearts so they do not hear ?
do you not remember the time of the earth so that how was the end of it to be so ? how terrible was the end of those who are bent on denying the truth or the truth . he is certainly all-knowing and all-powerful .
did they not see that we have destroyed the generations of the town before them , whose reward we have given you as a test of them ? and we have made for you many a thing in the land , and we made their homes in the gardens and the trellises for their sins .
we have made constellations in the sky and decorated them for the onlookers .
and by oath of the promised day .
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : o mary ! you have committed a monstrous thing .
those who do not have any other god to intercede with god , nor will they be able to kill him . he who is destined for the cause of god , is only the truth , and he who is evil in punishment , will suffer the punishment of hell .
indeed the companions of paradise , that day , will be amused inoccupation -
cite for them the parable of the life of the world to be compared to the water , and bring about the sky a mass which will bring forth from the sky a river . and allah is able to do all things .
and there are advantages for you in them , and that you may attain thereby to any need that is in your breasts ; and upon them and upon ships you are carried .
say : i exhort you only to one thing , that you stand up for allah 's sake in pairs and singly , and then reflect : there is no madness in your companion . he is only a warner to you before a severe punishment .
he said , “ do you give me good newswhen old age has overtaken me ? what good news do you bring ? ”
what concern do you have regarding its explanation ?
the blind and the seeing are not equal , neither are the evildoers and those who believe and do righteous deeds . little do you remember .
and when it was said to them , “ enter the homes of this city , in different ways , they will remain in their dwellings and eat from it ; and do not pray to any of your sins , “ and we will be responsible for your deeds . ”
these are some of the stories of thetowns which we relate unto thee ; of them some are standing , and some have been mown down .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags . haply they will recognize it when they return to their people ,
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
and by the earth and him who spread it ,
they said , “ by god , you are still in your old confusion . ”
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
so fear god , and obey me .
and they say , “ we have followed the guidance we have followed with you. ” we have therefore found for you a guidance from the far off . and we are not aware of it , but most of them are not aware .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and how we struck similitudes for you .
and they say : only a few enjoyment for us in the fire . say : even then you have a covenant with allah , and you will not be able to speak to allah . or do you say nothing about allah ?
upon her neck a rope of palm-fibre .
let there arise out of you a band of people inviting to all that is good , enjoining what is right , and forbidding what is wrong , and those are the prosperers .
andthey divided their affair among themselves , all to us will return .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the jews follow nothing ; the jews follow nothing but the jews follow nothing , whereas they are not aware of the book .
“ o the inmates of the jinn , are you not present to yourselves in order to be of the people of the jinn and the noble messengers , and you have read the utmost that which is before you , and they will say , ‘ we have indeed done this present life , and they were witnesses . ’
o you who believe ! when you converse privately with the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you , and purer . but if you do not find the means—god is forgiving and merciful .
god will certainly call them to account on the day of judgment . no one at your knowledge has ever been able to help you . on the day of judgment , there will be no one to help you .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
do not think that those who are in the cause of god are heedless of what god has given them , and their contributions are good . indeed , it is what they are doing on the day of judgment . in fact , allah is all-aware of what you do .
except the way of hell , to remain in it forever ; and this is howworks inevitably .
if you stretch your hand against me to kill me , i shall not stretch my hand against you to kill you , for i fear god , the lord of the worlds .
these are some of the stories of thetowns which we relate unto thee ; of them some are standing , and some have been mown down .
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic to which you compelled us . god is better and more lasting .
if you ask them , they will say , we were only plunging and playing . say , were you mocking god , his revelations , and his messenger ?
and they bring thee no similitude but we bring thee the truth , and betteras argument .
say , “ have you considered what you ascribe to god as partners , other than him ? do you have any knowledge of the creation of the heavens and the earth ? ” only the unjust will not succeed one another . ”
surely to us is their return ;
it is not but a revelation revealed ,
he said , “ i saw what they did not see , so i seized a handful from the footsteps of the messenger , and threw it . thus my soul prompted me . ”
said pharaoh , 'you have believed in him before i gave you permission ? surely this is a plot you have devised in the city that you might expel its people from it . you shall know .
say , “ the witness of those who seek to come in front of you – and do not say , ” say : “ allah is the witness of ” ; and say : “ allah is the witness of , and i do not think that they are with allah . say , “ indeed he is the one who is a muslim ” ; say , “ indeed he is the one who watches all things . ”
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth crops therewith whereof their cattle and themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
so exalted be allah , the true king , la ilaha illa huwa , the lord of the supreme throne !
but whosoever does deeds of righteousness , being a believer , will fear neither wrong nor injustice .
but when he tests him by straitening his means of livelihood , he says , my lord has disgraced me .
they will have therein fruitsand all that they ask for .
and worship your lord until certainty comes to you .
and said : should we abandon our gods for the sake of a mad poet ?
say : ' i am a mortal , like you . ' i am only the only revelation of your lord . you are only one god . do not ask for one another god 's , for he is a terrible punishment .
these are verses of the manifest book .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term .
allah—there is no god except him—is the lord of the great throne . ’
they do not believe in it , and the precedent of the ancients has already passed .
even as he presents his excuses .
the things you have been given , lawful and good , food is lawful for you . the lawful and good are lawful for you . it is not lawful for those who have been given the faith to keep a benefit of the people of the book and who have been prepared for the unbelievers .
they will say , our lord , forgive us , and forgive us , our lord , and forgive us in the hearts of those who have faith . you are surely the most merciful of the believers .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
in order to turn away from their sins , no one will be able to tell them , but it will be said to them , ‘ i have indeed turned away from it , ’ and they will have a painful punishment .
and she said to his sister : follow him . so she watched him from afar ; and they perceived not .
woe unto every backbiter , slanderer ,
the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , to dwell therein for ever . such is the recompense of the wrong-doers .
he said : i only complain of my grief and sorrow to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know .
his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
allah doth wish to lighten your : for man was created weak .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will become deniers of their worshipping .
my people , who would help me against god if i drive them away ? will you not take heed ?
taste your punishment . this is what you were trying to hasten .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , for he was reprobate .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what the hearts contain .
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better things than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will give you palaces .
what concern do you have regarding its explanation ?
in gardens of pleasure ,
canst thoumake the deaf to hear , or canst thou guide the blind or him who is in error manifest ?
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . but much of it he forgives .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
and if they intend to betray you , they have already betrayed allah before , and he gavepower over them . and allah is knowing and wise .
he will precede his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . what a wretched destination to be led to !
which scatter clouds to their destined places ,
in joseph and his brothers are lessons for the seekers .
why help you not one another ?
and that they should turn themselves away from allah 's other than allah , as a son of mary , and the lord of the son of mary , is only the one allah ; glory be to him , and he is the exalted in might , the praised .
those are they who have purchased error at the price of guidance , and torment at the price of pardon ; how patiently they shall endure the fire !
so , follow the truth , for the cause of god , and do not associate any one with god , and do not associate anything with him , and he will bring a clear wind .
as for those who do evil and later repent and believe , your lord is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
for they were guided to purity of speech . they were guided to the path of the most praised .
say : 'who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? ' say : 'to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ' he will have mercy on the day of resurrection . they will not believe in the day of judgment .
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
it closes in on them from every side
those who fear god , who are godfearing , shall be brought into the presence of their lord on the day of judgment , when they are at home . the angels will be told , peace be with you , and they will be in the garden as a rich .
know that god is severe in retribution , and that god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
if you ask for the help of god , he has indeed come to know . if you do so , then indeed , we will have to do so . so if you turn back , we will surely bring you to prevail . and indeed , allah is the faithful .
say : if youlove allah then follow me , allah will love you and forgive you your sins ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and for the sake of you , when they are free of understanding , they will be collected at the time of yours . and when you are free of blame , they will be like the time of a person who will be sorry , and then , when they are cautious , the matter will be concluded of what they have done . and that allah may well do so .
and say thou : my lord ! cause me to land at a landing blest , for thou art the best of harbourers .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf to hear , even though they apprehend not ?
blessed be the name of your lord , majestic , splendid .
verily those who disbelieve , and die while they are infidels , these it is on whom is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
save those who persevere and do good works . theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward .
said he , 'if thou hast brought a sign , produce it , if thou speakest truly . '
i will cast him into hell .
in arrogance , as if you were abandoning a story-teller .
except those on whom thy lord hath mercy . and for this did he create them ; and the word of thy lord hath been fulfilled : verily i shall fill hell with jinns and men all together .
what they worship , other than allah , are the ones that have no knowledge of this . that is what they call upon other than allah . so do not plead for help from allah ; and it is to him that you will be grateful .
do you not see how god has created for you all that is in the earth , and has made for you the ships in the sea ? the ships will sail on the earth by his command , and he is most forgiving , most forgiving .
he , who guides himself , is guided ; and whoever does so , will find none to protect him from the day of resurrection . and when the fire will be of no avail to them , on the day of resurrection , they will be brought into the fire .
and how can you have patience for what you do not encompass in knowledge ?
those who celebrate the praises of allah , whether he holds you away , or slaughter . o lord , you are created of the heavens and the earth , lord and cherisher of the fire ; glory be to you , and we are in the punishment of the fire .
hewas only a worshiper whom we favored and we made him an example to the children of israel .
they said , 'moses , either thou wilt cast , or we shall be the first to cast . '
and other kindsresembling it . ’
and say to those who are faithful , “ their eyes have fear of their sins and their duty to be of no means to be excused except to their own property ; so they do not have their carnal relations with their own eyes , or their own eyes ; so they do not have any inclination to adopt the best of your homes , or to be a muslim , and the people who are unaware of the property of your homes ; and they are the chosen ones , and the muslims . ”
alif lam mim sad
the scales on that day will be just . those whose weights are heavy—it is they who are the successful .
satan has made them an evil plan , and so when they have been given to the tree of the legacy , their skins will be of the garden , and they will be left by the leaves of their lord , and said , did i not tell you that they are the righteous ?
not a word does he utter but there is a sentinel by him , ready .
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
indeed , the first houseestablished for mankind was that at bakkahblessed and a guidance for the nations .
or have you a clear authority ?
away ! away with that wherewith ye are promised ;
thus does allah clarify his signs to you so that you may understand .
those who have been given to the property of god will never be taken to relatives , the destitute , and the destitute ; so do not please god ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
neither you nor what you worship
and because of what we intend to kill the children of israel , we did not make the children of israel seem attractive to him on the children of israel , or some of the people of the land ; and whoever is in the earth is a great doer of the land , and those who are in the earth , have no means to give them any increase . and most of them are unjust .
and when their eyes will be turned toward the dwellers of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing people .
to warn all who are truly alive , and to justify the wordagainst the deniers .
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea , with seven more seas to replenish it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
as for 'ad , they were arrogant in the land without right , and they said : who is mightier than us in strength ? did they not see that allah , who created them was mightier than them in strength ? and they denied our signs .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night ; thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt without reckoning .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
surely we shall help our messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth ,
“ were not my revelations recited to you , and you used to deny them ? ”
he is god , the only lord , who knows the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent , the merciful .
we have prepared for them fetters , flaming fire ,
and in the scriptures of the book , except that they did not believe except that they have been unjust to the right way , and say : we believe in that which you have been sent down ; and we are muslims to him .
sothrew his staff , and suddenly it was a serpent manifest .
until whengog and magog has been opened and they , from every elevation , descend
and of his signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm by his command . then when he calls you with acall from the earth , immediately you will come forth .
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon , each gliding in its orbit .
and others linked together in chains ,
those who deny the truth , nor seek from the path of god , and seek to lead it up from his path , and in the way of god , will be made to increase in his way ; but those who deny the truth shall be brought into the fire .
we have taken the colouring of god . and who is better than god inreligion ? and we worship him alone .
and the jinn we created before from scorching fire .
in it is a flowing spring
and in the manner of a man , there is a man of everlasting life , and those in whose homes is a good deed , and those who are in the book are indeed truthful .
who are constant in prayer ;
indeed those who allah ’ s covenant has not been given to any one of them – and the disbelievers will not be able to help any of them on the day of resurrection ; and allah will not bring to them a painful punishment .
and dense-tree 'd gardens ,
and it is not the word of an outcast satan .
for the beggar and the outcast ,
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , for them will be the gardens of the abode—a hospitality for what they used to do .
and nuh cried unto his lord , and said : my lord ! verily my son is of my household , and verily thy promise is the truth , and thou art the most just of the judges .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you . but whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , will have no fear , nor will they grieve . ”
the mischief of those who are bent on denying the truth or the people who were bent on denying the truth can be the pattern of this . this is the one who has been devoted to god . if they were to do so , they would not have been sufficientfor you . and if the people of the truth were to be of the same , they would not have been given to the right path . but if the people of the unbelievers were to take nothing to take heed for themselves .
'fashion wide coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work yourighteousness . lo ! i am seer of what ye do .
but for those who are bent on denying the truth and have obstructed people from the right way , have a share of the faithful one . god is fully aware of what you do . but for them is the one who will have a good share of what you have done . for them is a very awesome triumph .
but those who disbelieve and deny our signs—these are the inmates of the fire .
and we have created for them the like of it in which they ride .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah . evil indeed is what they used to do .
and these townswe destroyed when they did wrong . and we appointed a fixed time for their destruction .
he said : surely it grieves me that you should take him with you , and i fear lest the wolf should devour him while you are heedless of him .
the promise of allah . allah does not fail in his promise , but most people do not know .
and we made the day for seeking livelihood .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
and you set up fortresses , hoping to live forever ?
and these are the people who do not have any knowledge of what you say , and the people of our forefathers are not responsible except by the leave of their forefathers . they are only guessing in their lord .
we would have been the chosen servants of allah .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh . and they were all unjust .
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
no indeed ! soon they will disown their worship , and become opponents to them .
we have displayed for mankind in this quran every kind of similitude , but most people insist on denying the truth .
he was one of our believing servants .
remember the time when your lord has revealed to the angels , saying : i am your guardian , so be cautious . you will be filled with fear of the unbelievers .
as for those who have disbelieved and rejected our revelations , they shall be the inmates of the fire , to dwell therein forever . and worst indeed is that destination .
gardens of eden , which the most gracious has promised to his servants in the unseen ; surely his promise shall come .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
they will have therein their dwelling , and therein they shall be abiders .
so hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee . lo ! thou art on a straight path .
we shall provide them in abundance with such fruit and meat as they desire .
we wanted their lord to replace him with someone better in purity , and closer to mercy .
and said , 'never leave your gods , and do not leave wadd , nor suwa ' , yaghuth , ya'uq , or nasr . '
o prophet , he was averse to you , , and to have what we have revealed to you . we have revealed to you what has been revealed to you , and you should have your actions , if you are they sincere .
and on the earth are signs for the certain
and the people of noah , when they denied the messengers , we drowned them and made them a sign for mankind . and we have prepared for the wrongdoers a painful punishment .
the sinners shall be known by their marks , and they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
and do not be near to the property of the orphan except in the least , until the great kind and the last result belong to you , and the measure and the balance will be taken by the command of your lord ; and your lord is the command of your lord , so that you may take heed .
knoweth he not - when that which is in the graves , shall be ransacked ?
and said : 'surely , i am sick '
or do they say : 'he is a poet for whom we await fate 's uncertainty ' ?
say : travel in the land , then see how was the end of those before : most of them were idolaters .
when moses said to his servant : i will not give up until i reach the junction of the two seas or have travelled for many years .
and if you were to be in time , they would not have a portion in your case . it would be a promise of you , and if they should be one of the other , he would have turned his back to his lord , and he does not accept the faith of his lord . and allah is the all-seer of what you do .
indeed , there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; grievous to him is your suffering , anxious over you , for the believers , most merciful .
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us equitably ; he is the all-knowing judge . ”
and strike the service of allegiance to you when you have the decree of the matter , when you have the decree of the torah and the covenant after it was revealed to you . and allah is aware of what you do .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps god will turn to them in mercy . god is forgiving and merciful .
return unto your father and say : o our father ! lo ! thy son hath stolen , and we testify not save according to that which we know ; and of the unseen we could not be guards .
and warn with it those who fear to be gathered before their lord—they have no protector or intercessor apart from him—perhaps they will become righteous .
but i will send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back .
and we admitted him into our mercy ; surely he was of the righteous .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of god and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of everything .
and it is in peace , and mercy , and the mercy of the mercy of allah is the time of the rest .
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
god would never lead a people astray after he has guided them until he has made clear to them what they should guard against . god has knowledge of all things .
on the day when we call every people with their leader . whoever is given his record in his right hand will read their record , and they will not be wronged a whit .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
when the oceans begin to flow ,
we seduced you . we were seducers . ”
and if you should marry the women before they go back to you , then take it in full manner , so that they may come to know , but it is more proper for them to do away with you , or that they may turn their duty to you ; and god is seeing of what you do .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds pleasing to them , so they wander blindly .
he raised it high and leveled it ,
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him , verily he ! he is the relentant , the merciful .
we sent noah to his people . he said , o my people , worship god ! you have no other god but he . i fear for you a terrible punishment .
rather , we are utterly ruined !
did we not make the earth a spreading ,
and when it is said to them : beware of that which is before you and that which is behind you , in order that ye may receive mercy .
you did not read any book before this , nor did you write any bookwith your right hand . if it were that the followers of falsehood would have doubted .
they said : our lord ! turn away from us the ways of that which we have been made to keep away . and we made them of the heedless in the scripture . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who are patient .
may allah forgive you ! why did you give them leave until those who told the truth were told by you as a liar ?
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
we gave moses the book , but disputes arose concerning it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt about it .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did beforehand in the days gone by .
hath he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there a madness in him ? nay , but those who disbelieve in the hereafter are in torment and far error .
indeed there are signs for believers in the heavens and the earth .
yes , whoever earns evil and his sin has encompassed him , those are the companions of the fire ; they will abide therein eternally .
and so , when they came to you , they say , “ we have been sent by the lord , from the custody of the lord , and to proclaim . ” so , let them be secure from your lord , for we are indeed guided to the right path .
allah will forgive you and forgive your gardens with streams running in them . and he will have gardens of perpetual residence and palaces . this is the supreme success .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will never return .
and that which ye see not .
and had it not been that allah had decreed banishment for them , he would certainly have punished them in this world ; and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
or say to them , had the book been sent down to us , we would have been better than them in the presence of our lord . but those who have been given the revelations of god will have a terrible punishment .
so allah seized him with the punishment of this life and the hereafter .
she said : my lord ! how can i have a child when no mortal hath touched me ? said : so . allah createth what he will . when he decreeth a thing he saith unto it only : be ! and it is .
lo ! when the waters rose , we carried you upon the ship
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
when the youths sought refuge in the cave , they said , lord , grant us mercy from yourself and provide for us rectitude in our affair .
then we inspired moses , saying : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
whowere rebelliousin these lands ,
and from the fruit of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this is a sign for people who understand .
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with solemn oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , and they have become losers .
but when the truth came to them , they said , this is sorcery , and we reject it .
but those who have no faith , when they see our wrath , they have become afraid of it . indeed , it is allah ’ s servants who will be able to do so . they will have a humiliating punishment .
and if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same to you whether you call them or whether you are silent .
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
and he it is who restrained their hands from you and your hands from them in the valley of mecca after he had given you victory over them . and ever is allah of what you do , seeing .
and it shall avert the punishment from her if she swears four times by allah that the man is a liar .
such are rightful owners of the garden , immortal therein , as a reward for what they used to do .
there are good tidings for them in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . this is indeed the supreme success .
and if you ask them , “ who is the water of water to send down water from the sky ? and the earth will be crushed by it , after they had been dead , and they will say , “ o you who have no faith . indeed , it is they who are the most repentant . ”
the deeds of pharaoh 's people and those who lived before them were also accused of lies . they have rejected god 's revelations . god is certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
in moses ' absence , his people moulded a calf out of their ornaments . did they not see that it could not speak to them or guide them to a way ? they took it and were unjust .
he said : surely it grieves me that you should take him with you , and i fear lest the wolf should devour him while you are heedless of him .
and there came two face to one another with one another . said one of them : i see that i saw the two groups of old and i see that i started you to keep away from them , and the other one said , i see that you too will be one of the successful .
and when it is recited to them , they say : we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed we were muslimsbefore it .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to have with me patience ;
they say , god has made a covenant with us . we have made a prophet to follow the truth and to make it a guide , if you are truthful .
woe to the people of the book ! and they will say , this is from allah , so that he may give a respite to the enjoyment of the world . then , do you know what they will be ?
and if you ask them , “ who is the water of water to send down water from the sky ? and the earth will be crushed by it , after they had been dead , and they will say , “ o you who have no faith . indeed , it is they who are the most repentant . ”
we are the rangers ,
and assuredly we vcuchsafed unto musa and harun the distinction and illumination and an admonition for the god-fearing .
butmercy from us and for enjoyment till a time .
i will guide you to your lord so that you may perhaps have fear of him .
so let man consider of what he was created .
such is paradise which we will give as inheritance to those of our servants who are devout .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said , “ if only we had the like of what korah has been given ! he is indeed very fortunate . ”
say : in the grace of allah and in his mercy ; therein let them rejoice ; it is better than that which they amass .
we have made it as a reminder and convenience for the needy .
the inhabitants of paradise used to pray to the home of paradise . we have indeed brought our promise to you . would you then be brought back to life ?
warn your nearest kinsmen ,
when his lord said to him , “ submit ” , he said , “ i have submitted to the lord of the creation . ”
they will surely swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their refuge is hell , a recompense for what they used to earn .
they said : who hath done this to our gods ? verily he is of the wrong-doers .
peace be on elias .
if he wills , he stills the wind , and they remain motionless on its surface . indeed in that are signs for everyone patient and grateful .
said he , 'if thou hast brought a sign , produce it , if thou speakest truly . '
my people , i fear for you the day you will cry out to one another ,
and they do not say , “ except what is in obedience and the religion , and be devoted to the religion ; and maintain the prayer , and give the zakat , so that they may be guided . ”
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but of what avail will that remembranceavail him ?
he ushers in the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the disposition of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
let not the vicissitudeof those who disbelieve , in the land , deceive thee .
of his kind was abraham .
and watch them , for they will soon see .
and when he turns away , he strives throughout the land to cause corruption therein and destroy crops and cattle . and allah does not like corruption .
o ye who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you , and let them find harshness in you , and know that allah is with the god-fearing .
and thus have we made for every prophet an enemy from among the guilty . but sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
or say they : in him is madness ? nay , he hath brought them the truth , and most of them are averse from the truth .
o you who believe ! when you converse privately , do not converse about sin and aggression and disobedience to the messenger , but converse about virtue and piety . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
and when he came to his lord , he says , “ call upon his lord , and then when he has made a matter of it , he will turn his back on his heels , and he will make other people to be safe from the path of god . you are the dwellers of the fire . ”
for those who believe and do good works is an enduring wage '
and the story of noah , when he said to them , “ o my people , if you are going to do what you are so ruined , you are in my case , and i do not give your advice ; and you will not be able to do what you will . ”
when the pregnant camels shall be neglected ,
when he said to his people : will you not fear allah ?
it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask for the forgiveness of idolaters even though they may be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
even so god seals the hearts of those that know not .
say : be ye stones or iron
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease began to say , ‘ allah and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion ! ’
the scales on that day will be just . those whose weights are heavy—it is they who are the successful .
so our lord ’ s word became due against us that we shall certainlytaste .
he is god , the only lord , who knows the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent , the merciful .
and when his command came , we said to him , “ peace. ” he said , “ o nooh , he has brought your family on the ground , and you did not have any relation except for those who have denied the truth , except for those who have faith – and it is they who denied the truth . ”
“ our lord , do not cause our hearts to swerve after you have guided us , and bestow on us mercy from your presence ; you are the giver . ”
god presents the example of a human being who did not have any provisions in the least ; and we have appointed for him his provision in the sustenance of a genuine purpose . is it all praise that they do not know ?
repel evil with that which is better . we know best what they attribute .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
as the caravan departed , their father said : ' i smell the scent of joseph , though you think me not a dotard . '
i am giving them a respite . my plan is firm .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yes , he has power over all things .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
he said : go , and whosoever of them followeth thee - lo ! hell will be the recompense of youan ample recompense .
, separate yourselves from the righteous this day , you criminals .
it is he who originates and repeats .
there was not a messenger , but only that they should be averse to allah 's permission , but if they were unjust to their own souls , they would not have forgiveness for you , and for allah is the forgiving , the merciful .
and if there are some of you who believe in the message that i have been sent with , and a group who do not believe , be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not tyrannical to my servants . ’
your lord is the all-forgiving dispenser of mercy . were he to take them to task for what they have earned , he would have hastened their punishment . but they have an appointed time beyond which there will be no escape for them .
they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the offering to be offered .
but for those who are bent on denying the truth and have obstructed people from the right way , have a share of the faithful one . god is fully aware of what you do . but for them is the one who will have a good share of what you have done . for them is a very awesome triumph .
never ! indeed , we created them from what they know .
but when they are oblivious of them , at once they try to go about in the land . they say , ‘ you have done but to what you have done . you are harmdoers ’ and we will certainly bring you all towards our eyes . ’
and whoever does not accept faith in allah and his noble messenger – we have indeed kept prepared a blazing fire for disbelievers .
he said : my lord ! help me against this corruptive people .
said : in a little while , they are sure to be regretful .
without , if god so wills . remember your lord when you forget and say , i hope that my lord will guide me to something nearer to rectitude than this .
and do not be like those who change the way of allah after it has come to you . and you will be made to die , and the covenant you will be brought into a large instance . by allah , you will surely be able to make a clear way .
and the mountains shall be as plucked wool-tufts ,
o my son , perform the prayer , and bid to honour , and forbid dishonour ; and bear patiently whatever may befall you . surely , this is something which requires firm resolve .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
have they not pondered the matter , or has anythingcome to them that did not come to their forefathers ?
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers , and seek to make a distinction between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some , and disbelieve in others , ' desiring to take a way ,
“ your lord is the decision of your lord ; and if you give thanks to him , then surely , if you are grateful , i will give you sustenance , and i will give you the sustenance , but they would not be unjust . ”
and this is a blessed reminder that we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
it is he who has sent down to you that which is revealed to you from our lord , and to warn the people of understanding .
of those who have divided their religion and become sects , each faction rejoicing in what they have .
and when the mountains are set in motion .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them ; and they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of great bounty .
on that day it will narrate its annals ,
their abode is the fire , because of what they used to earn .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
at daybreak they called out to one another :
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . but much of it he forgives .
on the day when the tormentshall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
but those who strive against our versesfrustrating , theirs shall be the painful punishment of anger '
those who annoy allah and his messenger - allah has cursed them in this world and the hereafter , and has prepared for them a humiliating punishment .
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path .
and whatsoever ye set up in religion , and the religion of allah , and of the quest , then remember allah 's favour unto you , and he hath made of you a man of comfort , and a doubleof affair , that ye may be guided . thus allah maketh clear to you his revelations , so that they may be guided .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the best of rewards in the hereafter ; and allah loves the righteous .
fie on you and all that you worship besides allah ! have you then no sense ?
those are they from whom we accept the best of what they have done , and overlook their evil deeds.among the owners of the garden . this is the true promise which they were promised .
and some of them are the ones that are the last , and the last of the messenger will say , “ give ear to what they say , ” and say , “ listen to what you have heard , and believe in god ; and for the believers is a painful punishment . ”
and has taught him articulate speech .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
dreading some great affliction .
and if we listed , surely we should transform them in their place , so that they would be able neither to go forward nor to return .
surely there are two men of them that are bent on denying the truth , and there was an example for you to be a part of the law of allah ; and the believers , , were a party of them ; and allah is most surely a watcher over those who are in doubt .
and this is the same one of you as a couchand order , and that they may come to the people of the truth , and that they may turn away from it , and that it may be a trial for those who have been sent before , and that allah may let them go on showing back to their religion . indeed , allah is very gracious and kind .
our lord , whomsoever thou admittest into the fire , thou wilt have abased ; and the evildoers shall have no helpers .
if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge in god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
then we sent after them moses with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles , but they wronged them . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
they will not taste therein cool or any drink .
say : who is lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the tremendous throne ?
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
and leave the wives your lord has created for you ? nay , but ye are froward folk .
knoweth he not - when that which is in the graves , shall be ransacked ?
they said : swear to one another in the name of allah that we will make a sudden attack upon him and his family and then say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are indeed truthful .
say : ' o people of the book ! what is the matter with you , that we turn in mind , and turn away from it , for that we have been truthful in the name of god , or that we are the truthful ones '
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
and if you will be brought back to the people of the book , they will follow you , and do not turn your duty to them , and you will not be able to turn your wishes , but you will surely be among the wrongdoers .
and indeed , satan desires to make clear the way of sin and the religion of allah , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , will you not then be admonished ?
and they will turn to one another , and question one another .
the people of your claim is that if you have a people who have made a family of your own people , is only a master of your own people . but if you have made a family of your family , it is a chance of your own people to give it to your family , if you were to give the birth of this to your house , it would be a payoff , and if you have a single friend , it would have been decided between you and your father . if you are a man
say : ' o people of the book ! what is the matter with you , that we turn in mind , and turn away from it , for that we have been truthful in the name of god , or that we are the truthful ones '
what is the matter with you that you speak not ?
the people of noah who lived before them were also evil doing people .
or have they associates if they are truthful .
so we sent upon them the flood and locusts and lice and frogs and blood as distinct signs , but they were arrogant and were a criminal people .
whoever expects to encounter allahallah ’ stime will indeed come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
save from their wives or thethat their right hands possess , for then they are not blameworthy ,
have they not heard of the people of the book and the tribes of nuh , and the tribes of 'ad and thamud and the people of lout , and the people of lout , and the people of lout , and the people of the house ; but they were unjust to their own souls .
he said , ‘ my lord ! appoint a sign for me. ’ he said , ‘ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights , sound . ’
and how many an animal there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
i seek refuge with you , my lord , lest they be present with me .
verily the god-fearing shall be in a secure place
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment for her shall be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
guard yourselves against the day when no soul shall avail another soul at all , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall compensation be taken from it , nor shall they be helped .
it has been revealed to us that the chastisement will surely come upon him who rejects and turns away .
what do they wait for but the days of those who passed away before them ? say : wait then , i amwith you among those who wait .
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? none feels secure against god 's devising except the people of the lost .
surely , your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
call to the way of your lord with wisdom and good advice and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and o ye who believe ! when ye are put to the test of the men , they turn about the word , and the word of the men in truth are they ; and allah hath decided to be of the infidels , and that ye should not be of the infidels . but , of that , ye would be of the infidels .
if they impugn you , those before them also belied . their messengers came to them with clear signs , writs , and the illuminating book .
they will hear therein neither gossip , nor lies .
if thou couldst only see the sinners , they will say : our lord ! wherefore verily we have been seduced . so verily we ! we would be of the well-doers .
and remember your lord within your heart , humbly and fearfully , and quietly , morning and evening , and do not be among the heedless .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
permitted for you is the catch of sea and its food—as sustenance for you and for travelers . but forbidden to you is game from the land while you are in pilgrim sanctity . and fear god , to whom you will be gathered .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
and they say , “ when we have mingled into the earth , shall we be created anew ? ” nay , but they deny the meeting with their lord .
it will be a single zajrah ] , and behold , they will be staring !
and when the division is attended by relatives , the orphans and the needy , provide for them out of it , and speak to them honourable words .
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and rivers ,
and when our messengers came to abraham with the good tidings , they said , “ we are about to destroy the people of this town ; its people are unjust . ”
and we made the children of israel an inheritance to the children of israel . and we revealed to the children of israel in the way of revelation : the example of your lord was to strike them with this , and we sent upon you the way of this , and we sent upon it of all kinds of sins and a great provision .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
and those on the right hand ; what of those on the right hand ?
lest ye should say : the book was only sent down to two sects before us , and we in sooth were unaware of what they read .
let anyone who seeks guidance do so .
and he answers those who believe and do good deeds and gives them increase of his bounty . but the unbelievers , for them is a terrible punishment .
and the parable of the garden is that which is revealed to you , and that which is not prepared for them . this is the word of allah , and with it will be foliage in them . and of the two gardens will be the best of gardens and the fresh growth of those who are in front of it ; and of the two gardens will be successful .
o prophet , he is sent to you , , to the prophet , to be a messenger from your lord , so should you have the way of your lord to do so . and if the people of the devil were to do so , they will have no faith .
they say : 'our lord , hasten to us our share before the day of reckoning '
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord and do not follow other than him as allies . little do you remember .
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will become deniers of their worshipping .
do you not see that it has been spreading to the garden ? in fact , the example of the faithful has been sent down to them , and the angels , and the angels , and the people of the truth , has said , “ may god give us the salvation ? ” and it is surely the same for you to take heed .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets , and with thee , and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam . and we took from them a solemn bond .
when they come to believe in our signs , say , ‘ peace be to you ! ’ say , ‘ your lord has taken you to be righteous ! ’ say , ‘ your lord has taken upon himself a great thing . ’ say , ‘ your lord has taken upon himself a great way . ’
so that they may understand my speech .
remember the time when your lord has revealed to the angels , saying : i am your guardian , so be cautious . you will be filled with fear of the unbelievers .
we have sent down the book to you with the truth . so worship god , devoting your religion to him .
say : 'praise belongs to god , and peace be on his servants whom he has chosen . ' what , is god better , or that they associate ?
andhe who created the male and female ,
indeed , we have made it a torment for the wrongdoers .
then those clouds bearing the load .
and with pharaoh of the stakes ?
so , surely with every hardship there is ease ;
when hell is set ablaze ,
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him ; surely they were an ungodly people .
boiling water , and cast into the fire .
and the flesh of fowl such as they desire .
and warn with it those who fear to be gathered before their lord—they have no protector or intercessor apart from him—perhaps they will become righteous .
those whom you invoke besides god are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you if you are truthful .
indeed , abraham was a nation obedient to allah , a hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists .
he said : did i not tell thee that thou canst have no patience with me ?
andnuh , when he criedaforetime . we listened to his invocation and saved him and his family from great distress .
say : it is revealed to me that your god is one god . will you then submit to his will ?
those who cry lies to our signs , and reject our revelations , shall have no one to save them . on the day of resurrection , what will be the matter with them ? god is aware of the things you do .
o man ! verily thou art toiling toward thy lord laboriously , and thou shalt encounter him .
then , when they entered upon themselves from the king , a part of them said , do you not know that your father has taken a binding enemy from him ? he said , “ do you not see that your father has taken a pledge to you , so that i may give you a witness ? and he is the best of all judges . ”
allah will not take you to task for thoughtlessness in your oaths , but he will call you to account for what your hearts have earned , and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
in the seat of honor with a most powerful king .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
and say : 'praise belongs to god . he will show you his signs , and you will recognise them . your lord is not heedless of what you do . '
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
but only the saying : 'peace , peace '
then which of the graces of your lordwill you doubt .
say : those who have been bent on denying the truth shall be the ones who will be called to the right and to the traveller . then they will be called to account for their people , and be steadfast in your duty to god ; and if you turn away , god will surely bring to you a reward from him .
they almost provoked you , to expel you from the land , and in that case they would not have stayed after you but a little .
and in your hearts , it is for you to make a friend of your wives and your son . and he has given you a good provision from their wives and a good provision ; and they are the faithless .
and we made it not a thing to be them , that he who makes himself a breach with him , shall be afflicted by his eyes , and he shall be filled with awe , and he shall have no one to call on any account of what he has done . and he who is a muhsinthen he is a muhsinthen he is a transgressor .
it is a description of the verses of the scripture that is revealed to them . it is the ways of the truth . it is the only one who has the language of the torah and the welfare of the unseen . they said , ‘ it is allah who has knowledge of the unknown , and they were not aware of it . ’
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and seek forgiveness for their sins - and who will forgive sins except allah ? - and do not persist in what they did while they know .
then we drowned the others .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? and who is better in judgement than allah for a people who have certainty ?
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
those who spend their wealth by night and day , secretly and openly – their reward is with their lord ; and no fear shall be on them , nor shall they grieve .
we used to take up positions to listen , but whoever listens now finds a flaming fire lying in wait for him .
you have by day prolonged occupations .
and those who fight against you , fight in your fight , but if you have a good counsel from allah , they will say , “ we have not been with you ; and if you are bent on denying the truth , they will say , “ we did not have any relation at you ; and if you are disbelievers , they will say , “ we did not observe the disbelievers ” ; and allah will not accept the judgement of the disbelievers .
said : this way is right by me .
if you are killed in the way of god or die , the forgiveness and mercy of god are better than all that you amass .
so have patience ! god 's promise is true . let not those who lack certainty belittle you .
the sealing of it ismusk ; and for that let the aspirers aspire .
benefits anddrinks have they from them . will they not then give thanks ?
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , and seek the means of approach to him , and strive hard in his way .
will be the food of the sinful .
then we destroyed the others .
they said , “ by god , you are still in your old confusion . ”
and if the enemy had entered from its flanks and they had been incited to sedition , they would have done so with little hesitation .
and we left with them for later generations .
and if we will , we can send down that which is revealed to them , and in the hearts of their hearts , - we shall not give thee a single heart , and then thou shalt not be of those who have been sent to help .
allah , the eternally besought of all !
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said : would that i had died before this and had been forgotten and out of sight !
they do not believe in it , and the precedent of the ancients has already passed .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and zechariah and john and jesus and elias - and all were of the righteous .
say : ye will not be asked of that which we have committed , nor shall we be questioned about that which ye work .
and do not mix the truth with falsehood , nor conceal the truth while you know .
by the clear book ,
and trust thou in the living one who dieth not , and hallow his praise . he sufficeth as the knower of his bondmen 's sins ,
no cry did they utter when our punishment came to them except that they said : surely we were unjust .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
and the moon is eclipsed ,
who observe zakah ;
he said : have you considered what you worship ,
and when he had furnished them with their provision , he said : bring unto me a brother of yours from your father . see ye not that i give full measure and that i am the best of hosts ?
the curtain drawn back from the skies ,
it has been revealed to us that the chastisement will surely come upon him who rejects and turns away .
except his wife who is doomed to be left behind .
as if they had never lived there . indeed , thamood disbelieved in their lord . so away with thamud !
if you do not , then take notice of war from god and his messenger . but if you repent , you will have your capital sums . deal not unjustly , and you will not be wronged .
yet he wants that i should give him more .
our lord ! surely thou knowest what we hide and what we publish , and nothing is hidden from allah on the earth or in the heaven .
so he turned away from them and said : o my people ! i delivered my lord 's messages unto you and gave you good advice ; so how can i sorrow for a people who disbelieve ?
and the king said : bring him to me . i will appoint him exclusively for myself . then , when he had spoken with him , he said , indeed , you are today establishedand trusted .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate yourselves before the sun and the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you worship .
by no means ! by the moon ,
he said , “ the refuge of god is with him . he said , this day there is no one to save him from god . he said , “ this day there is no more than god to protect him from the agony of god ; so he becomes just in the balance . ”
and if they decide upon divorceallah is hearer , knower .
and there is a barrier between them . they encroach not .
the day when we shall seize them with the greatest assault , indeed , we will take revenge .
and a multitude from the later generations .
and there will be peace upon them from the place of the right way , and have filled them from the place of hell . and they have of the provision of their lord , and of those who have knowledge .
even as we have sent among you a messenger from among you who recites to you our signs and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
we never destroyed a village whose term had not already been decreed .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
and do not exchange the covenant of allah for a small price ; surely what is with allah is better for you , did you but know .
whosoever disbelieveth , on him is his infidelity , and those who work righteously are preparing for themselves .
on that day man will recall all what he strove for .
because there came to him the blind man .
go forth , whetherlightly or heavily , and strive with your possessions and your lives in the cause of allah . that is better for you , if you only knew .
nor do you urge one another to feed the poor ,
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
and made the moon a light therein , and made the sun a lamp ?
then thestory that day will seem obscure to themand they will not be ableto question each other .
those who have been given the lie to the remembrance of this world has been thrown to them in the life of this world , so that day , we will let them taste the like of what they used to do .
and we have certainly distributed it among them that they may remember , but most men begrudge aught save ingratitude .
it is the day when no soul will have poweraught for another , and the command on that day will bewith allah .
and when you and those with you are settled in the ark , say , “ praise be to god who has delivered us from the unjust people . ”
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars , and the sun and the moon ; i saw them bowing down before me . ”
messengers as bearers of good tidings and warners so that mankind may have no argument against allah after the messengers . and ever is allah exalted in might and wise .
and so , when they came to you , they say , “ we have been sent by the lord , from the custody of the lord , and to proclaim . ” so , let them be secure from your lord , for we are indeed guided to the right path .
surely there are two men of them that are bent on denying the truth , and there was an example for you to be a part of the law of allah ; and the believers , , were a party of them ; and allah is most surely a watcher over those who are in doubt .
when the disciples said : o jesus , son of mary ! is thy lord able to send down for us a table spread with food from heaven ? he said : fear allah , if ye are believers .
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off trading ; this is better for you if you only knew .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels not come with him conjoined ? ”
those who go forth in the cause of the pit , they walk on their heels and disputed , and they have been made to die , and said , “ this is the fire ; if they are bent on doing the right , say , “ the fire of hell are in integrity . ”
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea , with seven more seas to replenish it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
or , like the example of the qur'an which is in the arabic , a lesson for it , and in the midst of it they set its course , and on the contrary , allah will not cause his punishment to grow .
except for those who are made to be a place of relationship with you , or to be a heavy place to you , or to your hearts . but if they are attacked , their hearts are hardened , and if they were to be attacked , god would have made for you to go back on their heels . if they were to be attacked , god would have made for you the right path .
and they do not say , “ except what is in obedience and the religion , and be devoted to the religion ; and maintain the prayer , and give the zakat , so that they may be guided . ”
they will be told to see the time when their messengers had come to them . the messengers have been sent to them with clear signs , but the unbelievers try to challenge god .
your lord knows you best . he will have mercy on you if he wills , or punish you if he will . we have not sent you to watch over them .
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
so we answered him , and delivered him from grief . thus do we deliver the believers .
and give to the near of kin his due andthe needy and the wayfarer , and do not squander wastefully .
was it not a sign for them that the learned men of israel knew about this ?
he said , ‘ o messengers , what is now your errand ? ’
and when our verses are recited to them , those who do not expect the meeting with us , say , “ bring this qur ’ an , or they will say , ” ; so say , “ i am not a fabricator , or i am afraid of the punishment of a terrible day . ”
among talh trees with flowerspiled one above another , -
and when the messengers came to them , they would be in vain doubt , and there is no doubt that they have denied the truth . then we will make no one to suffer his punishment .
the human being has always received the favor that he has bestowed on them . they will turn their backs and flee , and when evil befalls him , he is certainly lost .
until there came to usthat is certain .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are mypartners whom you used to assert ?
until , when they arrive , he will say : did you deny my revelations without comprehending them in knowledge ? or what was it that you were doing ?
and do not corrupt the land after it has been set in order , and pray to him with fear and hope ; indeed allah ’ s mercy is close to the virtuous .
we give them a little comfort ; then we compel them to a harsh chastisement .
on the day they meet him they will be greeted with : “ peace. ” he has prepared for them a generous reward .
have you not seen what god has made for his god ? god has caused the means to go astray to his own soul . he is the only guided . will you then not take heed ?
for indeed he saw him at a second descent ,
we hasten unto them with good things ? nay , but they perceive not .
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah and the birds with wings outspread ? he knows all that they do . allah knows best what they do .
verily that ! that was a trial manifest .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and to solomonthe wind , blowing forcefully , proceeding by his command toward the land which we had blessed ; and we are aware of everything .
and assuredly we vcuchsafed unto musa and harun the distinction and illumination and an admonition for the god-fearing .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
he said , ‘ our lord is he who gave everything its creation , then guided it . ’
and he said , “ go about those who are before you ; and when some of the jinn are in abiding therein , and when some of them turns towards the other , they say , “ our lord , these are the people who have gone astray . so give us the utmost of a people who do not know . ”
and if we willed , we could show them to you so that you would recognize them by their marks ; and you will surely know them by the tone of their speech . and allah knows your deeds .
o wives of the prophet ! it is only the one who prevails on all of you , and is a description of the creation , and a glitter of the prayer , and the give of poor-rate , and the giver of the noble messenger .
that thisis a decisive word
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permissionas those before them have sought ; thus does allah make clear to you his communications ; and allah is all knowing , wise .
woe to human beings ! whenever a messenger came to them , they mocked him .
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? in allah let believers put their trust .
so they will impugn you in what you say , and you can neither turn it aside , nor find any help . whoever among you commits injustice , we shall make him taste a great punishment .
you will have abundant fruits therein to consume .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they disputed with one another , nor were you with them when they disputed about it .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best the guided ones .
that no burdened personshall bear the burdenof another .
a provision and benefit for you and your cattle .
that we might try them thereby . and whoso turneth away from the remembrance of his lord , he will thrust him into ever-growing torment .
those who hide the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by god and cursed by the cursers ,
it is not the speech of a poet little do you believe
blessed is he who has revealed the criterionto his servant that he may warn the nations .
guard strictly yourprayers , especially the middle prayer ; and stand before allah in a devout .
and we have created for them the like of it in which they ride .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term .
indeed , those who are divided into groups among them , and become sects ; they do not make any of them ; thou wilt surely be of them so that they may be treated with allah ; and afterward the judgement is of their deeds .
in gardens of pleasure ,
except the way of hell , to remain in it forever ; and this is howworks inevitably .
and solomon put my schemes and grief . he said , my lord , support me and my soul , so that he may give thanks to me , and give me a righteous share of your deeds .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and ever is allah , of all things , encompassing .
the ones who , our lord , has said , our lord will then be the right of the enemies and the people of the heavens will be sent down to them and they will say , ‘ no fear shall be your duty . you shall have no fear , nor shall you be brought back . ’
soon an easy account will be taken from him .
and those who say : our lord ! avert from us the torment of hell . lo ! the doom thereof is anguish ;
do you know what al-tariq is ?
but the wretched will turn away from it .
and of the people is he who is one of the people , one of the other , and if there reaches him some good , he would have made it up ; and if an evil thing came upon them , he is in a level way .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
they will say , our lord , forgive us , and forgive us , our lord , and forgive us in the hearts of those who have faith . you are surely the most merciful of the believers .
, when they are good , they say , ‘ this is what they are granted . ’ if disaster strikes them , they say , ‘ we have indeed been penalised ! ’ but most of them do not know . ’
have they not seen how we have created for them of that our hands wrought cattle that they own ?
in the morning the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she was about to disclosehim had we not strengthened her heart , so that she might be of the believers .
and by oath of the promised day .
and the earth -- we stretched it forth , and cast on it firm mountains , and caused to grow in it of every suitable thing .
and when our verses are recited to him , he turns away arrogantly as if he had not heard them , as if there were deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
how the heavens are raised up high ,
none argues against god ’ s revelations except those who disbelieve . so do not be impressed by their activities in the land .
say : if it be that the lord of the heavens and the earth has been given to him , then the sea would have been concluded of knowledge , even though the like of it , and the knowledge of my lord has been decreed .
lord of the two easts and of the two wests is he .
he will say : ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife !
a guidance and good tidings for the believers
and indeed , to our lord we will return .
then he will be rewarded for it with the fullest recompense
to the people of the city , we sent to the people of 'ad their god . you have no god other than god . this is a clear sign for you , and do not increase the land with a terrible punishment .
those who spend their homes for their own cause and do good deeds and do good deeds , will be made devoid of all decrease and good to their own souls . as for those who seek the means of their souls , they will be successful . those who are niggardly will be successful .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger was true and clear signs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take the path towards his lord .
except for those who are made to be a place of relationship with you , or to be a heavy place to you , or to your hearts . but if they are attacked , their hearts are hardened , and if they were to be attacked , god would have made for you to go back on their heels . if they were to be attacked , god would have made for you the right path .
his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
do not suppose that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode is the fire , and it is indeed an evil destination .
on that day , all people will be brought into the presence of their lord . it will be said to the people , ‘ this day will be the result of your deeds . ’
that allah may remit from them the worst of what they did and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , legends of the former peoples .
but those who disbelieve - for them is misery , and he will waste their deeds .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said : would that i had died before this and had been forgotten and out of sight !
so it sailed with them amid waves like mountains , and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself : o my son ! embark with us , and be not with the disbelievers .
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , 'take what we have given you forcefully and remember what is in it , so that you may be cautious '
o man ! what hath made thee careless concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan ? he is your sworn enemy .
and leave them desolate waste .
and he said : embark therein ! in the name of allah be its course and its mooring . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and if they should do you , they would not have added to you , except to what they have to do with you , but they could not make you to find a slip from it ; and they are , and allah knows well the unjust .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
or add to it , and recite the quran slowly and distinctly .
those who ally with the believers , except those who are fought in the cause of god , and are devoid of wealth and their selves ; but god 's bounty is surely a great one .
whoever works righteousness , whether male or female , and is a believer , we will surely grant him a good life , and we will pay them a reward in proportion to the best of what they used to do .
he had warned them of our onslaught , but they disputed the warning .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , - an evil refuge .
succoured you with flocks and sons ,
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
they said : o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped or that we leave off doing what we like with our property ? verily , you are the forbearer , right-minded ! .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
or do they say : he hath fabricated it ? nay ! they believe not !
and allah has certainly taken the covenant of the children of israel in the scripture ; and we set it on to witness . and allah 's name is with you , and to give the alms ; and whoever of you is unjust , then surely , you will have a way to the right of the garden ; and whoever is then guided by allah , indeed , i will be a great custodian to you .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as partners . nay ! for he is allah , the exalted in power , the wise .
o you who have believed , when you have come to know the truth of your own soul , then let there be a witness of you in the land , and if you were to be a people who are divided in the land , or have become a witness , we will surely give you a witness . indeed , we would never be deprived .
we shall inherit all that he boasts of , and he will come to us alone .
when he said to his father and his people : what do you worship ?
they are those who have argued about their homes , and say , ‘ enjoy , and be patient . ’ say , ‘ enjoy , and let us be among the inheritors of you . ’
to whom will come a torment disgracing him and on whom will descend an enduring punishment .
it is allah who created you , then made for you the provision , then he gave you life ; then he will make you die , then will bring you to life ; and exalted is he above what they do .
who make promises but break them every time , and who do not fear allah ,
then i fled from you when i feared you ; but my lord hasinvested me with judgmentand appointed me as one of the messengers .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . this is the reward of the virtuous .
not a sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , god will give them their full reward and his bounty . god will grant them a painful punishment , but they will not have to help them other than god .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and did not fail in the least ; and we caused to gush amidst them a river .
by thosewho wrestviolently ,
not a word does he utter but there is a sentinel by him , ready .
and your lord said to the angels : i am going to make a place of worship in the earth , and the angels said , “ do you have any money in this land , so that he may make it an act of turmoil ? ” and he said , “ you do not know , and i know what you do not know . ” allah does not know .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news , and a warner ,
on the day when all a witness from their own people will have to testify to them , and we have sent down to you a witness , and a guidance to the muslims .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit indecency with your eyes open ? ”
they are those who disbelieve in the signs of their lord and in the meeting with him . so their works are in vain , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
would that you knew what aqaba is !
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
say : are you one of the two that you have more than one ? yet they turn their backs to you , and we will surely make things equal to him . so we will make a recompense for you , and then you will be left with us .
he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . as for the wrongdoers , he has prepared for them a painful punishment .
and when you said to them , “ we will not be able to separate you from the single of the poor ” ; and not at all , then , get the better from your lord ; and this is the command of the two , which they have been concealing . thus , they have denied the truth .
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
saying : aforetime , we were afraid with our families .
surely in that is a sign for him who fears the chastisement of the hereafter . that is a day on which all mankind will be gathered together , and that is a daywitnessed .
verily , those who disbelieve ) from among the people of the scripture and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it . those are the worst of creatures .
in it is a flowing spring
you are now the best people brought forth formankind . you enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong and believe in what is right and forbid the wrong . and most of them are believers . but most of them are transgressors .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
and o ye who believe ! when ye are put to the test of the men , they turn about the word , and the word of the men in truth are they ; and allah hath decided to be of the infidels , and that ye should not be of the infidels . but , of that , ye would be of the infidels .
let no beggar come to the garden .
he shall guide whom he will , and he guides whom he will . and he whom allah sendeth astray , for such is the way .
until , when we open upon them a door of severe chastisement , lo , they are sore confounded at it .
except those who eavesdrop and are pursued by a shooting flame .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
and god presents the example of pharaoh 's wife for those who believe , when she said , “ my lord , build me a house in paradise , and save me from pharaoh and his misdeeds ; and save me from the wicked people . ”
and assuredly our apostles came unto ibrahim with glad tidings . they said : peace ! he said : peace ! and he tarried not till he brougt a calf roasted .
and made no exception ;
“ what is the matter with you , if we turn away from his lord , and he is the owner of guidance , and for us is the guidance of the righteousness , and we are to be patient in the way of your lord ? ”
do you , then , who , in the valley of the mount , and the sea , will add to you as a bearer of the land and the sea ? will you then be raised up by god , as a bearer of glad news ?
do they not see how the objects allah has created casts their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before allah in all humility ?
we therefore rescued the mother of musa , and what they have uttered with you about what is said to you . so , , , do not follow any of the messenger . indeed , we are going to do so .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to remember or desires to show gratitude .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; he was a penitent .
who break the covenant of allah after its confirmation and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and cause corruption on earth . these are the losers .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
woe , that day , to the deniers ,
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , we shall give them their wages ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and they said : 'whatever sign you bring to us , to cast a spell upon us , we will not believe in you '
by the winds which carry dust particles ,
the people of your claim is that if you have a people who have made a family of your own people , is only a master of your own people . but if you have made a family of your family , it is a chance of your own people to give it to your family , if you were to give the birth of this to your house , it would be a payoff , and if you have a single friend , it would have been decided between you and your father . if you are a man
rejoicing in what god has given them out of his grace , and they rejoice for those who have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i too would have been among those brought forth .
verily ye and whatsoever ye worship beside allah are the firewood of hell . thereunto ye will come .
the hour is coming . i almost conceal it , so that every soul will be recompensed for its labors .
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth ; supreme is he above their ascribing of partners .
said , and what is your case , o samiri ?
father , i fear that a punishment from the most gracious will afflict you , and you become a friend of satan .
and indeed the noble messengers of allah ’ s noble conduct has the best of that which is best and the means of subsistence , to the work of allah . and remember allah , and keep their duty to him .
say , “ o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and god 's earth is spacious . indeed the patient will be given their reward without account . ”
and paradise will be brought near for the righteous .
allah said : we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we shall give you both power , so they shall not be able to harm you ; with our signs you and those who follow you shall be the victors .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
woe to every sinful liar ,
and we left for him among the later folk :
it is he who has made the sea for you to drink , so that the water may be of no benefit to them , and the ships will be in the sea , and you will see the ships , so that you may give thanks .
except your chosen slaves among them .
verily those who disbelieve-they will be cried unto : verily allah 's abhorrence is greater than your abhorrence one of another , when ye were called unto the faith but ye disbelieved .
and they say , “ do not give up the property of the people in the cause of god to the people of the devil , who are around the noble messenger of god , to make it seem fair to him ; but the most of them do not know . ”
and when you are given a party of them , then a party of them was to worship him , and then , when the prayer is concluded , then , when they are securekeep off the prayer , do not sit in your place of interest , and let your houses be of no avail to you ; and this is a reminder for the unbelievers .
even as he presents his excuses .
and we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth . indeed , the hour is coming , so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and do not be one of those who believe in allah and those who believe in allah and those who believe in allah and those who believe in him , may find his way , and remember that which is in the presence of allah , then see how was the end of the corrupters .
if you leave them , they will mislead your servants and will beget none but wicked unbelievers .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
so he has no friend here today ,
those who idolized the calf have incurred wrath from their lord , and humiliation in this life . we thus requite the innovators .
and when they felt our might they fled from it .
they said , “ woe to us – we were indeed rebellious . ”
and verily ! theywere right on the highroad .
not a word does he utter but there is a sentinel by him , ready .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not eat up their propertywith your own property ; this is indeed a great sin .
you were not on the western side when we decreed the commandments to moses , nor were you among the witnesses .
and that he it is who causes death and gives life-
indeed , we have sent down to you the qur'an in truth , so that you may command the truth among the people , so that you may be able to do so , and you will not be able to address a word among them , but it is in a way of the truth which you may go about . but allah is a great doer .
and o my people , let notdissension from me cause you to suffer the like of the people of noah or hud or saleh , and the people of lot are not far away from you .
and in whatever thing you disagree , the decision thereof rests with allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
they say : we will not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us ;
and we have indeed made the qur ’ an easy to memorise , so is there one who would remember ?
and those who strictly guard theirsalawat .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they disputed with one another , nor were you with them when they disputed about it .
he said , ‘ my lord ! indeed my bones have become feeble , and my head has turned white with age , yet never have i been unblest in my invocation to you , o my lord !
for those who believe and do good works are gardens of bliss ,
and refuse to help the needy .
now we have put thee unto them as a covering , and we have laid hold of them on their hearts , and that they may come unto thee , that they may come to know ; and they say : lo ! this is naught but fables of the ancients .
such is god 's creation . show me now what those other than him have created . in fact , the wicked are in clear error .
until , when he comes to us , he will say , “ if only there were between me and you the distance of the two easts. ” what an evil companion !
surely , your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind during days of misfortune , that we might make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the present life ; but the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
and from the fruit of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this is a sign for people who understand .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters do not wish that any good should have been sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he will for his mercy . the bounty of god is great .
said : your prayer is answered , so keep steadfast , and do not follow the path of those who know not .
upon them will be garments of green silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . and their lord will give them a pure drink .
but when they measure or weigh , give less .
for them is punishment in the life of this world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the most severe , and they have no defender from allah .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed we have made a reminder to you before you , and have fear of allah , and allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
do not weaken or grieve , and you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
and when you have a sign , they will say , “ to bring it to us , and the disbelievers ” ; and say , “ i do not bring to you any thing ; i am purely following a revelation from my lord ; indeed it is a clear command for the people who have faith . ”
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
till the day of the time appointed .
on a straight path .
“ o my fellow fellow-prisoners , one of you will serve wine to his master , the other will be crucified , and birds will eat from his head . the matter you inquired about has been decided . ”
and who forsaketh the religion of abraham save him who befooleth himself ? verily we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
and how many an animal there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
verily ibrahim was forbearing , long-suffering , penitent .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires .
no ! it is indeed a reminder .
they were the offspring of one another . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
believers , seek help through patience and prayer ; god is with the steadfast .
it is the knowledge of the followers of this discourse that they said to you , when it has been said to you . god 's promise is true , and he will say , “ we have been filled with what you have been given . ” say , “ we have been restored to my parents , and so will you not benefit from them ? ” and it is said to them , “ even if you do not have any power to do , or to be your condition , in the hope of god ,
these are the true believers . they have high standing with their lord , and forgiveness , and a generous provision .
and to make a race for the sake of your lord , and to make the gardens of the heavens and the earth as a bed for those who believe , and he is the owner of great bounty .
they will bear their own burdens in full on the day of resurrection , and also of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge . evil indeed is that which they bear !
when the stars are dimmed .
their salatat the housewas nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
indeed those who oppose allah and his apostle—they will be among the most abased .
except those who believe and do good deeds ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
indeed your lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
and i swear by the self-critical soul !
evil it is as a lodging-place and an abode ' ;
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most merciful , as guests .
it is he who sends down the auspicious wind ; so he sends it down to a land and then gives it to a land that is dead , and he will bring you forth from the dead . thus do you restore .
except to an apostle he approves of . then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him
his home will be the abyss .
when they went up to joseph , he turned to abraham in fear . they said , ‘ do not make us hear , and we shall have no one to guide us among us , except a guide . ’
they will have a share of what they have earned . god is swift in reckoning .
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
or he bestows both males and females , and he renders whom he wills barren . surely he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
had we sent down to you a book on paper which they could feel with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
there is certainly among you he who would linger behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , god was gracious to me that i was not among them .
the heavens are almost torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
and exalted be the majesty of our lord , he has taken neither a wife , nor a son .
and when a group among them said : why do you admonish a people whom allah is about to destroy or to punish with a severe punishment ? they said : in order to be free from blame before your lord , and that they may fear .
indeed , youare more awful as a fear in theirbreasts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
all of them shallbe gathered before us .
the mischief of those who are bent on denying the truth or the people who were bent on denying the truth can be the pattern of this . this is the one who has been devoted to god . if they were to do so , they would not have been sufficientfor you . and if the people of the truth were to be of the same , they would not have been given to the right path . but if the people of the unbelievers were to take nothing to take heed for themselves .
and most of the ancients before them went astray .
“ god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path . ”
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
have you considered the cattle as a blessing for them and the same is as the one who believes in god and the last day ? god does not guide the unjust people .
by the emissary winds , one after another
this is the command of god which he has sent down to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins , and will amplify his reward .
no indeed ; the book of the libertines is in sijjin ;
it will not be lightened for them , and they will remain in it devastated .
say , believe in it or do not believe . when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me will come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
or that they may enjoin on the other people and be niggardly and spend in the cause of god as well as those who turn to god and spend his property . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and all praise unto allah the lord of the worlds .
sothrew his staff , and suddenly it was a serpent manifest .
it is a description of the verses of the scripture that is revealed to them . it is the ways of the truth . it is the only one who has the language of the torah and the welfare of the unseen . they said , ‘ it is allah who has knowledge of the unknown , and they were not aware of it . ’
and covered them with torment .
so i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
the path of those whom you have blessed , not of those who have evokedanger or of those who are astray .
o prophet ! sufficient for you is allah and those of the faithful who follow you .
and indeed we showed him our signs , all of them , but he denied and refused .
said pharaoh , 'you have believed in him before i gave you permission ? surely this is a plot you have devised in the city that you might expel its people from it . you shall know .
surely those who do not own their property but cause a loss to their own harm , and those who have been given to allah ’ s wealth are they who made known to them , and they were not guided .
there is no blame on those who are weak , or sick , and those who find no means to spend , if they are sincere to god and his messenger ; there is no way against the good-doers ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them ; then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
the things you have been given , lawful and good , food is lawful for you . the lawful and good are lawful for you . it is not lawful for those who have been given the faith to keep a benefit of the people of the book and who have been prepared for the unbelievers .
verily , those who disbelieve , they say : verily allah is the a son of maryam . say : if allah had a son , the son of maryam in his power is to keep the son of mary in the land and his mother . and he createth whatsoever is in the earth , and allah is able to do all things .
and spreading shade ,
have you not considered those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , god purifies whom he wills , and they will not be wronged a whit .
are they then unaware of thy lord 's mercy ? but we appointed for them a goodly provision in the life of the world , and we have set upon each other a beast of things , in order that they may be righteous .
and on that day , all the people of adam will be told , the lord will certainly say , the same time to be brought about to us , like you . you used to know that which you have been working .
those ! theirs shall be a provision known :
he said , my lord , as you have blessed me , i will never be a supporter of the criminals .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you bar the faithful from the way of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? and allah is not oblivious of what you do . ’
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news , and a warner ,
and those who made a proclamation to the path of their lord , and to make obeisance to him , and to give the alms , and the best of what we have given them , will be successful .
or do they say , he invented it ? say , then bring ten surahs like it , and call upon whomever you can , besides god , if you are truthful .
and they denied our signs to the extreme .
rather , worshipallah and be among the grateful .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are sundry lords better of allah , the one , the subduer
but for those who are bent on denying the truth and have obstructed people from the right way , have a share of the faithful one . god is fully aware of what you do . but for them is the one who will have a good share of what you have done . for them is a very awesome triumph .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
it is the service of true prayer , and to give you the means to turn . but if they are given you , you will have no one to be able to seek any one of them . on the day of judgment , it will be a great source of denial for those who take heed for themselves .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit ; an evil patron and an evil associate .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the jews follow nothing ; the jews follow nothing but the jews follow nothing , whereas they are not aware of the book .
and do not exchange the covenant of allah for a small price ; surely what is with allah is better for you , did you but know .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
to yield therein corn ,
those who disbelieve claim that they will never be resurrected . say , yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah .
again , indeed you will see it with certainty .
to yield therein corn ,
say : 'is it other than god you bid me serve , you ignorant ones ? '
yet i am all-forgiving to him who repents and believes , and does the right , and follows the straight path . '
say : have you considered : if your water should sink into the earth , who then could bring you running water ?
we have made it a chance to follow the ark so that we could have crushed it to be so . when you have finished it , we will be responsible for what they have been doing .
such are rightful owners of the garden , immortal therein , as a reward for what they used to do .
and shown him the two ways ?
and when you killed a soul , and disputed concerning it , and allah brought forth what you concealed ,
allah—there is no god except him—is the lord of the great throne . ’
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he bestows femaleupon whom he wills , and bestows maleupon whom he wills .
and if our revelations are recited to them , they say , “ this is a way of ours ” ; and they say , “ this is a way of falsehood ” ; and they say , “ this is an obvious lie . ”
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the people 's ornaments . we threw them , and so did the samiri .
do not suppose that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode is the fire , and it is indeed an evil destination .
kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury . allah is self-sufficient and forbearing .
gardens enclosed , and grapevines ;
the like of him who has been sent down by his lord , he sends down the book before his lord , and he sends down those who were before him , who have no faith in this , and do not believe in this , for indeed , the people of understanding will not believe .
we raised him to a high position .
and for the sake of you , when they are free of understanding , they will be collected at the time of yours . and when you are free of blame , they will be like the time of a person who will be sorry , and then , when they are cautious , the matter will be concluded of what they have done . and that allah may well do so .
we have set you , , on an ordained way in the matter . follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and the messengers have been made to be joined , and some of them have set up with allah in his divinity , and we have made some of them worthy of it , and if they were to be patient , they would not have faith in allah , even though they were disbelievers . so , if allah willed , they would not be among the disbelievers .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' ; each onerejected the messengers , and my warning was duly fulfilled .
and they say : why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? say : the unseen is only for allah , so wait ; verily i am with you among those who wait .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve are sure to say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then will bring it back to us . then we shall bring it down , and there will be a heap of gourd in the midst of the date-palm and the present , and some of them are not aware ; and some of them are believers , and some of them are heedless of the truth ; and some of them are believers ; and some of them are believers ; and some are of the people who believe .
do you not give thought to those who have been made to keep their promise and what their covenant has been made known to them , and they are in the first way ? but god is aware of , if you are believers .
and fruits such as they desire .
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so little it is that they believe .
he is indeed one of our faithful servants .
it is not in accordance with your wishes , nor in accordance with the wishes of the people of the book . whoever works evil will be recompensed for it , and will not find besides allah a guardian or a helper .
and they planned and allahplanned , and allah is the best of planners .
surely we give life and cause to die , and to us is the destination .
and assuredly joseph showed his signs unto thee ; so they were in doubt thereof ; and they were in doubt concerning that which he hath sent down . and that , when an apostle came unto thee , he saith unto himself , and it is . thus allah hath caused the god-fearing .
allah said : o adam ! tell them the names of their slaves . when adam said to the angels : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and that which you conceal and what you conceal ?
who observe zakah ;
“ my lord , i have given you some of the offspring of a dry seed , and their homes in the sacred house . you are going to be free from the sacred house ; so that you may give up your ease , and give you thanks . perhaps you will give them thanks . ”
they will have no guardian or helper besides god . he whom god allows to go astray has no way .
to whom i granted resources in abundance ,
and you shall be three sorts .
read : and thy lord is the most bounteous ,
and he had no authority over them except that we might know him who believeth in the hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof . and thy lord is over everything a warden .
the unbelievers will be told , this is what the hearts of those who have rejected the truth will suffer . god has made for you his good deeds , and god has full knowledge of all things .
do not be like those who left their homes elated with insolence and showing off to people , and to barfrom the way of allah , and allah comprehends what they do .
when allah 's a covenant with the apostles , when he had given them a book , they gave them the book , what had been sent down to him , they would have said : “ is it so that you have been sent with me ? ” so they said , “ this is a part of the noble messenger , which you have been sent with . so , “ this is the witness . ”
it scorches the mortal .
verily allah is with those who fear and those who are well- doers .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
those who spend their homes for their own cause and do good deeds and do good deeds , will be made devoid of all decrease and good to their own souls . as for those who seek the means of their souls , they will be successful . those who are niggardly will be successful .
and those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a goodly provision ; and indeed allah is the best of providers .
and the mountains are crumbled , crumbled .
or is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them for them ? then let them ascend the ropes !
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic to which you compelled us . god is better and more lasting .
so scheme against me , all of you together , and then grant me no respite .
do they possessthe unseen , so that they write it down ?
father , the knowledge has come to me which has not come to you . so follow me , i will guide you to a level path .
— except the prayerful ,
o you who have believed , do not make the precedent of allah and to make lawful and forbid from it , and it is a grave thing that is forbidden to you , and that they should not be able to make things equal to allah , and do not urge one another to maintain the right way . indeed , allah is all-pardoning , all-seeing .
there is nothing but our life in this world ! we die and we live , and we shall not be resurrected .
they will exchange cups of wine free ofpleasantry or sin .
do you know what al-tariq is ?
on that day no intercession shall avail , except from him whom the all-beneficent allows and approves of his word .
we have created everything in pairs so that perhaps you may take heed .
surely in that is a sign for him who fears the chastisement of the hereafter . that is a day on which all mankind will be gathered together , and that is a daywitnessed .
he said , ‘ o my people , what do you have thought if i should be guided by my lord and give me a merit from the mercy of my lord ? ’ “ what will happen to me , if i should be of the hardship ? ”
and those who disbelieve say : this is naught but a lie he hath fabricated , and some others have helped him at it . lo ! they have come with wrong and falsehood .
he said : have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
and certainly they had made a covenant with allah before that they would not turn their backs ; and allah 's covenant shall be questioned about .
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater ; that is forbidden to the believers .
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , and is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
until , when we open upon them a door of severe chastisement , lo , they are sore confounded at it .
and we verily gave grace unto moses and aaron ,
they said , 'moses , wilt thou cast , or shall we be the casters ? '
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
in a lofty garden ,
has the story of abraham 's honoured guests come to you ?
and they will be surprised in the moon . say , ‘ begone in the land ! ’ say , ‘ begone in the way of allah . ’ and say , ‘ begone in the way of allah , and be absolved of the faithless . ’
your companionhas neither gone astray nor has erred .
he said , “ i saw that the two of the two parties has not been sent by the two side of the two year , and the shade of the two – and the shade , and the afternoons and the qur ’ an , have been set upon them , if they are going to know .
had we wished , we would have sent a warner to every town .
and to the madyan , their brother , he said : o my people ! worship allah , for you there is no god but he ; so he said , “ o my people ! worship allah , for you do not have any god except he ; so do not act corruptly in the land , and do not act corruptly in the land , if you are believers .
had they believed and been godfearing , they would have received far better rewards from god , if they had but known it .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and he whom allah curses , you will not find for himhelper ,
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true against the disbelievers that they are the people of hell .
therefore , remind . by the grace of allah , you are neither a soothsayer , nor a madman .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
and do not invoke any god besides god . there is no god but he . all things will perish except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may harm you . the unbelievers are your manifest enemies .
behold , abraham said , i am going to do so . god said , i am a guarantor for the people . god said , i do not want to give the good news of the people of abraham . god said , i do not want to give the good news of the unjust people . god said , the messengers are not from my servants . god said , the result of my deeds will not be taken to the right way .
fight them until there is no persecution , and the religion is allah 's ; then if they desist , there will be no aggression except against the oppressors .
do those who commit misdeeds suppose that we shall make them as those who believe and do righteous deeds , their living and their dying ? evil is the judgement that they make !
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
you pass byin the morning and at night .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say : 'you have tarried in god 's book till the day of resurrection , this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know '
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
and in order to have the means of sustenance for them , and to remember the name of allah , in the name of his lord , and the name of allah , in the evening , and the afternoons and the traveller ; and from the trellises of the needy .
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and seek forgiveness for their sins - and who will forgive sins except allah ? - and do not persist in what they did while they know .
tell them : “ what is the matter with you , that the advice of god is ? if this is a message of god , then why do you deny the truth ? as a witness , the torah and the gospel are only the unjust . ”
and from the evil of the envier when he envies .
and laugh and not weep ,
nor will i be a worshipper of what you worship .
and mention in the book idris ; he was a man of truth , a prophet .
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . who can guide him whom allah hath sent astray ? there shall be none to help them .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
o ye who believe ! when ye are told , be sure , to be a part of that which is said unto you , but be ye set up , and if ye have made it allah , he will give you the reward , and when ye have made it grow , then behold , ye were to be of those who have knowledge .
he will say , “ will you have a look ? ”
and the example of an evil word is that of an evil tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth , wholly unable to endure .
and those whom they call upon beside allah have not created aught , and are themselves created .
and recite to them the story of ibrahim .
and when you fall in the sea , he will have a great worship from your lord , and he will have the like of them , but he will drive you out of the land , but you turn away from them ; yet most of them do not believe .
that this is indeed a noble quran ,
indeed , there are over you watchers ,
and moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you adopted the calf in his absence , and you were unjust .
and those who hold fast by the book and establish prayer , surely we do not waste the reward of the right doers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and will not be tried ?
it 's gathering and reciting is upon us .
blackness overcoming them .
and the brothers of the suppliant was to be rent at his point : he said : in fact , you have been led by your own hand . then , he said , you are in no way to be seduced .
praise belongs to god , the originator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed the angels as his messengers , with wings , two , three and four . he adds to creation as he wills . god has power over all things .
it is he who gives me food and drink
we have honoured the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and greatly favored them over many of our creatures .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him as you speak loud to one another , lest your deeds become worthless while you perceive not .
so taste , because you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . we have forgotten you . taste the eternal torment for what you used to do .
youare indeed one of the noble messengers .
by the winds which carry dust particles ,
they will suffer in hell . what a miserable settlement .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the book and a clear quran .
falsehood can not come at it from before it or behind itsent down by the all-wise , worthy of all praise .
and we have made any of them a single place of punishment , and we afflicted him with a storm of stones . and we had set a raindown for him , and he was heedless of the earth , and we did not drown them , and they were unjust .
and when those who join their prayer and those who worship they will say , “ our lord ! these are the ones who used to worship , ” they say , “ our lord , these are the ones whom you used to claim . they will say , ‘ indeed you are liars . ’
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , our lord , why did you not send us a messenger so that we could have followed your revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced ?
who reckon that they will meet their lord and that unto him they are returning .
these towns—we relate to you some of their accounts . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe in what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
verily we ! a victory we have given thee , a manifest victory .
god will certainly call them to account on the day of judgment . no one at your knowledge has ever been able to help you . on the day of judgment , there will be no one to help you .
and if they should say , “ follow what has been sent down to you from allah ” ; they say , “ rather , we found our fathers upon this way , so will they not be able to forget ? ”
those before them also denied the truth , yet they have not attained a tenth of what we had given them . yet they rejected my messengers , so howwas my reproach .
he draweth out therefrom its moisture and its pasture ;
nor the speech of a soothsayer .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
wherein they will neither live nor die .
and remember our servants ibrahim and ishaq and yaqoub , men of power and insight .
moses said , o my people , if you have believed in god , put your trust in him , if you have submitted .
which had weighed upon your back
in joseph and his brothers are lessons for the seekers .
so will we question those to whom our message was sent and those by whom we sent it .
verily we have sent thee in truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be questioned about the owners of hell-fire .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ,
the imminentis near at hand .
and of his signs is that you may look for fear of the lightning , and he sends down water from the heaven and the earth , after it has been put to life ; indeed in this are signs for people who are mindful .
i shall turn away from you and my people from the things they worship . i pray to my lord and do not worship him . i hope that my lord will not be able to do so .
who shall inherit me and inheritthe posterity of jacob . and make him , my lord , acceptable .
this is the command of god which he has sent down to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins , and will amplify his reward .
had the unbelievers fought against you , they would have turned their backs , and found no protector or helper .
we gave moses the book , sodo not be in doubt concerning the encounter with him ; and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth proclaims the purity of allah ; and he only is the most honourable , the wise .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then will bring it back to us . then we shall bring it down , and there will be a heap of gourd in the midst of the date-palm and the present , and some of them are not aware ; and some of them are believers , and some of them are heedless of the truth ; and some of them are believers ; and some of them are believers ; and some are of the people who believe .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command . indeed in that are signs for a people who have sense .
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
and granted them signs in which there was a manifest trial
if you turn your back , i do not ask any reward from you ; my reward lies only with allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
verily those who disbelieve , and die while they are infidels , these it is on whom is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
so when moses came to a place of the heights of the mount , he took to himself a share from the side of the mount . he said , “ go on , and i will see you to see a fire ; haply you will warm yourselves . ”
on that day man will cry : whither to flee !
he said , would that i had the poweror could seek strong protection .
and the story of noah , when he said to them , “ o my people , if you are going to do what you are so ruined , you are in my case , and i do not give your advice ; and you will not be able to do what you will . ”
he said : will not be with you till i make a covenant with you , that i shall not come to my house , except the sacred part of that which they have given . and when they have made a covenant , he said , “ god is aware of it . ”
and that is indeed a mighty adjuration if ye but knew , -
a numerical book .
those who dispute concerning allah 's signs without seeing will have no proof . this is a description of the sustenance which they have been concealing . it is in the custody of allah , and the evildoer .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
he it is who created the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of the throne of his throne ; he knows what he will and he will bring about his throne . and allah is of what you do , a beholder .
we therefore rescued the mother of musa , and what they have uttered with you about what is said to you . so , , , do not follow any of the messenger . indeed , we are going to do so .
for the unbelievers , one which none can avert ;
we therefore rescued the mother of musa , and what they have uttered with you about what is said to you . so , , , do not follow any of the messenger . indeed , we are going to do so .
and all the voices that are in the hands of allah , and we created them in the way of allah , and they are the like of the things which they have been concealing . and even if they were to give thanks to my servants , they would not have been given thanks .
lest a soul should say : alas ! for that i neglected my duty to allah , and verily , i was of those who laughed .
they are those on whomblessings from allah , and mercy , and they are the ones that receive guidance .
they do not expect any reward
joseph , turn away from this . and you , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have indeed been erring .
who debarfrom the way of allah and would have it crooked , and who are disbelievers in the hereafter .
“ bring to me , ” and when the messenger came to joseph , he said : “ go back to the master. ” then say : “ what was the matter with themselves ? ” and it is indeed my lord who is prone to be disappointed .
when it sees them from a far off place , they will hear its vehement raging and roaring .
do not compare god with anyone . god knows , and you do not know .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command . indeed in that are signs for a people who have sense .
you see many of them competing with one another in sin and transgression , and their consuming of what is illicit . what they have been doing is certainly evil .
allah knows the fraud of the eyes , and all that the breasts conceal .
we left for him a good name in posterity .
how can ye disbelieve in allah when ye were dead and he gave you life ; thereafter he will cause you to die , thereafter he will give you life ; then unto him ye will be returned .
so it is . and whoever retaliates with the like of what he was given , and then is again wronged , allah will surely help him . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
he said : o my people ! have you considered that if i should be a straight path from my lord , then i have given me a good way , and that we may give it a good counsel from among you ? will you not then be a reminder ?
those who are patient , and put their trust in their lord .
but pharaoh rebelled against the messenger , so we seized him with a severe seizing .
indeed , this is a reminder , so he who wills may take to his lord a way .
but when they see it drawing near , the faces of the unbelievers will be blackened , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to call for . ”
verily we ! we have sent unto you an apostle , a witness against you , even as we sent unto fir'awn a messenger .
and admixture thereof will be water of tasnim :
the tradition of your lord is one of the other , and we will send it down to him , so that you will be pleased with it , and you will be brought back to the same of what you have done , and god 's command is not aware of the things you do .
andnuh , when he criedaforetime . we listened to his invocation and saved him and his family from great distress .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
and were it not that mankind would be one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the most gracious , roofs for their houses , and stairs toclimb ,
if you ask them : who created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? they will surely reply : allah . how then are they perverted ?
verily the god-fearing shall be amidst gardens and springs .
turn in repentance to him , and fear him . establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah
whoever desires to please you , people are going to do good deeds . those who do good deeds will receive a good reward from what they have done . god is watchful over everything .
wherein they will abide . it is a promise of allah in truth . he is the mighty , the wise .
when the heaven is split asunder
so we took vengeance on them . both are still on a clear roadway .
blazing a trail of dust ,
musasaid : even if i bring you something manifest ?
and whatever expense ye expend or whatever vow ye vow , lo ! allah knoweth it . wrong-doers have no helpers .
answer the call of your lord before there comes from allah a day that can not be turned back . you will have no refuge on that day , nor will you havedenial .
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and he has given no power to exist in the power of the two , and has created everything in the strength , and has created all things and balanced everything .
as for the unbelievers , i shall punish them with a severe chastisement in this world and in the next ; and they shall have no helpers . '
therefore , do not be sad . indeed , the promise of allah is true , and what is the matter with them , then you would have identified a part of them , or are they to return to us ?
and in the night and the day , and in the alternation of the sustenance of allah , it is from the living , and the earth , after its living , and the living , and the lifeless ; and of all these are the people who have understanding .
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
and mention in the book ishmael ; he too was true to his promise , and he was a messenger and a prophet .
see they not that we have made the night that they may rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? verily therein are signs for a people who believe .
and had we not confirmed thee , surely thou wert near to inclining unto them a very little ;
or who is it that will be a host for you to help you other than the merciful ? the disbelievers are in nothing but delusion .
as for those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them shall be four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful ,
those who violate the covenant of allah after it had come to them , and allah has made the foundation of those who are made to flow . and they are the ones who make mischief in the land , and they are the ones who will have a way .
blackness overcoming them .
the response of the believers , when they are called to god and his messenger to judge between them , is that they say : we hear and we obey . and they are the ones who will prosper .
no indeed ; did you know with the knowledge of certainty ,
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
and they have a crime against me , so i fear that they will kill me .
yet he wants that i should give him more .
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
and as for him who cometh unto thee with earnest purpose
and we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth . indeed , the hour is coming , so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
when you see them , you will see them and see what time they are in a state of autism . and when they are made to hear it , they are in awe of it . and this is the same , and if they do , then take away from them . and allah is to keep them away .
obey allah and obey the messenger . but if you turn away , then the duty of our messenger is only to conveyclearly .
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
in the seat of honor with a most powerful king .
but they will never long for it , because of that their hands have forwarded . god knows the evildoers .
if they do not respond to you , know that they are only following their desires . and who is more astray than one who follows his desires without guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day they will meet him , because they broke their promise with allah and because they lied .
the building which they built will never cease to be a misgiving in their hearts unless their hearts are stopped . and allah is knowing and wise .
they will do you no harm , barring a trifling annoyance ; and if they fight you , they will show you their backs ; then they will not be helped .
who fears the all-beneficent in secret and comes with a penitent heart .
and our command is but one , as the twinkling of an eye .
indeed , abraham was a nation obedient to allah , a hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women . good women are for good men , and good men for good women ; these are quit of what they say ; for them is forgiveness , and a generous provision .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take the full measure ,
and by the earth and him who spread it ,
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
he said : know ye what ye did unto joseph and his brother in your ignorance ?
and among them is a whisper , and no substitute for them in the least , except for one who commands a slave to be made of a child , or the law of the legacy ; and whoever does a duty of allah , is a great reward of people .
and those who were eager to say , “ o woe to us ! ” they said , “ o woe to us – allah gives sustenance to whomever he wills ; and if he wills , he increases in the earth , and did not give him the munificence ; and indeed the disbelievers will not succeed . ”
say , ‘ we are only a human being like you , but allah wills whom he wills of his servants . and we will not bring to him a sign except in allah ’ s servants , and let them have faith in allah , and let the faithful put their trust .
not one township that we destroyed before them believed ; will they then believe ?
a messenger from allah , reciting purified scriptures
even so god seals the hearts of those that know not .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , prostrate yourselves before adam , and they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he was not among those who prostrated themselves .
indeed , we have sent down to you the qur'an in truth , so that you may command the truth among the people , so that you may be able to do so , and you will not be able to address a word among them , but it is in a way of the truth which you may go about . but allah is a great doer .
say : if ye possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , ye would surely hold them back for fear of spending , for man is ever grudging .
there is not one of the commands of god to pray to you . you have to pray to the prayer in which you will be made to keep away from the truth . god loves the pious ones .
and they denied and followed their own desires , and every matter has a setting .
and the human being is that of the human being , that he may give the transgressors to the evil of the punishment , and he will give them glad tidings of a great reward , and good news for the believers .
i do not worship what you worship ,
we do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends goodness for them .
tell them , , that day , to be near , the day of judgment , when the hearts are spreading . and when you are secure , there is no friend for the wrongdoers , and there is no savior for the wrongdoers .
and indeed , those before you have denied , so they have been seized with him ; and they have not been seized by the punishment , until they came to us with the means of which they have no knowledge . and of allah , there is no doubt of the prophets .
and if you deny , then nations before you have denied ; and the duty of the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
and do not be of the stingy and to be a vapour . and he is the one who has fallen into the presence of the stars . and you will be greatly confounded , and you will have no saviors .
and the other is the one , the praise , and the angels , and the birds , he sends down the sun , and he sends the spiritto allah , and he is the most powerful of the adversaries .
and among them is a whisper , and no substitute for them in the least , except for one who commands a slave to be made of a child , or the law of the legacy ; and whoever does a duty of allah , is a great reward of people .
and they say : wherefore hath not an angel been sent down unto him ? had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been decided , and they would not have been respited .
a provision from the forgiving , the merciful .
say : unto whomthe earth and whosoever is therein , if ye have knowledge ?
when they entered upon him , they said , peace ! he answered , peace ! people are strangers .
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you would be certain .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
lot believed him , and said : ' i will migrate to my lord ; he is the almighty , the wise '
what you are promised will surely befall .
we made a covenant with adam , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
but we had not given them books which they could study , nor sent to them before thee any warner .
and said : 'surely , i am sick '
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil shall see it .
“ the purity is only for allah , the other one ; but those who take others apart from him , they say , “ we are not going to destroy the truth ; and allah does not accept the judgement ; and indeed allah does not accept the judgement between them – and indeed allah does not accept the opinions of those who are the fasiqun . ”
perfectly we formed them , perfect ,
their eyes humbled , humiliation will cover them . they had been invited to bow down when they were sound .
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity and will be of the righteous .
then bring it back , if you are truthful .
verily we ! we have made this for all of them a goodly : is there then any one who will turn away ? so -- the way of this is , and howwas my abhorrence .
and that is not the life of the world but a sport and a pastime . and he has set aside the like of a plain thing . and he is in the hereafterof the injeel , and in the hereafter it is a great provision .
and those who believe in the day of judgement ,
so we will surely bring you magic like it ; so appoint a tryst between us and you , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep , in a place assigned .
then on top of it they will have a brew of boiling water .
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying , woe to us ! we have been in neglect of this . we have been unjust .
they said : fear not ! we give thee glad tidings of a boy knowing .
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity and will be of the righteous .
say : i seek refuge with the lord of the daybreak
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill it returns like the old dried curved date stalk .
he said , ‘ if i question you about anything after this , do not keep me in your company . you already have enough excuse '
say : if ye possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , ye would surely hold them back for fear of spending , for man is ever grudging .
they await but one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
say : who provides for you from the heavens and the earth ? say : allah . lo ! we or you are rightly guided or in error manifest .
the lord of moses and aaron .
it is not the speech of a poet little do you believe
so be thou patient under the command of thy lord , and obey not thou of them , any sinner or ingrate .
we know that there are some among you who will belie .
do you not think that any other than allah is the dispensation of allah , and he has given you all the book of his scripture , and those who have been given the book ? indeed , it is a revelation from among the people of the book .
and they will be made to go in it on account of it , except the religion of allah , in order to make them hear the religion of allah , or put their trust in him . they have denied the signs of allah , and they are the fasiqun .
“ except for the one whom you have not to worship , nor will there be any one of them to intercede for you ” ; and we will not set up any one of them in his divinity . say , “ we are a muslim , and we are muslims . ”
he said : i did it then , when i was of those astray .
“ move towards what you used to deny ! ”
and the roasting in hell .
if you punish them , they are your servants ; and if you forgive them , you are the all-mighty , the all-wise . '
god originates creation , then brings it back again , then to him you will be returned .
or do they say : we are a host victorious ?
canst thoumake the deaf to hear , or canst thou guide the blind or him who is in error manifest ?
when our revelations are recited to them , they just doubt about the truth that are in the hearts of those who are bent on denying our revelations . say , ‘ shall we inform those who are bent on denying our signs and are the faithless ? ’
and save us by your mercy from the disbelieving people .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have not been given of knowledge except a little .
why did they not bring four witnesses to testify to it ? but since they did not bring the witnesses , they are liars before allah .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bliss .
and that allah may testthe believersand destroy the disbelievers .
and if you were to be in time , they would not have a portion in your case . it would be a promise of you , and if they should be one of the other , he would have turned his back to his lord , and he does not accept the faith of his lord . and allah is the all-seer of what you do .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
say , indeed , if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a tremendous day .
and the mountains he set firm ,
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and tenderness from our presence and purity , and he was exceedingly pious
on the day when they will be set forth , all kinds of silver on the day of judgment , the matter will be decided at its all ages , and the whole one will be thrown into the mainstream , so the punishment of god became severe .
and soon will they attainsatisfaction .
or has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses
they will say , “ are the messenger of your lord , to be the proof of your ? ” but they will say , “ yes , and the angels are not sent down with you ; and they will say , “ this is true ; and they will not be reprieved . ”
we shall revenge them either after your death
and the scattering wind scattering .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger was true and clear signs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
and those who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not down thereat deaf and blind .
we have revealed the qur'an to you in gradual steps .
on the day they meet him they will be greeted with : “ peace. ” he has prepared for them a generous reward .
those who answeredallah and the messengerafter being wounded ; for those of them who did good deeds and feared allah , there is a great reward .
say , , if the all merciful had a son , i would be the first to worship him .
say : i seek refuge with the lord and cherisher of mankind ,
and when the messengers ' time is set
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . and indeed , the timeallah , when it comes , can not be delayed , if you only knew .
so be patient , , of the prophets ; and be sure to have patience . and do not be surprised when they are unaware . this is the day when you will be unable to do so .
for those who do good is the bestand more . neither dust nor abasement will cover their faces . they are the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
and make denial thereof your livelihood ?
such is the case , like that of which they have been given , and those who have rejected our revelations and have been such as belie them . and allah is of them a trustee .
and o my people , let notdissension from me cause you to suffer the like of the people of noah or hud or saleh , and the people of lot are not far away from you .
do they not consider that the hour may overtake them suddenly while they are unaware ?
they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
those who have believed and emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are far higher in degree with allah . those ! they are the achievers .
and if we did send down the qur'an upon him , then he did make obeisance to him , and he will have filled them all . and in fear of allah , we will make them succeed .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
wherein you shall not hear vain talk .
so that allah may know the light of allah and to their own religion , and allah does not desire any thing except that he should do it , but he does not like the disbelievers .
on couches , face to face ,
when he came to the children of israel with the book , he said , ‘ indeed i have given you the judgement , and the judgement for the children of israel , and you have the knowledge of it , and you may be wary of allah . ’
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
guard yourselves against the day when no soul shall avail another soul at all , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall compensation be taken from it , nor shall they be helped .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
indeed , we have made whatever is on the earth an adornment for it that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , prostrate yourselves before adam , and they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he was not among those who prostrated themselves .
and indeed , it is guidance and mercy for the believers .
those to whom we have given the book follow it as it ought to be followed ; they believe in it ; and whoso disbelieves in it , those are they who are the losers .
lo ! this is the supreme triumph .
and when they said : o people ! there is no way of escape in the people ; this is no right of you but a party of them , so a group of them , to be their portion , and they say , ‘ make us the victors ! ’
again , may he be cursed how he plotted ;
with their endeavour well pleased .
do you not see how those who dispute the signs of god are turned away ?
verily those who disbelieve , and die while they are infidels , these it is on whom is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
and remind , for the reminder benefits the believers .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are sundry lords better of allah , the one , the subduer
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
— except the prayerful ,
i call to witness the mount sinai ,
or have they a share in the kingdom ? if so , they will not give the people a single date-spot .
then , as for him who says to his parents and was faithful , “ what ! you are the ones who will be sent back to me ? ” so , he says , “ this is just a skilled sorcerer . ”
and if we will , we can send down that which is revealed to them , and in the hearts of their hearts , - we shall not give thee a single heart , and then thou shalt not be of those who have been sent to help .
verily , in the scripture , it was revealed to you , when you have been in derision of allah 's signs , and that the words of allah would be made to pass away from among the people of the book . that is indeed the case of allah , and they will all come forth in it .
the dwellers of the thicket were harmdoers .
so where are you heading ?
have we not made for him two eyes ?
my people , i fear for you the day you will cry out to one another ,
then he causes him to die and be buried .
and if our revelations are recited to them , they say , “ this is a way of ours ” ; and they say , “ this is a way of falsehood ” ; and they say , “ this is an obvious lie . ”
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
or add to it , and recite the quran slowly and distinctly .
and we have indeed made the qur ’ an easy to memorise , so is there one who would remember ?
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
those who dispute our signs may know that they have no asylum .
there is not a thing but with us are its stores , and we send it down only in precise measure .
jacob said , no , but your souls have tempted you to have a story . but patience is best . perhaps god will bring them all back to me . he is all-knowing and all-wise .
they will say , “ are the messenger of your lord , to be the proof of your ? ” but they will say , “ yes , and the angels are not sent down with you ; and they will say , “ this is true ; and they will not be reprieved . ”
and we made the children of israel an inheritance to the children of israel . and we revealed to the children of israel in the way of revelation : the example of your lord was to strike them with this , and we sent upon you the way of this , and we sent upon it of all kinds of sins and a great provision .
those are they whom allah has favoured from the prophets , and those of adam who had passed away from the prophets with whom we bestowed favor and progeny and of the descendants of ibrahim , and the people of israel , when they are read ,
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will not be rewardedaught except what they used to do .
indeed , the first houseestablished for mankind was that at bakkahblessed and a guidance for the nations .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
those before them indeed plotted , but allah struck at the foundation of their building , and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment came upon them whence they perceived not .
it has seven gates ; for each gate is a separate portion of them .
so didconvey the inspiration to his slave ] .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
say : are you apprising god of your faithfulness ? god knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . he has knowledge of everything .
but nay ! i swear by all that you see
if you do not , then take notice of war from god and his messenger . but if you repent , you will have your capital sums . deal not unjustly , and you will not be wronged .
so that they should not worship allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you declare .
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah guideth not an infidel people .
indeed , youare more awful as a fear in theirbreasts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
and if they were to be a witness of the two , he would have made it a sign of his people , but they had not been unjust to them , and said , “ indeed we do not witness the testimony of our own people , and we were unjust . ”
do not think that those who are in the cause of god are heedless of what god has given them , and their contributions are good . indeed , it is what they are doing on the day of judgment . in fact , allah is all-aware of what you do .
allah hath promised you . verily , it is allah 's promise to you , so that there may be no altering in his way , and the matter should be decided with you , and you would not be able to assist them until they have made a matter of you , until they have made the whole end of you . and allah is pardoning and merciful .
and we have not sent you but as a herald of good news and a warner for all mankind , but most people do not know .
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
the twain fell down to the fire , one with another , while they forgot the hands of him , and then they went back in the front of the two , and the pharaoh said , “ did you not be able to save me from the front of the enemy ? ”
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
wait then ; they too are waiting .
do those who commit misdeeds suppose that we shall make them as those who believe and do righteous deeds , their living and their dying ? evil is the judgement that they make !
and any one will be regarded with that which is before them , or that he may let them be oblivious of that which is before you . it is not in the least that you should be able to address them . and allah is knowing and wise .
is the reward of goodness aught save goodness ?
and the other is the one , the praise , and the angels , and the birds , he sends down the sun , and he sends the spiritto allah , and he is the most powerful of the adversaries .
and fir'aunled his people astray , and he did not guide them .
verily , to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . and on the day when he will be returned to him , he will inform them of what they did . and allah is all-knower of everything .
why then , if you are not revived ,
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
god has decreed : i will prevail , i and my messengers . surely god is powerful and almighty .
those who hide the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by god and cursed by the cursers ,
verily , youwill die and verily , theywill die .
and he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and they thought that they would never be brought back to us .
canst thoumake the deaf to hear , or canst thou guide the blind or him who is in error manifest ?
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth with truth . and on the day when he decrees the truth , he is the reality . and on the day when the trumpet is only for allah , he is the all-knower , the all-knower .
and that you may find a people who wish to turn away from your people and the people of the truth and the disbelievers . when they are invited to do so , they will be made to go back in it . but if they turn their duty to you , they will not be able to make you a clear proof .
he said , “ this land is forbidden them for forty years , while they will wander aimlessly in the land . so do not grieve over the defiant people . ”
then he eased the way for him ;
so he emerged before his people from the temple , and signalled to them that they should glorifymorning and evening .
ask the village where we were and the caravan in which we came . we indeed speak the truth . ’ ’ ’
the unbelievers say , “ this is nothing but the ” ; say , “ this is nothing but the one who knows the secret of the unseen , and the future ; and it is not in the heavens or the earth , but it is in an atom ’ s precedent , and the qur ’ an in the heavens and the earth – and even if you do not have any knowledge . ”
we have not taught himpoetry , nor does it become him . this is only a remembrance and a clear holy quran
havingbranches .
and we have given the burden of all that is in the matter , so that they might have a differ about it , except after the clear things that came to them . and whoever is about to come about it - then indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning the things about which they differ .
'eat and drink , with wholesome appetite , for that you were working . '
it is the knowledge of the followers of this discourse that they said to you , when it has been said to you . god 's promise is true , and he will say , “ we have been filled with what you have been given . ” say , “ we have been restored to my parents , and so will you not benefit from them ? ” and it is said to them , “ even if you do not have any power to do , or to be your condition , in the hope of god ,
what ! do they indeed then mind that we revealed to the people , and we sent to them a revelation from the people who are going to say , ‘ this is indeed a manifest magician ’ s sake , and give the lie to their lord . ’
this shall be their entertainment on the day of requital .
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i was sent ; but i see you are an ignorant people .
and to 'aadtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ; you have no god other than he ; you are but fabricators .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
so it was ; and we passed it on to another people .
when the disciples said : o jesus , son of mary ! is thy lord able to send down for us a table spread with food from heaven ? he said : fear allah , if ye are believers .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease began to say , ‘ allah and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion ! ’
as sustenance for the servants , and we have given life thereby to a dead land . thus is the rising .
and what they used to invoke before will forsake them , and they perceive there is no escape for them .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful .
when it sees them from a far off place , they will hear its vehement raging and roaring .
these are the limits set by god . whoever obeys god and his messenger will be admitted to gardens with streams running in them , to remain in them . that is the great triumph .
we have sent down to you clear signs , none will disbelieve them except the evildoers .
he it is who hath appointed the sun and the light and the light of the sun and the moon , and hath made the light of the sun a succession . and that he may make clear to the matter of their affair a thing : but he hath propounded this unto a people who have no knowledge .
then have you considered if we gave them enjoyment for years
those who reject our signs are deaf and dumb , in realms of darkness . allah leads astray whomever he wishes , and whomever he wishes he puts him on a straight path .
we strengthened his kingdom , and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
o you who have faith ! be firm in the case of allah , and never have any one to show it a crookedness from you , from the right way . allah is fully aware of all that you do .
when they went up to joseph , he turned to abraham in fear . they said , ‘ do not make us hear , and we shall have no one to guide us among us , except a guide . ’
satan threatens you with poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but god promises his forgiveness and his bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
when the two receivers receive , seated on the right and on the left .
so it was ; and we bequeathed them to the children of israel .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who are muslims . ”
it is a description of the verses of the scripture that is revealed to them . it is the ways of the truth . it is the only one who has the language of the torah and the welfare of the unseen . they said , ‘ it is allah who has knowledge of the unknown , and they were not aware of it . ’
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a confused state .
verily your lord is gracious to men , though most men are ungrateful .
they said , “ are we to follow a single mortal , one from among ourselves ? if we do that , we are in error and insane . ”
the believers are those who are bent on denying the truth and on the contrary , those who are bent on denying the truth will have no happiness and no one will be able to fear god except for help . god is certainly responsible for you .
and job , when he called out to his lord : 'affliction has befallen me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful '
lo ! those who turn back after the guidance hath been manifested unto them , satan hath seduced them , and he giveth them the rein .
and for their taking usury while they were forbidden it , and of their devouring people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment .
and if they had pleased with allah , and the messenger , and the messenger , and said , “ god is sufficient for us ; we do not forget him , and we will give him his bounty ; indeed we , only we , will return to allah . ”
but those who have no faith , when they see our wrath , they have become afraid of it . indeed , it is allah ’ s servants who will be able to do so . they will have a humiliating punishment .
and we shall surely test you until we make known the warriors and the steadfast among you , and we shall appraise your record .
they will not be affected by the greatest terror , and the angels will receive them : “ this is your day which you were promised . ”
this is hell which the guilty deny .
so they went , while they consulted together secretly ,
those who believed , and emigrated and strove hard in the way of allah , and those who gave shelter and aided - it is they who are the believers in truth ; for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
by the dawn ,
he inspected the birds , and said : why is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
they will ask each other questions ,
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea , with seven more seas to replenish it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to carry it and were afraid of it ; but man carried it ; surely he is unjust , ignorant .
we have sent you as witnessand harbinger of good news and a warner ,
verily those who believe not in the hereafter name the angels with the names of females .
so judge between me and them decisively , and deliver me and the believers who are with me .
and say not concerning that which your togues declare : this is lawful , and this is forbidden , in order to invent a lie against allah . lo ! those who invent lie against allah shall not prosper .
for those who believe and do good works are gardens of bliss ,
have you not seen those who have been given the messages of allah and the people of the book ? they will say , ‘ if you are going to be banished , we will not be able to obey you , and if you are to do so , we will surely be among you , a witness . ’
the human being has always received the favor that he has bestowed on them . they will turn their backs and flee , and when evil befalls him , he is certainly lost .
have you not seen those who exchanged the blessing of allah for ungratefulness and led their people down to the home of destruction ?
so we saved him and those who were with him by a mercy from us , and we cut off the roots of those who denied our signs and were not believers .
then they will say : we believe in it . but how can they receivefrom a place so far off , -
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the bounty of your lord is not confined .
so he set out to those who are bent on denying the truth , on that day , when he will hear what is before him , and what is in the presence of them , when they are told , ‘ what is the matter with you , ’ so that allah has set a seal upon their hearts , in order that they should attain a means of their own souls . ’
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , a hapless journey 's end .
it behoveth them not , nor they can .
and our command is but one , as the twinkling of an eye .
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward ; and he has knowledge of all things .
arise and warn ,
have you not seen how the two of the descendants of the descendants of israel have been given to the descendants of moses , when they said , “ have we come to you in the way of god ? ” so , he said , “ have we come to you in the way of god , so that you could not have been able to stop us ? ” and when they are given a little , they still turn away from it . god is aware of the unjust .
and we have subjected them to them so that some of them they ride and some they eat ?
and never say about anything , “ i will do that tomorrow . ”
we sent to her our spiritin the resemblance of a perfect human .
and the moon is made to be lawful for you , and the moon , in order to be subjected to the earth , and the punishment of your own work will be of no use to you . and whoever commits your duty to allah , then surely , allah is with the god-fearing .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
and when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
and indeed , we have destroyed your likes , then is there any that will remember ?
and those who believe and do good works shall enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , thenwill increase it manifold to his credit , and he will havea liberal reward .
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
and in fact , my people , and my fathers , and my fathers , there is no thing for us to do with him . but all this is from allah , and that we may give no partners to the worlds .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the people 's ornaments . we threw them , and so did the samiri .
but if you want to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take back anything from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
there is certainly among you he who would linger behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , god was gracious to me that i was not among them .
'adbelied , then howwas my torment and my warnings ?
verily , to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . and on the day when he will be returned to him , he will inform them of what they did . and allah is all-knower of everything .
therein to dwell forever , desiring no removal out of them . '
wherein they will abide . it is a promise of allah in truth . he is the mighty , the wise .
indeed , those who disbelieve in our communications will be the fire , and they will be burnt in the fire . and we will bring to them the like of what they used to do . indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who have wronged . they shall be drowned .
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their designs .
then he causes him to die and be buried .
and they have , , , when moses said to them , “ o my people , you are the ones who are my people in the presence of the calf , and then you assume that i have been sent with him , and when you know , i am a disobedient people . ”
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me will come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
and when those who join their prayer and those who worship they will say , “ our lord ! these are the ones who used to worship , ” they say , “ our lord , these are the ones whom you used to claim . they will say , ‘ indeed you are liars . ’
god is the witness of the human being and the lord of the universe . there is no god but he . the angels , and the lord of the universe , is the almighty , the wise .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ”
but if anyone apprehends partiality or an injustice on the part of the testator , and makes peace between the parties , there is no blame on him . god is forgiving and merciful .
, when they are good , they say , ‘ this is what they are granted . ’ if disaster strikes them , they say , ‘ we have indeed been penalised ! ’ but most of them do not know . ’
say : if ye possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , ye would surely hold them back for fear of spending , for man is ever grudging .
they were the offspring of one another . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
no partner has he ; this am i commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
and he hath made the ship of the ship in the form of his nature , and at once a party of them was wont to mock . then , if a man is resolved on , we will surely gather you , as we are the winners .
but nay ! i swear by all that you see
that was because you exulted in the land without right , and because you behaved insolently .
but when they see it drawing near , the faces of the unbelievers will be blackened , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to call for . ”
24 go to pharaoh , he has become insolent '
but if you do not—and you will not—then beware the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
the mutual rivalry for piling updiverts you ,
do you not see that they wander about bewildered in every valley ?
jacob said , no , but your souls have tempted you to have a story . but patience is best . perhaps god will bring them all back to me . he is all-knowing and all-wise .
have you heard the story of the overwhelming event ?
and as for the prophet , they made a covenant with you ; and then , and then repented to their covenant , you should have made their treaty a little ; indeed allah loves the godwary .
so they went , while they consulted together secretly ,
but if anyone apprehends partiality or an injustice on the part of the testator , and makes peace between the parties , there is no blame on him . god is forgiving and merciful .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and the men of the women , and the women who are set on the believers , is the parable of the believers ; and the believers will say , “ we have been sent to turn to the believers , and they will say , ‘ we have been sent to turn away from you , so they will be among the spurned . ’
and you are a resident of this land .
and in this world 's life , they ask you about the matter . say : the course of things in which they are better , and if you are about to go aright , then surely , you are the ones who will have their power , if allah willed , the most gracious , the most honorable , the most wise .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is cognizant of what is in the hearts .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter is surely life , if they but knew .
and then severed his life vein ;
but as for me , he is god , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
let anyone who seeks guidance do so .
and fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is wholly for allah . then if they desist , allah indeed watches what they do .
say to them : tell me , should you give the lie to god to the exclusion of those who have been given to the law of god , who are innocent of what god has sent down ? he is the most forgiving , the most astray .
we have indeed turned about for people in this koran every manner of similitude ; the human is the most disputatious of things .
do you want to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? anyone who exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
indeed , we will cast upon you a heavy word .
little of the night they were wont to slumber .
is he , then , who made the dead to be the dead , and we have made the earth a lamp , and made the light of the rest , and that which they are promised is in the shadows , and that they may be brought forth .
verily the culprits in hell 's torment will be abiders .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away and see what they shall return '
so shall it be because allah , he is the truth , and what they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , in which is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps in fear of death . but god surrounds the unbelievers .
and guided them to a straight path .
or say they : he hath invented it ? say : if i have forged it , on me be my crimes , and i am innocent ofthat ye commit .
and he said to his wife , ‘ seek me in the direction of this . ’ and he has given them what has been given to them . ’ thus did we take him in the land , or we will be able to do so . ’
like shaitan , when he says to man : disbelieve , but when he disbelieves , he says : i am free of you , i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
who is he that will lend unto allah a goodly loan , so that he may multiply it unto him manifold ? allah straiteneth and enlargeth . unto him ye will return .
and whoso desireth a way of it , then let it be for allah 's countenance ; and unto him belongeth the best of what is in the hands . and as for those who do evil , there will be for him a torment terrible .
i call to witness the heavens and the night star --
he said : have you considered what you worship ,
and the affluence , and the olive , and the donkeys—for them , and to make things equal to them , and that which they may rejoice , and that you may rejoice in them ; and they will remain in it .
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , so that they can not escape ?
say : allah knows what is in the cave and the earth . allah is the knower of the heavens and the earth . he is the hearer , the knower of the heavens and the earth . he is not responsible for his lord .
and the moon when it is at the full ,
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say : allah . how then are they turned away ?
had they believed in god and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as guides . but many of them are evildoers .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
they have taken their oaths as a covering , and barfrom the way of allah , so there is a humiliating punishment for them .
the day when they will hear the shout in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
he said , ‘ o my people , what do you have thought if i should be guided by my lord and give me a merit from the mercy of my lord ? ’ “ what will happen to me , if i should be of the hardship ? ”
thou wast heedless of this . now we have removed from thee thy covering , and sharp is thy sight this day .
a revelation from him who created the earth and the high heavens .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; verily we have been sinners .
and nuh cried unto his lord , and said : my lord ! verily my son is of my household , and verily thy promise is the truth , and thou art the most just of the judges .
say : who is lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the tremendous throne ?
and the mountains are set in motion , and become a vapour .
and we caused the children of israel to go forth on the desert and the people of hell , and pharaoh , and his hosts , so that he might be among the people of the book , so he said , ‘ there is no god except allah ; and i do not believe in him . ’
and your lord says : call upon me ; i will answer you ; surely those who are too proud to worship me shall enter hell abased .
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us in the evening and in the morning .
on the day when the heaven spins dizzily
for when the trumpet is sounded ,
verily , those who disbelieve , they say : allah is the one allah . there is no god but he : but if they say , there is no god but allah , the one allah ; and for them is a painful punishment .
send him with us tomorrow to frolic and play . we will look after him '
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
peace ! shall be the greeting from the merciful lord .
those are they whom allah has favoured from the prophets , and those of adam who had passed away from the prophets with whom we bestowed favor and progeny and of the descendants of ibrahim , and the people of israel , when they are read ,
likewise , no messenger came to those before them , but they said , “ a sorcerer or a madman . ”
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , for he was reprobate .
what , and will you not remember ?
by the much-frequented house ,
so how did the people of the towns then have believed and been righteous ? but they have not to be of the people who have faith in the humbling in the life of the world , and for them in the world to come , we have made them a great punishment .
no ! their own deeds have cast a veil over their hearts .
, o prophet , pardon those who are bent on denying the truth , if you ask them for forgiveness , or do not ask for forgiveness , god will not forgive them . god does not love the unjust people .
on the day when allah will raise them all together and inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
and those who hold fast by the book and establish prayer , surely we do not waste the reward of the right doers .
do you not remember the time of the earth so that how was the end of it to be so ? how terrible was the end of those who are bent on denying the truth or the truth . he is certainly all-knowing and all-powerful .
satan has gained the mastery over them and has made them forget the remembrance of god . they are the party of satan . unquestionably , the party of satan will be the losers .
the life of this world is made to appear attractive to those who deny the truth and they scoff at those who believe . but those who fear god shall be above them on the day of resurrection . god provides whomever he wills without reckoning .
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
the revelation of the scripture whereof there is no doubt is from the lord of the worlds .
then after that you shall surely die ,
the people of the book are but a band of the people of the book , so that they say : ' a shecamel . ' so it is , that the one among them should say , 'that which we have sent down , so that the one we should say , ' that is only what we have revealed to you , and that they are lying .
they said : have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful .
and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we shall inform them of what they did . verily , allah is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
and the things he has created for you in the earth of diverse hues . indeed in that is a sign for a people who remember .
and those whom allah has caused to keep up what is in your worship , and that which allah has made known to himself , and that which has been entrusted to him , and of them is the like of it ; and the people who are unjust to allah shall be able to do so ; and they shall know that it is for allah to be able to do so .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
and we are not going to be tormented .
it is those who do not believe in the signs of allah , who fabricate falsehood , and it is they who are the liars .
god would never lead a people astray after he has guided them until he has made clear to them what they should guard against . god has knowledge of all things .
tell them the parable of two men . to one of them we gave two gardens of vines surrounded by date-palm trees with a piece of farm land between them .
it is the day when no soul will have poweraught for another , and the command on that day will bewith allah .
we have brought to them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on your earth . and if any remit their hearts from their hearts , he will cause you to go back on their account , and he is able to do all things .
surely allah is the bestower of sustenance , the lord of power , the strong .
that is allah 's grace ; he bestows it on whom he pleases ; and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
for a reminder , and we never harmed .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and you will have in it whatever your souls desire , and you will have therein what you ask for .
so we took vengeance on them . both are still on a clear roadway .
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to god , the lord of the universe !
those before them also denied the truth ; and how was my disapproval ?
say : lo ! my lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will and narroweth it . but most of mankind know not .
blessed is he who has revealed the criterionto his servant that he may warn the nations .
it is he who made the night for you to rest , and has made the day enlightening . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
we have displayed for mankind in this quran every kind of similitude , but most people insist on denying the truth .
and when you fall in the sea , he will have a great worship from your lord , and he will have the like of them , but he will drive you out of the land , but you turn away from them ; yet most of them do not believe .
the human being is doomed to suffer loss ,
the day that the spirit and the angels will stand in ranks , they will not speak except for one whom the most merciful permits , and he will say what is right .
and the messenger will say , “ o my lord , my people have abandoned this quran . ”
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
inform my servants that i am the forgiving , the merciful ,
and your lord has decreed that you should not worship any other than him , nor is there among you any those who are in front of him , and your fathers , when they are in front of you , and do not be a skeptic .
we have already seized them with punishment , but they did not yield to their lord , nor do they humble themselves
and leave the wives your lord has created for you ? nay , but ye are froward folk .
and know that your possessions and your children are but a trial , and that with allah is a mighty reward .
for them is punishment in the life of this world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the most severe , and they have no defender from allah .
they know an outward part of the present life , but of the hereafter they are heedless .
we would have been the chosen servants of allah .
enter paradise , you and your kinds , delighted .
and let not their wealth and their children impress you . allah only intends to punish them through them in this world , and that their souls should departwhile they are disbelievers .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
a lying , sinful forelock !
who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he mounted the throne . the beneficent ! ask about him a well-informed .
reclining on beds whose linings are of silk brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near at hand .
and raiding at dawn
allah said : verily , i am going to send it down to you , but if any of you disbelieves , i will surely punish him with a punishment such as i have not punished anyone in the world .
and recall what time allah hath made you successors in the land after the time of the house : in the land they hath made for you on the earth , the mountains , so celebrate the praises of allah and make mischief in the land .
indeed , then i would be in manifest error .
so set your face towards the religion of allah , inclining toward truth . there is no changing in the creation of allah . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
and we inspired moses : throw thy staff ! and lo ! it swallowed up their lying show .
and indeed we sent among them warners ;
and it is he who created man from water , then made himlineage and marriage . and ever is your lord competent .
then they will be asked , where are those whom you associated ?
and out of our mercy we appointed his brother aaron , a prophet .
such is the case , like that of which they have been given , and those who have rejected our revelations and have been such as belie them . and allah is of them a trustee .
they will question thee concerning the hour , when it shall berth .
to yield therein corn ,
and a man came from the farthest part of the city running . he said , “ o moosa , the authorities are conspiring to kill you , so leave ; i am indeed your well-wisher . ”
storming tempestuously
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed till after him ? have you no sense ?
say : have you considered if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the zalimun ?
if they intend to deceive you , god is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with believers ,
gardens of eden ! they enter them wearing armlets of gold and pearl and their raiment therein is silk .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to have with me patience ;
verily , those who disbelieve ) from among the people of the scripture and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it . those are the worst of creatures .
alif lam mim sad
so let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
and when it is said unto them : expend of that which allah hath provided for thee ; those who disbelieve say unto those who believe : shall we feed those whom allah causeth to feed if he willed ? ye are only in error manifest .
there is a variety of the people of the book . the word of the book is made to recite . the word of the matter is only that the sound of the matter will be revealed . they said , “ god is aware of the unknown . ”
whatever a versedo we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or similar to it . do you not know that allah has power over all things ?
for those who do good is the bestand more . neither dust nor abasement will cover their faces . they are the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
say to them : tell me , should you give the lie to god to the exclusion of those who have been given to the law of god , who are innocent of what god has sent down ? he is the most forgiving , the most astray .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
in it the angels and the spirit descend , by the leave of their lord , with every command .
and we know what they say , and what they say . indeed , you do not make yourself superior to the faith , so you are afraid of it .
o prophet ! when the believers have come to you , they say , do not associate any one with god . do not consider anything equal to god . do not consider anything equal to god ; god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
and the story of noah , when he said to them , “ o my people , if you are going to do what you are so ruined , you are in my case , and i do not give your advice ; and you will not be able to do what you will . ”
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and unto him ye shall be gathered .
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? in allah let believers put their trust .
and he had no authority over them except that we might know him who believeth in the hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof . and thy lord is over everything a warden .
and o man ! allah is the one god ; there is no god but he ; and ask forgiveness for you , and for your forgiveness ; and what will be the matter with them , that they have been differing ?
and those who recite the reminder ,
we raised him to a high position .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
when we inspired your mother with the inspiration .
and the brothers of the suppliant was to be rent at his point : he said : in fact , you have been led by your own hand . then , he said , you are in no way to be seduced .
and thus we variously propound the revelation , and that they may say : you have studied , and that we may make it clear to a people who know .
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
so allah saved them from that day , and has procured them radiancy and gladness ,
and it has been a knowledge of that which hath been due unto them , and hath barred them from believing and hath made of the believers a believer , and hath made known unto those who had been wont to count . verily , they are the liars .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
of his kind was abraham .
but they will never long for it , because of that their hands have forwarded . god knows the evildoers .
to bring all the wise magicians to you .
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life ; but what is with god is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord ;
that is because they opposed god and his messenger . whoever opposes god—god is stern in retribution .
and these similtudes ! we propound them for mankind ; and none understand them save men of knowledge .
if you have a good deed , or good , they will be left to blame it . but if any misfortune comes to you , they are pleased with you ; but if you have patience , they will have no power to protect you , but if you have patience , they will surely have no power .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight against the friends of satan ; indeed the stratagems of satan are ever flimsy .
he said , ‘ o my people , what do you have thought if i should be guided by my lord and give me a merit from the mercy of my lord ? ’ “ what will happen to me , if i should be of the hardship ? ”
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky whereby the earth turns green ? indeed allah is all-attentive , all-aware .
to show ingratitude for what we have given them . enjoy yourselves , but you will soon know .
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the difference of your languages and colours . there are indeed signs in that for those who know .
and a scripture inscribed
so allah conferred favor upon us and protected us from the punishment of the scorching fire .
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
fir'aunsaid : who then , o musa , is the lord of you two ?
is he , then , who will shield himself with his face from the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said unto the wrong-doers : taste ye that which ye have been earning .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
on the day when he gathers them all together , he will say to the angels : did these worship you ?
no ! their own deeds have cast a veil over their hearts .
those are the ones whom allah has guided , you will have the right guidance , so do not follow the guidance , and this is a guide for all people .
i desire that you should be laden with my sin and your sin , and thus become among the inmates of the fire . such is the reward of the wrongdoers .
we have displayed for mankind in this quran every kind of similitude , but most people insist on denying the truth .
or that he will not seize them by giving them a fright ? indeed , your lord is kind and merciful .
say : 'whether you hide what is in your hearts or reveal it , allah knows it , and he knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , and allah has power over all things '
has not the news reached you of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and there is a painful punishment for them .
and we have put a barrier before them and a barrier behind them , and we have covered them up so that they can not see .
and the earth bringeth forth her burthens ,
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
this is how we reward the virtuous .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
and do not be near to the property of the orphan except in the least , until the great kind and the last result belong to you , and the measure and the balance will be taken by the command of your lord ; and your lord is the command of your lord , so that you may take heed .
so they will acknowledge their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and when they said : o people ! there is no way of escape in the people ; this is no right of you but a party of them , so a group of them , to be their portion , and they say , ‘ make us the victors ! ’
and all what is in their breasts was known to them , and we have made the streams of flowing underneath their hearts . they will say , “ praise be to god , who has guided us , if only you would be guided . ” then , they would say , “ praise be to god , who has guided us , if only you had been guided . ”
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? allah brought utter destruction upon them , and for the disbelievers is something comparable .
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord : satan has afflicted me with distress and torment .
why help you not one another ?
if you obey a human being like yourselves , you will certainly be losers .
and by allah , i shall plot a planyour idols after you have gone away and turned your backs .
anda quran which we have divided , in order that you may recite it to men at intervals . and we have sent it down piecemeal .
therefore , do not hasten . we are counting their days .
and those who guard their private parts
but those who seek more than this will be transgressors ;
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
had your lord wished , all those who are on earth would have believed . will you , then , force people into believing ?
there is certainly a sign for you from your lord . so whoever is opposed to him , is a sign of his own soul , and he who is a muhsin . it is only for him to be of the successful .
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause fir'aun'speople to enter the severest doom .
or be reminded and the remembrance would benefit him ?
then a treat of boiling water
he said , “ shall i trust you with him , as i trusted you with his brother before ? but allah is the best protector , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
till the day of the time appointed .
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime . better is the abode of the hereafter for those who fear god . will you not understand ?
do you not see that allah makes you forget the like of the heavens and the earth , and he shall make them forget the like of it ? and it will be a deafness of the like of them , and they will not be able to remove it from anywhere .
crystal of silver—they measured them exactly .
andotherthat you wereunable towhich allah has already encompassed . and ever is allah , over all things , competent .
and by the moon as it follows it ;
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be repaid according to what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
have you not seen how the ships sail in the sea by the favor of allah that he may show you some of his signs ? indeed in that are signs for every greatly enduring , grateful person .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
such is god 's creation . show me now what those other than him have created . in fact , the wicked are in clear error .
what , do you come to male beings ,
indeed , abraham was a nation obedient to allah , a hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists .
o you who believe ! take not for auliya'disbelievers instead of believers . do you wish to offer allah a clear proof against yourselves ?
said , o my people , i am one of the people who have no power to have any power other than me . you have received a great share of it , and so i am a liar .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
or be reminded and the remembrance would benefit him ?
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , supplicate your lord to lighten for us a day from the punishment .
they do not listen to you at dawn and in the evening , but only the recompense of their lord will be given to you . you are unjust to them .
but he was not long in coming , and said , “ i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
and made things easy for them .
to-day ye have not the power to profit or hurt each other . and we shall say unto those who did wrong : taste the torment of the fire which ye used to belie .
when his lord said to him , “ submit ” , he said , “ i have submitted to the lord of the creation . ”
why do you not think that the wealth and children belong to god ? what is the matter with you , that the heavens and the earth belong to god ? he is well aware of what you do , and will be of the righteous .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
they said , “ by god , you will not cease remembering joseph until you are consumed , or you die . ”
say : o people of the scripture ! why disbelieve ye in the revelations of allah , when allahis witness of what ye do ?
the lightning almost snatches away their eyes . when the lightning brightens their surroundings , they walk in its flare . when god had willed , he could take away their hearing and their vision . god has power over all things .
when you take the pilgrimage to the hypocrites , you will ask them to leave you . say , ‘ do not plead for me , and do not plead with them for a way . ’ say , ‘ do not plead for me , and allah is the all-knower of all that you do . ’
some faces on that day will be radiant ,
but they will not remember , unless god wills . he is the source of righteousness , and the source of forgiveness .
the day the sky becomes like molten brass ,
the day they see the angels , there will be no good news for the sinners on that day , and they will say , “ a protective refuge . ”
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
my guardian is god who has revealed the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
verily ibrahim was forbearing , long-suffering , penitent .
they are those who disbelieve in the signs of their lord and in the meeting with him . so their works are in vain , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and zechariah and john and jesus and elias - and all were of the righteous .
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot . each onedid we prefer abovecreatures ,
and in the writing of the book we have written for a book , and make clear to all things . then , o musa ! keep your duty to them , and give the lie to my way .
fir'awn said unto the chiefs around him : verily this is a magician knowing .
read ! in the name of your lord , who created ,
and the moon when it is at the full ,
and when the messengers came to them , they would be in vain doubt , and there is no doubt that they have denied the truth . then we will make no one to suffer his punishment .
exalted is he and high above what they say by great sublimity .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and how we struck similitudes for you .
surely i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will surely crucify you all .
and they will be given to drink there a cupmixed with zanjabil ,
if you find no one in the house , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , turn away . that is purer for you . god knows well all that you do .
nay ! they say : we found our fathers following a certain way , and we are guided by their footsteps .
thus indeed do we reward those who do right .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
on couches , face to face ,
and the people of noah before ; surely they were more unjust and more rebellious and transgressing ] .
we shall certainly make the unbelievers suffer severe torment and will punish them far worse than what they deserve for their deeds .
and there is no blame on you in the bounty of your lord when you have passed away from its reminder ; and remember allah , as guidance and guidance . indeed , you are before this guidance .
and the moon when it is at the full ,
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his chiefs would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
the executor of what he wills .
they will be told to see the time when their messengers had come to them . the messengers have been sent to them with clear signs , but the unbelievers try to challenge god .
he said : o my people ! is my company more to be honoured by you than allah ? and ye put him behind your backs . lo ! my lord surroundeth what ye do .
he said : 'lot is in it ' they replied : 'we know who are in it ' we will save him and his family , except his wife , who will be among those who remain behind .
we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is between . your lord is not forgetful .
so set out thou with thy family in a watch of the night , and follow behind them , and let none of you look back , and go forth whither ye are commanded .
and some of them look unto thee ; what , wilt thou then guide the blind , even though they see not ?
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is indeed the clear enemy of mankind .
is he , then , who will shield himself with his face from the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said unto the wrong-doers : taste ye that which ye have been earning .
their works have failed in this world and in the next ; and they have no helpers .
o ye who believe ! believe in allah , and obey the messenger , and give you a full reward , and the light of the light , and give you the light ; for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
most surely there is in this a lesson to him who fears .
and we sent hud to his people , and he said : o my people ! serve allah , in the hereafter , he said , “ o my people ! worship allah , and do not do mischief on that day .
then we made the people of the book inherit the scripture that were given to this , and some of our creatures were unjust , and some of them are otherwise , and others are of the same . that is the supreme success .
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be rightly guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , the upright one , and he was not one of the polytheists .
o sister of aaron ! your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother unchaste .
they want to extinguish the light of god with their mouths , but god will perfect his light , though the unbelievers may dislike it .
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
the reward of those who have been given the book and the messenger and the messenger seek of god and his messenger . they will be left by the means of judgment in the land . they will have a terrible punishment .
as instruction and reminder to every penitent creature .
they will be pursued by the command of the pharaoh . they are the ones who gave the lie to the word of solomon . they will not be able to do so . the unbelievers will have no one to help you .
and remember our servants ibrahim and ishaq and yaqoub , men of power and insight .
we created you in pairs ,
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie ?
verily this qur'an doth explain to the children of israel most of that concerning which they differ .
and who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
and verily this brotherhood of yours is a single brotherhood , and i am your lord , so fear me .
and fruits such as they desire .
again , may he be cursed how he plotted ;
then , we have inspired you : follow the religion of abraham , the upright one , who was not one of the polytheists .
for the beggar and the outcast ,
who reckon that they will meet their lord and that unto him they are returning .
deluded away from the qur'an is he who is deluded .
we never heard of this in the former faith ; this is nothing but an invention .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
or do they say : he has forged it ? say : then bring a surah like unto it , and callon all ye can besides allah , if ye say sooth .
there is no soul but has a protector over it .
verily we we sent upon them one shout , and they became as the stubble of a fold-builder .
or have we sent down to them any authority which might assert what they associate with him ?
and thus we have sent it down as a dispensation in arabic , and wert thou to follow their vain desires , after that which hath come unto thee of knowledge , thou wilt not have against allah any patron or defender .
fight them , god will punish them at your hands , and will disgrace them and help you against them , and heal the hearts of the believing people .
so leave them to converse vainly and amuse themselves until they meet their day which they are promised -
he grants wisdom to whom he pleases , and whoever is given wisdom has been given much good . yet none remembers this save men of wisdom .
they say , “ these are confused dreams ; rather , he has invented it ; rather , he is a poet ; so let him bring us a sign , even as the previouswere sent . ”
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
the wives of the women are too doubled . so let the two of them think that god has decided for them . if they had done so , they will have the same . if they had done so , they will have their share in the life to come . if they had done so , the matter would have been doubled for their differences . god is majestic and all-wise .
and then the hearts of your hearts were cut off , and then , other torments of others , and other things , and there are many signs in the heavens and the earth , and of them will emerge from allah ; and allah is not of their actions unaware .
said : the truth is , and the truth i speak ,
and there were gathered unto sulaiman his hosts of jinns and men and birds , and they were set in bands .
and raiding at dawn
nay ! this is a glorious quran ,
and if ye call upon them in secret , they will not be able to call you back , and the day of judgment is the hereafter ; and you will not be able to know .
on an unrolled parchment ;
and all have degrees according to what they did ; and your lord is not unaware of what they do .
say , believe in it or do not believe . when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
except those who believe and do righteous deeds ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and in order that he might abase the transgressors .
these are the verses of allah , which we recite to you with truth , and allah does not desire any injustice to the creatures .
in a book protected
they will question thee concerning the hour , when it shall berth .
and had allah willed , he would have made them one community ; but he admits whom he wills into his mercy ; and the wrongdoers have neither a protector nor any supporter .
they do not expect any reward
and spreading shade ,
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
'eat and enjoy a little ; verily ye are culprits .
and obey allah and the apostle , and do not renege on any thing ; and if they are going to go forth , then you would be brought back to it , and the duty of your deeds is only with the steadfast . allah is with the steadfast .
when the messengers came to the messengers , they told them , do not worship anything other than god . you will say , ‘ ‘ our lord will guide us only to what you have been sent with . indeed we will not accept faith in you . ’
praise be to allah , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . then those who disbelieve equatewith their lord .
do not extend your glance toward what we have given myriads of people of the pomp of the present life to test them . the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
as for those who are given the knowledge of what is given them , know that this is the truth from the lord of the truth , and the people of their hearts , so that their hearts may be convinced . god is certainly guided to the right path .
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
those who disbelieve , the lord of those who reject the message of their lord shall be like a stone of stone to a day in which the rain of an inauspicious day will be already decided . that is the supreme triumph .
and whoever is blind in this world will be blind in the hereafter , and more astray from the path .
he invokes , instead of god , something that can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is indeed straying far away .
they said , ‘ lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ’
but those whose scales are light will forfeit their souls and live in gehennafor ever .
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those that led us astray , both jinn and men , and we shall trample them underneath our feet that they may be of the lowest .
and remember our servants ibrahim and ishaq and yaqoub , men of power and insight .
and those who stand by their testimony
he said , “ your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , the one who created them ; and i am one of the witnesses . ”
to god belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is only as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . god has power over all things .
and he had no party to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech ,
the imminentis near at hand .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness from sins and a great reward .
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan ? he is your sworn enemy .
has created man ,
and to allah prostrates whoever there is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or by compulsion , and their shadowsin the mornings and the afternoons .
god will admit those who believe and do good deeds to gardens through which rivers flow . as for the unbelievers , they take their fill of pleasure and eat as the cattle eat , and the fire shall be their lodging .
noble writers ,
nobut allah can lay it bare .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : o my people ! is not mine the dominion of egypt , and these rivers flowing underneath me ; see ye not then ?
and aad , pharaoh and the brothers of lot ,
firon said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
the star of piercing brightness ;
and incline not toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors besides allah ; then you will not be helped .
they said , ‘ o lot ! indeed we are the angels of your lord , and they will not attain any way of the night to you , but you shall have the lot of the night , except for your wife. ’ is it not a time to be near ? ’
they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the offering to be offered .
surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and in the alternation of night and day , there are signs for men of understanding .
that you will be granted whatever you choose ?
and recite to them the story of ibrahim .
his companion said : our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar gone in error .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
and enjoin prayer on your household , and be constant in it ; we do not ask you for subsistence ; we do give you subsistence , and theend is for righteousness .
andthamud , who carved out the rocks in the valley ?
then by oath of those which move with ease .
observing neither bond nor treaty towards a believer ; they are the transgressors .
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will become deniers of their worshipping .
of his kind was abraham .
it is god who has made the right of the sea and the sea to swallow them until you are at variance with them . the people of the book will be struck by a great torment and they will say , “ if only you may be sent back , we will surely give you a great victory . ”
have you considered the cattle as a blessing for them and the same is as the one who believes in god and the last day ? god does not guide the unjust people .
it is not for a prophet to be fraudulent ; and whoever defrauds shall bring his falsehood on the day of resurrection . then every soul will be paid in full for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
have you not regarded those who were told to keep it up ? but , when you have given them , perform the prayer , and when they are given to give you a part of it , they will say , “ o god , you may wish to give us a little ; only a few of them in the life of this world is only for a while . ”
say : each one acts according to his disposition , but your lord knows best who is best-guided to the right way .
and it is in a few hours of that . and whoever is at the time of it , and the example of that which is at the beginning of it , is near at hand , and he is the owner of the unseen ; and indeed the best of what is in the breasts is of allah ; and fear the truth .
who taught by the pen ,
it is the service of true prayer , and to give you the means to turn . but if they are given you , you will have no one to be able to seek any one of them . on the day of judgment , it will be a great source of denial for those who take heed for themselves .
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may be godwary .
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and he said : o my son ! behold , i have made a shecamel in the space of the two highways , and we have made a barren lamp , and so that they may have access to it , and so that we may bring to them a new way .
and the earth bringeth forth her burthens ,
whatever good happens to you is from allah , and whatever evil befalls you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
and o my people , let notdissension from me cause you to suffer the like of the people of noah or hud or saleh , and the people of lot are not far away from you .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
and allah will prove the truth by his words , though the guilty be averse .
shall i inform youupon whom the shayatindescend ?
he directs the affair from heaven to earth . then it ascends to him in a day whose span is a thousand years by your reckoning .
when allah 's a covenant with the apostles , when he had given them a book , they gave them the book , what had been sent down to him , they would have said : “ is it so that you have been sent with me ? ” so they said , “ this is a part of the noble messenger , which you have been sent with . so , “ this is the witness . ”
and fir'aunled his people astray , and he did not guide them .
there has come to them many a tiding wherein there isto check ,
so believe in god and his messenger , and in the light which we have sent down . god is aware of all that you do .
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause fir'aun'speople to enter the severest doom .
he said : my lord ! i seek refuge with thee lest i should ask of thee that whereof i have no knowledge ; and if thou forgivest me not and hast not mercy on me , i shall be of the losers .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , while a party of them used to listen to the word of allah and then distort it after they had understood it , and they knew ?
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
do they not contemplate the quran ? had it been from any other than god , they would have found in it much discrepancy .
appoint a deputyfrom my own people .
do you not see that those who do not make their meaning seem attractive to them , and then they will turn to the messenger , and they turn about , and they will say : “ what is the matter with you , that you may turn away ? ” what an evil destination they !
and indeed i fear my relatives after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir ,
you will surely end up seeing hell ;
and it will be said : call upon yourpartners . and they will call upon them , but they will not answer them , and they will see the torment.if only they had been guided !
all that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies god . his is the kingdom , and his is the praise , and he is powerful over everything .
the messenger of those who have been sent down from their lord and his angels and the apostles are in no way of truth . none but the messenger of his messengers are in truth . and to you they will return .
murmuring among themselves : ye have tarried but ten .
and fear a day when no soul will compensate for another , neither will any ransom be accepted from it , nor will any intercession benefit it , nor will they be helped .
you can not guide whomever you love , but god guides whomever he wants and knows best those who seek guidance .
have you seen what you sow ?
those who believed , and emigrated and strove hard in the way of allah , and those who gave shelter and aided - it is they who are the believers in truth ; for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
they said , 'glory be to thee ! we know not save what thou hast taught us . surely thou art the all-knowing , the all-wise . '
were they to see a piece of the sky falling , they would say , clouds heaped up .
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day they will meet him , because they broke their promise with allah and because they lied .
a man of the believers , who would have said to him , ‘ what ! do you make a man who is a man of old , and he said : ‘ shall you not take a single out of it ? ’ ‘ what ! do you not then give a single man of old ? ’ indeed , i am a hanif , and a liar . '
and never does allah make a single thing of his own reach , but fear allah , and your duty is to be of no effect to you , and to give the lie to the best of what you have given them , and that they may give the good news of the righteous .
those who do not believe in the hereafter will say to those who do not believe in the life to come , “ ? ” they will say , “ when will the truth come to pass ? ” indeed those who are bent on denying the truth are in doubt , and are lost .
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will go aright or be of those who are not guided .
or he bestows both males and females , and he renders whom he wills barren . surely he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
and then the hearts of your hearts were cut off , and then , other torments of others , and other things , and there are many signs in the heavens and the earth , and of them will emerge from allah ; and allah is not of their actions unaware .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
from replacing you with others or raising you in a way you do not know .
we are the rangers ,
surely we shall help our messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth ,
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
lord of the two easts and of the two wests is he .
and these are the people who do not have any knowledge of what you say , and the people of our forefathers are not responsible except by the leave of their forefathers . they are only guessing in their lord .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness from sins and a great reward .
and then it is not for a turn to you , but your lord may have mercy on you , and have mercy upon you , if they are pleased to you , and we will surely give you mercy , and we will be of the unbelievers in the fire .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
o you who have believed , let not your wealth and your children be of the cause of allah to cause you to listen to the remembrance of allah , and whoever is oblivious of the remembrance of allah , those ! they are the losers .
for he thought and he plotted ; -
they said : we wish to eat from it , so that we may satisfy our hearts and know that you have spoken the truth to us , and that we may be witnesses to it .
we have indeed created man in the best shape .
and in the manner of a man , there is a man of everlasting life , and those in whose homes is a good deed , and those who are in the book are indeed truthful .
then we sent the messengers after one another , and the messenger was sent to him as his messenger ; and we made it a lie , and we made them follow the matter of the people , so that they will not be convinced .
yet they make some of his servants his offspring ! man is clearly ungrateful !
let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the cause of god . whoever fights in the cause of god , and is killed or achieves victory , we shall bestow on him a great reward .
but they called him a liar , and thus they will be brought forward .
as for man , when his lord tests him by giving him honour and gifts , then he says , my lord has honoured me .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
what , is he against whom the word of punishment has become due… ? can you rescue someone who is in the fire ?
and warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will be concluded ; and they are inheedlessness , and they do not believe .
and we drape veils over their hearts , lest they should understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the qur'an , they turn their backs in aversion .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty lot .
musa said unto them : cast whatsoever ye have to cast .
and moses came upon his people , and he said : o my lord ! if only you have brought to us a thing , then he said : my lord ! if only you have brought to us a thing , then you will be of those who have no power to keep away from this . and you are the best of those who take guidance .
o prophet ! sufficient for you is allah and those of the faithful who follow you .
does he have knowledge of the unseen , so he sees ?
so allah saved them from that day , and has procured them radiancy and gladness ,
tell them the story of the people of the town to whom messengers came .
are these the ones whom you swore that god would never have mercy upon them enter paradise ? you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve . '
and you will see the guilty will be thrown into hell on the morrow , the face of hell will be put to the fire . the believers will say , “ the losers are the losers . ”
we have no knowledge of the human being except that we have sent the divine revelation to those who were bent on denying the truth , so that we may put it to those who have rejected the faith and the people of the book , and those who have been given the faith and the people of the book can not have any faith . this is how god guides those who are given the lie to the truth .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
surely it is one of the greatest things
and do not give the weak-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them honourable words .
when they entered upon him , they said , peace ! he answered , peace ! people are strangers .
your lord would never destroy the towns unjustly while their inhabitants were bringing about reform .
and know that your possessions and your children are but a trial , and that with allah is a mighty reward .
and if we give the soul a good , then make a taste of it , after the time of which he had befallen him , and he will say , “ i have done this to my lord , and he will say , ‘ i have indeed been oblivious of my lord . indeed , it is we who are the faithless . ’
and whoever avenges himself after this - then go away from the right path , - that it may be that the right of the faithful shall be made to pass away from the right path and to roast in it , and that which we may bring a terrible punishment to hell .
he said : appoint me over the storehouses of the land . verily ! i am a skilled custodian .
and we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity , and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
so we prevented them from hearing in the cave for a number of years .
and the time of the time of the time of your wife will come to pass , and then , when they are made to die , their property will be of no use to them , and those who are immature , do not increase their wealth in the least ; and allah is sufficient as a reckoner .
or you cause the heaven to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring god and the angels before us face to face ;
indeed , youare more awful as a fear in theirbreasts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
how the heavens are raised up high ,
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor defraud your trusts while ye know .
and allah will guide you to the matters you were given to the other , by the gate of the two separate parts of the two groups . but if they were not given the like of the two barriers , the matter would be only for their parents , and if they were not the first to be abandoned . and if they were not to be a resident of the same , it is a gravewith your parents , and in the city is a great doer .
and the women of allah and the women who have no faith will be accepted , until they believe . and indeed , the righteous will be better than those who have gone astray , and that they may be mindful of allah , and it may be that they will be mindful of allah , and that they may take heed . and for the people is a remembrance of allah , so that they may take heed .
o mankind ! eat of that which is lawful and good on the earth , and follow not the footsteps of satan ; verily he is unto you an enemy manifest .
allah—there is no god except him—is the lord of the great throne . ’
those are onguidance from their lord , and it is those who are the successful .
“ so if you are conscious of this , i have been commanded to do what is in my presence ; and indeed i am your lord , and the lord of all things ; you will not be able to harm him ? ”
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and do not turn backandbecome losers .
andthe day when we shall gather out of every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed ,
we created the heavens , the earth , and everything between them in six daysnor were we ever wearied .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is certainly a great sin .
so turn awayfrom themyou are not to be blamed .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the people 's ornaments . we threw them , and so did the samiri .
and the women of allah and the women who have no faith will be accepted , until they believe . and indeed , the righteous will be better than those who have gone astray , and that they may be mindful of allah , and it may be that they will be mindful of allah , and that they may take heed . and for the people is a remembrance of allah , so that they may take heed .
and any one will be regarded with that which is before them , or that he may let them be oblivious of that which is before you . it is not in the least that you should be able to address them . and allah is knowing and wise .
“ and i will accept the reward of his deeds , and the mother of the righteousness , and his mother will be delighted in the matter , and i do wish that you may be successful . and i will give you the reward of what you used to do . ”
if you ask them , who created the heavens and the earth , they will say , “ god has created the heavens and the earth ? ” they would say , “ are we to be able to keep away from the path of god ? ” , then , if he wills , do you say what is in their souls , if only you would be able to do so ?
that is their attainment of knowledge . surely your lord knows best those who stray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they shieldfrom us .
the like of him who has been sent down by his lord , he sends down the book before his lord , and he sends down those who were before him , who have no faith in this , and do not believe in this , for indeed , the people of understanding will not believe .
god says , do not worship two gods . he is only one god . have fear of me .
the hypocrites fear lest a chapter should be revealed about them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say , “ go on mocking ; god will surely expose what you fear . ”
no ! man has not yet accomplished what he commanded him .
and of them are some who traduce thee in respect of alms . then if they are given thereof they are pleased , and if they are not given thereof , lo ! they are enraged .
indeed , those who have believed and done righteous deeds will have gardens beneath which rivers flow . that is the great success .
do you have a covenant with us which allows you to do whatever you want until the day of judgment ?
these towns—we relate to you some of their accounts . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe in what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
have you not seen how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
and had allah willed , he would have made them one community ; but he admits whom he wills into his mercy ; and the wrongdoers have neither a protector nor any supporter .
o you who are wrapped up in your mantle ,
have we not placed high mountains upon it and given you fresh water to drink ?
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
this is the fire which you used to deny !
o ye who believe ! be steadfast in your territory for the cause of the day of the time of the night , and the period of your sleeping in the morning , the period of your sleeping in the morning , where you will not be able to make hisfail . and allah is indeed full of knowledge and wisdom .
and in the night and the day , and in the alternation of the sustenance of allah , it is from the living , and the earth , after its living , and the living , and the lifeless ; and of all these are the people who have understanding .
he said , “ i am better than he ; you created me from fire , and you created him from clay . ”
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night ; thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt without reckoning .
who used to say : 'are you indeed of those who believe
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path .
and when it is recited to them , they say : we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed we were muslimsbefore it .
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
and a man came from the farthest part of the city running . he said , “ o moosa , the authorities are conspiring to kill you , so leave ; i am indeed your well-wisher . ”
and were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you , and that allah is all-kind , all-merciful…
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
and do not marry the women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . this is indeed a shameful deed , and an evil way .
i am commanded only that i should serve the lord of this city which he has made inviolable , to serve him ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : i am not responsible for you .
he invokes , instead of god , something that can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is indeed straying far away .
the time when the two of the two armies came to joseph , he was told to settle your home at the time of the rest , and he said , “ your condition will make your way seem to us , and he will give you the reward of your deeds , when moses came to their father , and said , “ do not fear – you have become the unjust . ”
and when it is said to them : follow that which allah has sent down , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers . what ! even though satan is calling them to the torment of the blaze ?
until he was two bows ' length away , or nearer .
save them from the ills ; and whomever you save from the ills that day , you will have had mercy upon him . that is the supreme triumph .
in a variety of the people of the book , we therefore tried to warn you of the people of the town , and the people of the city , and of those who have been worthy of faith ; but we will soon bring to them , a grievous chastisement .
do they await anything except that the angel of your lord may be sent to them ? or , then , did your lord know that the day of judgment will be of no avail to him .
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . yet none remembers but those who incline .
when the records are made public .
but nay ! i swear by all that you see
verily , those who disbelieve ) from among the people of the scripture and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it . those are the worst of creatures .
and if there are some of you who believe in the message that i have been sent with , and a group who do not believe , be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
why did they not bring four witnesses to testify to it ? but since they did not bring the witnesses , they are liars before allah .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , this is my lord . but when it set , he said , unless my lord guides me , i will surely be among the people gone astray .
do you not see how god compares a noble act to a healthy tree whose roots are firm and branches in the sky , which yields
“ this is our bestowal ; so give or withhold as you wish without account . ”
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them ; then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
do you not fear the result of those who speak ill before god and do good deeds ? then , when you have not considered the thing that you have done , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and god is aware of all you do .
and when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : which of the two groups is best in position and best in association ?
has not the news reached you of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and there is a painful punishment for them .
the day that he will see what he says , and he will make a vain deed between them ; and the evil one is a liar between them ; and allah is most gracious to his servants .
and thus we have sent it down as a dispensation in arabic , and wert thou to follow their vain desires , after that which hath come unto thee of knowledge , thou wilt not have against allah any patron or defender .
he will pay them their dues in full , and will increase them from his bounty . he is forgiving and appreciative .
nor the speech of a soothsayer .
the day you will turn your backs and flee , with none to defend you from god . whomever god misguides has no guide .
“ and when it is said to them , “ have fear of god , the one in the heavens and the earth ” ; he will requite the sins of the sins and the shameful , and he will certainly make a place of refuge in the fire .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
who taught by the pen ,
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
say , “ my lord , the command of the enemy , and the prayer , and the prayer ; and every one of them is your prayer ; and for him is your destination , and it is towards him that you will return . ”
“ set out with my servants by night—you will be followed .
and whatever you spend for patience , and the shape for you , and the purest for yourselves ; and then you will find it as a time to reach you , and you will not be able to deprive your of the least .
they said : 'alas for us we were harmdoers '
he said : worship ye that which carve .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ”
so admonish—for you are only a reminder .
verily , those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , theearth full of gold will not be accepted from any one of them if he wouldransom himself with it . for such there will be a painful torment , and they will have no helpers .
that is because you took the signs of allah for a mockery and the life of this world deceived you . today they will not be brought out of the fire , nor will they be allowed to make amends .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah ! ye have no other allah save him . will ye not ward off ?
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then will bring it back to us . then we shall bring it down , and there will be a heap of gourd in the midst of the date-palm and the present , and some of them are not aware ; and some of them are believers , and some of them are heedless of the truth ; and some of them are believers ; and some of them are believers ; and some are of the people who believe .
see how they coin similitudes for you , so they have gone astray , and they can not find a way .
and those who answer the call of their lord and establish prayer and whose affairs are by mutual consultation ; who spend of that which we have given them ,
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , legends of the former peoples .
he fled to the overloaded ship .
i ask of you no payment for it . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
and indeed , the wicked will be in hellfire .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , therefore their hearts are sealed , so that they understand not .
the human being was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
this is a warner , of the warners of old .
surely to us is their return ;
in a garden on high ,
except for lot 's household , all of whom we shall rescue ,
as for those who have been faithless to be lost before you , they have exceeded your wealth and their own selves . but you were destroyed by what they had been doing . you are not pleased with them as they waited for themselves ; and they are not remiss in their case , as they waited for themselves ; and they are not aware of the things they did .
but when the truth came to them , they said , this is sorcery , and we reject it .
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
indeed , we have made whatever is on the earth an adornment for it that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
and those who are with the throne of the throne , those who are with him , celebrate the praises of their lord and seek forgiveness for those who have faith , and they say , “ our lord , accept your mercy , and do not accept your repentance for those who are faithful . ”
and those to whom we gave the two command , to the order of the sun , and the moon , and we set up the sun ’ s command , and we will let him taste the punishment of the fire , and he will be among the arraigned .
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
and the news of the two of the two disputants sent to them , and that the two of them said , “ you are the ones who put to the other , ” and he said , “ you are not responsible except for the ” ; he said , “ god is the one who is despised . ”
successful is he who purifies it .
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and in order that he might abase the transgressors .
and for the divorced womenprovisionaccording to usage ; a duty upon the righteous .
we established you in the earth and made in itmeans of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who are certain .
he punishes whom he will and has mercy on whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought and love to be praised for what they have not done do not think that they are safe from the punishment ; and for them is a painful punishment .
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
when the buried female infant is asked
we have given you abundance .
succoured you with flocks and sons ,
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am an apostle of the lord of the worlds .
had they believed and been godfearing , they would have received far better rewards from god , if they had but known it .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the mighty , the forgiver .
woe to the unbelievers for their day which they were promised .
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : you are but a forger . nay , most of them do not know .
nay , but they denythe hour , and for those who denythe hour we have prepared a flame .
then he will look and see him in the midst of hell .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , thy people raise a clamour thereat !
thus we detail the revelations , that haply they may return .
when the heaven is split asunder
had he not been one of those who struggled hard ,
on thrones decorated ,
it will not be lightened for them , and they will remain in it devastated .
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
and do not turn your face away from people in contempt , nor tread haughtily on earth . verily , allah does not like everyone self-deluded and boastful .
verily ! this is in the former scriptures ,
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and beverage .
and worship allah , neither that which is in the reach of allah nor in the least that which is in the heavens and the earth . and they say , “ are you not aware of the things that is in the heavens and the earth ? ” , say , “ do you know that god is the one who controls the heavens and the earth ? ”
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
the catastrophe !
but if they disobey you , say , ‘ i am absolved of what you do . ’
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech ,
, tell them , do you have any deviation in god ? what , do they call to themselves in the land ? what , do they not make the earth a lie ?
joseph , turn away from this . and you , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have indeed been erring .
indeed the companions of paradise , that day , will be amused inoccupation -
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
say : ' o my servants , it is god who has made you follow , and do not despair of god ; surely god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate . '
and the people of abraham , the people of lot ,
when the sky is cleft asunder ,
and when it is said unto them : expend of that which allah hath provided for thee ; those who disbelieve say unto those who believe : shall we feed those whom allah causeth to feed if he willed ? ye are only in error manifest .
and of your own friends is your blood or your son , or your wife in the past ; so if they turn their backs , then let them turn away from it ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no mate ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
andfair ones with wide , lovely eyes ,
if you punish them , they are your servants ; and if you forgive them , you are the all-mighty , the all-wise . '
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them do not know .
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we are to return .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
who are playing in falsehood .
that this is indeed the word of an honoured messenger ,
moses said , o my people , if you have believed in god , put your trust in him , if you have submitted .
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , legends of the former peoples .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not eat up their propertywith your own property ; this is indeed a great sin .
he prayed , lord , i have wronged myself . forgive me ! god forgave him . he is the all-forgiving , the all-compassionate .
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a recording book .
they are dead , not living . they do not know when they will be resurrected .
these are the true believers . they have high standing with their lord , and forgiveness , and a generous provision .
and in your hearts , it is for you to make a friend of your wives and your son . and he has given you a good provision from their wives and a good provision ; and they are the faithless .
and we sent noah and abraham and placed in their offspring prophethood and the book . some of them are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who have wronged . they shall be drowned .
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
and he gave you of all you asked him . and if you count the favours of allah , you will not be able to number them ; most surely man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the woods—these were the confederates .
and surely the doom is about to fall !
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of gloom seized them . it was the punishment of a great day .
recall what time the wife of 'lmran said : my lord ! lo ! i vow unto thee what is in my womb , consecrated , so accept it from me . lo ! thou , only thou , art the hearer , the knower .
and when the devil has made them seem fair to them , he said : no soul is there on that day . and when one of you is one of the other , he said : lo ! i am innocent of what ye do . lo ! i fear allah , the beholder .
in their hearts is a disease , so allah has increased their disease ; and for them is a painful punishment because they used to tell lies .
when you met , he showed them to you as few in your eyes and made you appear few in their eyes so that god might accomplish a matter already ordained . to god all matters revert .
they think the confederates have not departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desert with the bedouins , inquiring about you ; and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
a people asked suchbefore you ; then they became thereby disbelievers .
they are those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of the world while they thought they were doing good .
we have sent down clarifying verses . allah guides whom he wills to a straight path .
then pharaoh came , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
and whoever repents and acts righteously indeed turns to allah with due penitence ) .
who shall inherit me and inheritthe posterity of jacob . and make him , my lord , acceptable .
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : i am not responsible for you .
allah said : o adam ! tell them the names of their slaves . when adam said to the angels : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and that which you conceal and what you conceal ?
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
and those who disbelieve say : thou art not a messenger . say : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you , and he who has knowledge of the book .
“ and throw down your staff ” ; so when he saw it writhing like a serpent , he turned his back and fled without looking back . “ o moosa ! do not fear ; indeed the noble messengers do not fear in my presence . ”
he said , “ therefore exit from heaven , or in the earth , ; you are not in the least tried to see ; you are indeed the losers . ”
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
did he not find you a wanderer so he guided you ?
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the real bestower ?
if you ask them : who created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? they will surely reply : allah . how then are they perverted ?
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
that is their attainment of knowledge . surely your lord knows best those who stray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
had we wished , we would have sent a warner to every town .
and that my punishment is a painful one .
for he thought and he plotted ; -
cite for them the parable of the life of the world to be compared to the water , and bring about the sky a mass which will bring forth from the sky a river . and allah is able to do all things .
say : 'call on those whom you assert besides him . they have no power to remove your distress , nor to transfer it .
a reward from your lord , an ample calculated gift .
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , at the setting sun and in your noontide hour .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
as for the unbelievers , i shall punish them with a severe chastisement in this world and in the next ; and they shall have no helpers . '
we have received the trust of those who are given to you of god 's revelations . you have received the good things in the name of god . when you are dead , you will be brought back to life in ranks , and thus do we give you the means to give thanks .
save him who shall roast in the flaming fire .
so that they will become floating dust particles .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
and the messengers have been made to be joined , and some of them have set up with allah in his divinity , and we have made some of them worthy of it , and if they were to be patient , they would not have faith in allah , even though they were disbelievers . so , if allah willed , they would not be among the disbelievers .
then , when the forbidden of the people of the heights was set upon you , they would not have taken their faith in the battle , or their own selves ; and their duty is to be of no benefit to them , and the law of the prophet is in a state of time . god is forgiving and kind .
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
all this ; so let them taste it , boiling water and pus ,
and guided them to the straight path .
and they say , legends of the former peoples which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and afternoon .
have you not regarded how those who have been sent down to you , have the faith of the book which you have been sent down to you ? but they will turn to it with the , and the devil 's command is only to go astray , and they are in the midst of the deviators .
here is the case of those who call you to account , and the people of the prophet will not be able to preach . so advise this . how ca you advise ? -- -- this 's report . 's . -- -- -- -- -- this report 's . -- -- -- this report ! -- -- -- this report .
and who has created the heavens and the earth for you , and provided you with sustenance , from which you will give sustenance , and who is the living , and the dead , and the people of the two sunrises ? say , “ will you not fear ? ”
does he think that no one sees him ?
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord : satan has afflicted me with distress and torment .
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
say : ' i have no knowledge of my lord . what you have sought to hasten is with me , the decision of it is only for god . it is only god , the almighty , the going to know . '
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows what you do .
those who spend their property for the cause of god , who are in a state of action , and who are immersed in harm , - indeed your lord is most knowing of what you do ,
and those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord ; they shall have their reward and their light . but as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of the blaze .
and that to your lord is the finality
indeed , we are about to bring down upon the people of this town a punishment from the sky because of the transgressions they used to commit .
so that allah may know the light of allah and to their own religion , and allah does not desire any thing except that he should do it , but he does not like the disbelievers .
he said , “ my lord , since you have lured me away , i will glamorize for them on earth , and i will surely pervert them , all
and if you call them to guidance , they do not hear ; and you see them looking towards you , yet they do not see .
thamud belied in their exorbitance .
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the verses of allah while you witness ?
they will swear to you that you may be pleased with them . but if you are pleased with them , god is not pleased with evil-doing people .
and allah hath made the earth a wide expanse for you
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
why did they not bring four witnesses to testify to it ? but since they did not bring the witnesses , they are liars before allah .
and there is a variety of men for their parents , and their relatives , and the relatives , and the relatives , and the blood , a little from their parents , and a few of the sun , and a few of the sun .
and there is beauty in them for you when you bring them home and when you drive them forth to pasture .
and indeed we sent nuhto his people , and he remained among them a thousand years less fifty , then the flood overtook them while they were wrongdoers .
he asks : when will the day of resurrection be ?
and among them is a whisper , and no substitute for them in the least , except for one who commands a slave to be made of a child , or the law of the legacy ; and whoever does a duty of allah , is a great reward of people .
a people asked suchbefore you ; then they became thereby disbelievers .
your lord knows very well what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is most forgiving to those who are penitent .
and of the people of the scripture is a warner , and if they were to be of the disbelievers , they would surely have brought them back to the faith , after the truth came to them , but you will not be able to do it ; and allah is able to do all things .
eachwe warned by examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
that when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ?
they were defeated and turned belittled ,
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord and do not follow other than him as allies . little do you remember .
say , ‘ we are only a human being like you , but allah wills whom he wills of his servants . and we will not bring to him a sign except in allah ’ s servants , and let them have faith in allah , and let the faithful put their trust .
but they will never long for it , because of whattheir hands have sent before them . god knows well the wrongdoers .
allah has already ordained for you , , the dissolution of your oaths . and allah is your maulaand he is the all-knower , the all-wise .
and the inmates of hell will be shut out of the fire . there are the ways of the fire which they will assert . they will say , peace be on you . they have said , peace on you .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be repaid according to what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
o you who have faith ! do not approach the prayer while you are going to keep back , and this is not a time to be altered , until , when they are free of the prayer , or the occupants of those who are immature , do not sit in a state of pleasure . and allah is pardoning and watchful .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the people 's ornaments . we threw them , and so did the samiri .
pharaoh said , you have believed in him before i have given you permission . the chief of your people is one who has taught you magic . but you will soon know .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
then allah will turn clemently after that to whomever he wills ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
qarun , pharaoh , and haman . moses came to them with clear signs , but they acted arrogantly in the land . they could not escape us .
o man ! verily thou art toiling toward thy lord laboriously , and thou shalt encounter him .
it is a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
the sun and the moon follow a reckoning ,
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not .
satan , the devil , is a part of the law of the law and in the future . then we said to them : 'you are not sent down upon the earth , when they are cautious '
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
nay , it shall come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they shall not be able to repel it , nor shall they be respited .
“ go about in this world for us – and we have indeed been in the hereafter – indeed we do not have any guidance upon you ; and indeed , i will do as it is a mercy to those who are godwary , and give to those who are godwary in our ayat , a mercy , and those who are fearful of our mercy .
who avoid whatever is vain and frivolous ;
and fir'aunsaid : o haman ! build for me a tower that i may arrive at the ways ,
and you shall know to whom will come a chastisement degrading him , and on whom will fall a lasting torment .
he said : thatin which my lord has established me is better . help me with your man-power and i will build a barrier between you and them .
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
and enjoin prayer on your household , and be constant in it ; we do not ask you for subsistence ; we do give you subsistence , and theend is for righteousness .
let anyone who seeks guidance do so .
would you then , if you were given the authority , work corruption in the land and sever your ties of kinship ?
so how were my punishment and warnings ? !
as the caravan departed , their father said : ' i smell the scent of joseph , though you think me not a dotard . '
have they not observed the sky above them , how we have built it and adorned it , and there are no cracks in it ?
and the heavens and the earth did not weep for them , nor were they respited .
he said , 'assuredly i will take unto myself a portion appointed of thy servants ,
which continued to strike them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you could see the people lying prostrate as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees .
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : if allah finds any good in your hearts he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you . allah is forgiving , merciful .
by the sky with its returning rain ,
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
verily , those who accuse chaste women , indiscreet and believing , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and unto him ye shall be gathered .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
and we have indeed made the qur ’ an easy to memorise , so is there one who would remember ?
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
would that you knew what hawiya his ?
and when it is said to them : beware of that which is before you and that which is behind you , in order that ye may receive mercy .
and how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession availeth naught save after allah giveth leave to whom he chooseth and accepteth .
he said , “ go down , both of you , from here , some of you enemies to one another . but if there comes to you guidance from me , whoever follows my guidance , will not go astray nor suffer . ”
they ask , ‘ when will be the day of retribution ? ’
this is the true story . there is no god but god , and assuredly god is all-mighty , all-wise .
at length , when there comes the deafening noise , -
god commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and to judge with justice . excellent is the admonition god gives you . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
so hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee . lo ! thou art on a straight path .
those who believe and whose hearts find rest in the remembrance of allah . unquestionably , by the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
they will be honoured in the gardens of bliss .
'call not out today for one destruction , but call for many ! '
those are the companions of the right hand .
and i do not acquit myself . verily , theself is inclined to evil , except inasmuch as my lord has mercy . indeed , my lord is forgiving and merciful .
and we shall bring hell in front of the disbelievers .
in them are two gushing springs .
a blessed book that we have sent down to you , that they may ponder its verses , and for those with intelligence to take heed .
so , when they took him away , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , we inspired in him : you will surely inform them of this their affair while they knownot .
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
and they bring thee no similitude but we bring thee the truth , and betteras argument .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters do not wish that any good should have been sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he will for his mercy . the bounty of god is great .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
and the messengers have been made to be joined , and some of them have set up with allah in his divinity , and we have made some of them worthy of it , and if they were to be patient , they would not have faith in allah , even though they were disbelievers . so , if allah willed , they would not be among the disbelievers .
dark-green in colour .
o you who have believed , fear allah as he should be feared and do not die except as muslims .
and certainly they had made a covenant with allah before that they would not turn their backs ; and allah 's covenant shall be questioned about .
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited
god invites you to mansions of peace , and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
that is because they have been averse to what god has sent down , so he has made their works to fail .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the people 's ornaments . we threw them , and so did the samiri .
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
as for those who have taken awliya besides him , god is watching them and you are not a guardian over them .
and your devotions amidst the worshipers .
and do not obey any vile swearer ,
and there is no blame on you in the bounty of your lord when you have passed away from its reminder ; and remember allah , as guidance and guidance . indeed , you are before this guidance .
and when they said : verily joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we , even though we are a well-knit band .
and has subjected for you all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; it is all from him . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
he said : o noah ! he is not of your family . lo ! he is of unrighteous conduct . so ask not of me that of which thou hast no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be among the ignorant .
and of the people of musathere is a community who leadwith truth and establish justice therewith .
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : you are but a forger . nay , most of them do not know .
those who have knowledge of the knowledge , they said , woe to you ! you have no power to do so ; the reward of god is better for him who has established faith , and will not be patient .
so when she arrived , it was said , “ is your throne like this ? ” she said , “ as if this is it ; and we were given knowledge before her , and we were submissive . ”
in a guarded tablet .
youare indeed one of the noble messengers .
on that day man will recall all what he strove for .
nor any food except from the discharge of wounds ;
and she who was in the house of joseph was inclined to his , and he said , “ do not ascribe your attention to him ; and he said , “ do not ascribe your staff. ” he said , “ do not ascribe your staff. ” he said , “ i am a muslim , and my lord is the doer of all virtue . ”
and lo ! we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said : by the might of pharaoh , it is we who will certainly win !
the ones who , our lord , has said , our lord will then be the right of the enemies and the people of the heavens will be sent down to them and they will say , ‘ no fear shall be your duty . you shall have no fear , nor shall you be brought back . ’
by those who gently draw out ;
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and surely the doom is about to fall !
“ go about in this world for us – and we have indeed been in the hereafter – indeed we do not have any guidance upon you ; and indeed , i will do as it is a mercy to those who are godwary , and give to those who are godwary in our ayat , a mercy , and those who are fearful of our mercy .
allah will punish him with the greatest punishment .
the chiefs of those who were proud among his people said : o shu'aib ! surely you have believed in allah and the believers , we will surely cause you to die , or are they the inheritors ?
i call to witness those who stand arrayed in rows ,
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
then we drowned the others .
by the glorious morning light ,
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
“ our lord , do not cause us to be faithful , and to make yourself a herald of the land and make us a guide for you and accept our repentance ; you are the most acceptor of repentance , the most merciful . ”
if god were to accelerate the evil for the people , as they wish to accelerate the good , their term would have been ended . but we leave those who do not expect to meet us to wander perplexed in transgression .
and what will explain to thee what sijjin is ?
and that it is he who gives wealth and riches ,
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he said , ‘ do you have faith in it before i have given you permission ? indeed , it is the greatness of allah , the magicians who have passed away by you , and we will surely make a bulwark of it and crucify you . and we will be among the heedless . ’
and do not believe in him , and do not follow the fact of those who follow you , say , ‘ indeed the guidance of allah is only to guidance , and say , ‘ it is only the guidance of allah , ’ so say to him , ‘ it is only the guidance of allah , ’ so say to him : “ indeed it is allah who is the biggest guidance . ”
and a few from the latter ones .
and whoever commits the wages of sin , and is not a sin , he is only one of his own soul ; and whoever does a good deed , he will be given to the extent of what he has given them ; and they will be given to the extent of all that they did .
ha ' . mim .
lot was also one of the messengers .
has the reminder been cast upon him from among us ? nay ! he is an insolent liar .
so where are you heading ?
and the devil will say : lo ! allah 's promise is true : and i give unto you the promise , and i am a liar unto you , and i shall not act with you , nor shall ye be able to call upon me ; but i shall not call upon you that which ye were wont to do . lo ! i believe not in the worlds .
and the slaves of the most beneficentare those who walk upon the earth easily , and when the ignorant address them , they say , “ peace ” ;
and when they are called to allah and his messenger so that he may judge between them , lo ! a party of them are averters .
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them ! perceivest thou of them anyone or hear of them a whisper ?
so they will impugn you in what you say , and you can neither turn it aside , nor find any help . whoever among you commits injustice , we shall make him taste a great punishment .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
and let those who have taken to themselves a fear of allah may be made of pure his bounty , and those who seek of you of his bounty , and if they are innocent of your slaves , seek the way of attaining your slaves . but if they are innocent , they take it in your way , and in order that they may be righteous .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
praise be to allah who has sent down to his servant the book devoid of all crookedness ;
say , “ in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and he protects while none can protect against him , if you know ? ”
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . neither you nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
detracter , spreader abroad of slanders ,
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
there is not a townbut we shall destroy or sternly punish it before the day of resurrection . that is inscribed in the book .
on the day when we will say to hell : are you filled ? it will say , are there any more ?
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is great deprivation .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
so when the sight becomes dazed ,
and to david we gave solomon—what an excellent servant he was ! indeed , he was a penitent .
or has he daughters while you have sons ?
that is because they said to those who hate what allah has revealed : we will obey you in some matters . but allah knows their secrets .
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but of what avail will that remembranceavail him ?
but god will never defer any soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
they rejoice in allah ’ s blessing and bounty , and that allah does not waste the reward of the faithful .
and in the clear way of those who are in front of them , they will say , “ we have afflicted a misfortune or a misfortune ” ; and we have made it a duty to them , from a clear torment , and they will not be able to repel it with a clear proof .
have they not seen the birds , flying in the midst of the sky ? nothing holds them up except allah . indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
that god may reward each soul for its deeds . god is swift in reckoning .
and thus we have sent it down as an arabic koran , and we have diversified the warnings in it , that peradventure they may fear or it may cause them to take heed .
so we took vengeance on them . both are still on a clear roadway .
it is god who knows the day of judgment . we shall have the knowledge of all that is in your bellies . he knows what is in your bellies . he has the knowledge of all things . he has knowledge of everything .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought and love to be praised for what they have not done do not think that they are safe from the punishment ; and for them is a painful punishment .
say , “ who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ is it god , the lord of the creation , and then say , ” say , “ what is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ what is the matter with them ? ” say , “ what is the matter with them ? ” say , “ what is the matter with them ? ” say , “ what is the matter with them ? ” say , “ what is the matter with
remember how you were weak , having been destroyed by the leave of the earth , and that the people be cautious , and god is all-mighty and all-knowing .
and when they are made to listen in the quran , it would certainly be revealed to them , and the hour is a time for them , the time when they will say , ‘ our lord ! we have faith , so keep us in a witness . ’
over it are nineteen .
so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are heedless .
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each , and let no pity towards them in enforcing the laws of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day ; and let a group of believers witness their punishment .
friends on that day will be foes one to another except al-muttaqun .
but god will never defer any soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
because he thinks that he is independent .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
they do not listen to you at dawn and in the evening , but only the recompense of their lord will be given to you . you are unjust to them .
there is not one of the commands of god to pray to you . you have to pray to the prayer in which you will be made to keep away from the truth . god loves the pious ones .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may harm you . the unbelievers are your manifest enemies .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , then we shall say unto those who ascribed partners : where arethose partners of your make-believe ?
they had found their parents astray .
and those who give what they give while their hearts are fearful because they are about to return to their lord ,
and whoever does good deeds , whether male or female , and is a believer—those will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
we created man out of dry clay , from moulded mud ,
nor will they be permitted to offer any excuses .
pharaoh said , you have believed in him before i have given you permission . the chief of your people is one who has taught you magic . but you will soon know .
and the fifththat the curse of allah be on him if he is one of the liars .
we will attend to you , o prominent beings .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
the sun and the moon follow a reckoning ,
fir'awn said unto the chiefs around him : verily this is a magician knowing .
but whoever brings vice—they will be flung down on their faces in the fire . are you not rewarded according to your deeds ?
your companionhas neither gone astray nor has erred .
those who deny the truth say , do not believe in this matter of the quran and do not believe in the life to come . if you will , they will say , “ we are believers . ”
are they better , or the people of tubba and those before them ? we destroyed them , for surely they were guilty .
in the morning the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she was about to disclosehim had we not strengthened her heart , so that she might be of the believers .
and fruits and fodder
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
these are verses of the wise book ,
there is not one of the people of the book but will surely believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
we send down blessed water from the sky with which we grow gardens and the grain which is harvested ,
that is because they said to those who hate what allah has revealed : we will obey you in some matters . but allah knows their secrets .
and there is life for you in retribution , o men of understanding , that you may guard yourselves .
and those who join what god has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and dread the harshness of the reckoning ;
that we may glorify you much
they said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph with our things , so the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we tell the truth .
when they see what they are promised , they will know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in numbers .
and when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : which of the two groups is best in position and best in association ?
o prophet , he was averse to you , , and to have what we have revealed to you . we have revealed to you what has been revealed to you , and you should have your actions , if you are they sincere .
say , “ whoever is in the custody of the most gracious , will have in wealth and this world to give up what is in their eyes ; and they will come to know who is the best of punishment , and who is the best of those who exceed the right . ”
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
when they had come to them from god , they would have been given to them a book . what they had done is sure to help them , but they had rejected god 's help . god 's retribution against those who deny the truth , so let them be a liar .
your lord is the all-sufficient dispenser of mercy . if he wills , he can take you away , and make whomever he wishes succeed you , just as he raised you from the seed of another people .
this is a declaration for mankind , a guidance and an admonition unto the god-fearing .
they are those who have argued about their homes , and say , ‘ enjoy , and be patient . ’ say , ‘ enjoy , and let us be among the inheritors of you . ’
and we send the winds fertilizing , then we send down water from the sky and we give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
god has given the example of the house of abraham to the people of the unbelievers who were unbelievers to have two sons . but they did not know the two of their two women , but they are the ones who will suffer the fire .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion , even though the pagans may detest .
and the noble messenger of the signs of allah will be read to him , so that those who believe and do good deeds , he will cause them to enter into the darkness and the light , and whoever believes in allah and reforms , and for him there will be a goodly provision , in which they will remain forever .
or have you a clear authority ?
and when it is said unto them : believe as the peoplehave believed , they say : shall we believe as the fools have believed ? lo ! they themselves are the fools , but they know not .
verily , in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the sun and the sea , and the alternation of the sun and the earth , then bring it in upon the earth , and bring about the matter which is in the heavens and the earth , and in between the things they have been working .
and tenderness from our presence and purity , and he was exceedingly pious
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . and indeed , the timeallah , when it comes , can not be delayed , if you only knew .
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . but much of it he forgives .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , to make it prevail over all religions , and allah suffices as witness .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that the two of them will be seated in the sea , with it to be established ; and the sun , and the earth – it is the same for the people of the fire ; and this is how god explains the destiny of the human being ; and this is how god explains the destiny of the human being . this is how god explains the destiny of the enemies .
a questioner questioned the imminent torment .
then i announced to them andconfided to them secretly
a party of the people of the book would love to mislead you but they lead you astray , but they do not realize it .
their lot therein will be groaning , and they will not hear anything in it .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them ? he has appointed for them a term about which there is no doubt . but the unjust do not consent to aught but denying .
the tribe of thamud , we destroyed the people of israel in the town , to make things clear to them , and the devil 's way to make them go straight , and the path of their own people are , though they were possessed .
that is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood , while those who believe follow the truth from their lord . thus allah coineth their similitudes for mankind .
who created death and life that he may try youwhich of you is best in deed . and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
he who takes the pilgrimage for the cause of god in the land , may be held free for himself , and he has made a vast provision for him . he is the recompense of their deeds . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
if we will , we can send down on them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
does he promise you that when you are dead and have become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
and there will be peace upon them from the place of the right way , and have filled them from the place of hell . and they have of the provision of their lord , and of those who have knowledge .
and urged not on the feeding of al-miskin ,
and indeed he saw him on the clear horizon . .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a place in hell for disbelievers ?
or say they : in him is madness ? nay , he hath brought them the truth , and most of them are averse from the truth .
then depart from the place whence the multitude hasteneth onward , and ask forgiveness of allah . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
the lord of moses and aaron .
he dreadeth not the sequel .
for he did not believe in god the great ,
they said , 'glory be to thee ! we know not save what thou hast taught us . surely thou art the all-knowing , the all-wise . '
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
in the morning the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she was about to disclosehim had we not strengthened her heart , so that she might be of the believers .
then , on the day of resurrection , allah will say to him , “ where are those who have been overwhelmed with my lord. ” those who have been given knowledge , they will say , “ this is the day of separation . ”
and all the voices that are in the hands of allah , and we created them in the way of allah , and they are the like of the things which they have been concealing . and even if they were to give thanks to my servants , they would not have been given thanks .
and the people of the opponents came to this . so quickly go towards it , and to the evil of their evil deeds , he said , “ o my people , are these the ones whom i have chosen , and do not fear god ? ”
so theyadvanced towards him , hastening .
no indeed ; did you know with the knowledge of certainty ,
why do you not bring down the angels upon us if you are truthful ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the mighty , the forgiver .
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
the things that god has created for them , has all that god has created for them . they say , this is god 's ' and he has said , “ this is the lord of their own hands . whoever ascribes their gods to god , has been abandoned . ”
but the wretched will turn away from it .
they will be honoured in the gardens of bliss .
but when he tests him by straitening his means of livelihood , he says , my lord has disgraced me .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty lot .
said the council of his people , 'we see thee in manifest error . '
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
it is he who pusheth away the orphan ,
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a devastating flood that swept away the dams and replaced their gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
and they denied and followed their own desires , and every matter has a setting .
but as for me , he is god , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
so glorify the name of your lord most great .
the recompense for evil is an evil like it , but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward lies with allah . indeed , he does not like the wrongdoers .
such is paradise which we will give as inheritance to those of our servants who are devout .
god is the witness of the human being and the lord of the universe . there is no god but he . the angels , and the lord of the universe , is the almighty , the wise .
and we chose them , out of a knowledge above the nations .
but those who deny our revelations will be seized by nemesis for being disobedient .
and assuredly we have sent down unto you revelations illuminating and a similitude for those who passed away before you , and an admonition unto the god-fearing .
verily the god-fearing shall be in a secure place
it is god who has made the right of the sea and the sea to swallow them until you are at variance with them . the people of the book will be struck by a great torment and they will say , “ if only you may be sent back , we will surely give you a great victory . ”
o you who believe ! do not befriend your fathers and your fathers , and if they have disbelieved , they would have surely been averse to you , and whoever of you is led astray , and it is they who are the wrongdoers .
they said : if only he had a breach with him , his brother have a right to one . then he said : he is a man of falsehood ; and he said : your people are a people who do not know .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , - an evil refuge .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
and others linked together in chains ,
nay , but we are deprived !
the heavens are almost torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
so why did they not entreat when our punishment came to them ? but their hearts were hardened , and satan made theiracts seem alluring to them .
do you not fear the result of those who speak ill before god and do good deeds ? then , when you have not considered the thing that you have done , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and god is aware of all you do .
lo ! we withdraw the torment a little . lo ! ye return .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
they said : o dhu ' l-qarnayn ! gog and magog are causing corruption in the land . shall we then pay you a tribute on condition that you set a barrier between us and them ?
firon said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
that is because they followed what angers god , and were averse to his good pleasure , therefore he has made their deeds devoid of all virtue .
when they meet those who believe , they say , we believe . but when they are alone with their devils , they say , we are really with you ; we were only mocking .
and be not like those who say : we hear , and they hear not .
thereof we created you , and thereunto we return you , and thence we bring you forth a second time .
or have we sent down to them any authority which might assert what they associate with him ?
the mutual rivalry for piling updiverts you ,
the day they will be burnt in the fire ,
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times its like ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like of it ; they will not be wronged .
tell the believers to forgive those who do not fear the days of god , in order that he may recompense people for their deeds .
verily this is a reward for you , and your endeavour is accepted and recognised .
they do not value god as he should be valued . god is strong and mighty .
pelting them with stones of baked clay ,
we have set you , , on an ordained way in the matter . follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and your lord says : call upon me ; i will answer you ; surely those who are too proud to worship me shall enter hell abased .
and whatsoever of favours is with you is from allah ; then when distress toucheth you , unto him ye cry for help .
gardens of eden , which the most gracious has promised to his servants in the unseen ; surely his promise shall come .
and his wife , the wood-carrier ,
or do they think that we do not hear their secret thoughts and their secret counsels ? yes indeed , our messengers are with them , writing down .
and the noble messenger of the signs of allah will be read to him , so that those who believe and do good deeds , he will cause them to enter into the darkness and the light , and whoever believes in allah and reforms , and for him there will be a goodly provision , in which they will remain forever .
this is because allah is the truth , and that which they call upon besides him is the falsehood , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
and recall what time we treated with musa forty nights , then ye betook the calf after him , and ye were wrong-doers .
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
by the glorious morning light ,
and he swore to them , “ i am a sincere advisor to you . ”
but proclaim the blessings of your lord .
the unbelievers who have been given the sanctity of the faithful will face the way of hell to the believers who do not realize the truth of their own tradition , and they will have a painful punishment .
'call not out today for one destruction , but call for many ! '
nay , but the hour is their tryst , and the hour is more disastrous and more bitter .
and strike the service of allegiance to you when you have the decree of the matter , when you have the decree of the torah and the covenant after it was revealed to you . and allah is aware of what you do .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all hearing , the all knowing .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i : so send him with me as a helper to confirm my truthfulness , for i fear that they will reject me .
did we not destroy the earlier generations ?
ha ' . mim .
o you who believe ! when you converse privately with the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you , and purer . but if you do not find the means—god is forgiving and merciful .
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers , and seek to make a distinction between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some , and disbelieve in others , ' desiring to take a way ,
not one township that we destroyed before them believed ; will they then believe ?
we send not down the angels , save with truth ;
say , “ i am commanded to serve god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
it is he who blesses you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; and he is most merciful to the believers .
and when they are made to be of the seas , they would be like the mountains , like the mountains ; and call upon allah in his divinity . and when they will be called upon to allah , they will be called upon his own side , and some of our signs are not able to save them from the most merciful . and if they do , then , are of those who are ungrateful .
we have given them a place of enjoyment , which we have blessed . there is no doubt that the length of the day they are about to make .
the act of the prophet will be told , did you not know that we did not have any claim to you ? but you would say , “ in fact , you did not have any faith . and the devil ’ s punishment came to you , and you were safe from the way of god . ”
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
did we not create you from an insignificant fluid ?
by no means ! by the moon ,
the command of allah is coming , so do not seek to hasten it . highly exalted is he above what they associate with him .
and if they dispute with you , say : 'allah knows best what you are doing .
and whatever is in your own hands , to the former nations , do not be impressed by the majesty of allah , and to make things equal to you , but you are not aware of the things you have done . it is indeed allah ’ s will , and you do not perceive .
allah exhorts you never again to repeat the like , if you are believers .
and proclaim the pilgrimage among men . they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel , they will come from every deep ravine ,
so how did the people of the towns then have believed and been righteous ? but they have not to be of the people who have faith in the humbling in the life of the world , and for them in the world to come , we have made them a great punishment .
they thought , as you thought , that god would never raise up anyone .
osoul , inrest and satisfaction !
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
is it such a talkthat youdeny ?
to god belongs the truth , but those who invoke him will be called to ruin , and they will not be able to save him in the least , except for the cause of god . the petition of the unbelievers is only in the shadows .
the like of which was never created in the land ?
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the most forgiving , the most merciful . ”
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause fir'aun'speople to enter the severest doom .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and in the cause of allah , and let him know what every soul has to come to pass . indeed , allah is acquainted with what you do .
put your trust in god ; god is sufficient as a guardian .
there is not one of usbut has his known place ;
so he showed him the mighty sign ,
i do not think that the hour will ever come , and even if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this .
those before them indeed plotted , but allah struck at the foundation of their building , and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment came upon them whence they perceived not .
he said : peace be on thee ! i will ask forgiveness of my lord for thee ; verily he is unto me ever so soicitous .
alif lam mim sad
and when the clear signs comes to them , they say : we shall not believe in the until the case of the matter we have sent down , and allah is the knower of that which they have been earning .
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . yet none remembers but those who incline .
there is no fault for those who believe , and do righteous deeds , when they will be saved by god , he will cause the sins of their souls to appear away and who will be left responsible for their sins and god loves the pious ones .
by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
and never came there unto them a messenger but they did mock him .
and when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ do not make a sign a sign for us , except what befell what was with moosa ” ; they said , “ we are magic , ” and they said , “ we have not been deprived . ”
which will neither fatten nor avail against hunger .
woe to the people of the book ! and they will say , this is from allah , so that he may give a respite to the enjoyment of the world . then , do you know what they will be ?
lo ! when the waters rose , we carried you upon the ship
whether you speak loudlyhe indeed knows the secret and what is still more hidden .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and we sent down to you manna and quails :
by the lote-tree of the utmost boundary ,
the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , to dwell therein for ever . such is the recompense of the wrong-doers .
allah has created every beast of water from a sort of water . some of them walk upon their bellies , and some of them go upon four , and some of them go upon four ; for allah creates whatever he wills ; surely allah has power over all things .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not
by the angels who float ,
lo ! allah it is who is the dominion of the heavens and the earth , and verily he shall pass away , and if they go ye twain , there is none who can save them from evil . lo ! he is forgiving , merciful .
and the people of the opponents came to this . so quickly go towards it , and to the evil of their evil deeds , he said , “ o my people , are these the ones whom i have chosen , and do not fear god ? ”
and persisted in the great sin
by your life , they were bewildered in their drunkenness .
god commands justice , kindness and giving theirnear relatives , and he forbids indecency , dishonor , and insolence . he admonishes you so that you may take heed .
will you believe in it only after it has overtaken you , although it was your wish to hurry it on ?
and those who fight against you , fight in your fight , but if you have a good counsel from allah , they will say , “ we have not been with you ; and if you are bent on denying the truth , they will say , “ we did not have any relation at you ; and if you are disbelievers , they will say , “ we did not observe the disbelievers ” ; and allah will not accept the judgement of the disbelievers .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him shall all things be brought back .
but they were succeeded by a generation who neglected their prayers and followed their desires , so they shall encounter error
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
and we delivered him and his people from the great distress ,
half of it , or reduce it a little ;
when the disciples said : o jesus , son of mary ! is thy lord able to send down for us a table spread with food from heaven ? he said : fear allah , if ye are believers .
andwhen ibrahimsaid : o my lord ! make this city secure , and turn me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our signs and said , 'what , when we are bones and broken bits , shall we really be raised up again in a new creation ? '
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying , woe to us ! we have been in neglect of this . we have been unjust .
verily your lord is gracious to men , though most men are ungrateful .
early morning brought upon them enduring punishment .
and for you is the kind of animals , and the best of that which is in their bellies , and the recordgoes of pure water ; and we have brought to those who fear it ,
it is he who gives life and death ; and when he decrees a thing , he but says to it 'be , ' and it is .
“ o my fellow fellow-prisoners , one of you will serve wine to his master , the other will be crucified , and birds will eat from his head . the matter you inquired about has been decided . ”
do they not see that they are tried every year once or twice ? yet they do not repent , nor do they remember .
and we delivered him and his people from the great distress ,
then shall a soul know what it has put forward .
what , do they not remember the coming of the people who lived before them and the people of the subverted college ? how was it that they did not reach the land ? that was the deed they have been doing .
that day mankind will issue forth in scattered groups to be shown their deeds .
those of your women who commit fornication , take the evidence of four witnesses from amongst you against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for themway .
indeed to your lord is the return .
know that allah gives life to the earth after its death . we have made clear our signs to you , so that you may understand .
hewas only a worshiper whom we favored and we made him an example to the children of israel .
they said : verily we have been sent unto a people guilty-
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater ; that is forbidden to the believers .
andwhen we gave moses the book and the criterion , so that you might be guided .
god is a jew , an upright man , and his messenger , and your duty is not to mount at the fact , nor to mount it , but he is able to do so , but he will have the power to do so . god has power over all things .
do you not see that allah has created for you all that is in the heavens and the earth ? and he has made for you an advantage and a clear book .
they said : burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do .
a provision and benefit for you and your cattle .
and when the people come after that , there is no doubt about them . so we place our bounties towards them . so , this is a plan by our command . and indeed , we have done what they plot .
then he collectedand made a proclamation ,
and when our messengers came to abraham with the good tidings , they said , “ we are about to destroy the people of this town ; its people are unjust . ”
their deception will not avail them in the least on that day , nor will they be helped .
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
they said , “ delay him and his brother , and send recruiters to the cities .
and verily thou ! thou callest them unto a path straight .
do not give , thinking to gain greater
and he said : embark therein ! in the name of allah be its course and its mooring . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
he said : what is your opinion , when you have to be with joseph ? they said : we have no power to set you in allah 's way . he said , “ this is a part of the truth ; and he was about to be of the truthful . ”
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a place in hell for disbelievers ?
your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
orwe show thee that wherewith we threaten them ; for lo ! we have complete command of them .
'eat and drink , with wholesome appetite , for that you were working . '
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit ; an evil patron and an evil associate .
and stop them , for they must be questioned .
abasing , exalting ;
has not the news reached you of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and there is a painful punishment for them .
do you not see that allah makes you forget the like of the heavens and the earth , and he shall make them forget the like of it ? and it will be a deafness of the like of them , and they will not be able to remove it from anywhere .
say : 'if there had been other gods with him , as they say , they would surely have sought a way to the lord of the throne '
for indeed he saw him at a second descent ,
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , so that they can not escape ?
they ask , when will this promise be fulfilled , if what you say is true ?
such is 'iesa , son of maryam .a statement of truth , about which they doubt .
no indeed ; did you know with the knowledge of certainty ,
lo ! allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and allah is seer of what ye do .
and it was said , “ o nooh ! do not be sent down by the ship , in order to cast it in upon the ship ” ; so we will give you some of it , and give others from us , and then to be a punishment from us .
do not make excuses . you have disbelieved after your belief . if we pardon some of you , we will punish others for they are guilty .
and they say : wherefore is not a sign sent down unto him from his lord ? say thou : verily allah is able to send down a sign , howbeit most of them know not .
they will be told to see the time when their messengers had come to them . the messengers have been sent to them with clear signs , but the unbelievers try to challenge god .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
they said : have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful .
and if ye disbelieve , verily allah is free of need , while ye are not pleased with the bondmen of the believers , but should ye receive the right way , that ye may give up the right way , and that ye may be of the thrivers . and he is the knower of that which ye worked .
the guidance of your lord has been revealed to you and you have no one besides god as his guardian . then , if you have been given to the fire , then cast it into a mercy , and a mercy to the blaze .
it may be that those who disbelieve wish ardently that they were muslims .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
give full measure , and cause no loss .
indeed the virtuous are in serenity .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , supplicate your lord to lighten for us a day from the punishment .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say , “ this is a difficult day . ”
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the difference of your languages and colours . there are indeed signs in that for those who know .
“ this is our bestowal ; so give or withhold as you wish without account . ”
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i was sent ; but i see you are an ignorant people .
we have already seized them with punishment , but they did not yield to their lord , nor do they humble themselves
as sustenance for the servants , and we have given life thereby to a dead land . thus is the rising .
we informed him that the unbelievers would be utterly destroyed .
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . allah accepts the repentance of whomever he wills ; and allah is all knowing , wise .
and who are constant in their prayers .
and save us by your mercy from the disbelieving people .
and say : 'praise belongs to god . he will show you his signs , and you will recognise them . your lord is not heedless of what you do . '
do not think god is unaware of what the wrongdoers do . he only gives them respite till the day on which all eyes will stare fixedly in horror .
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
and we sent not before thee any envoys but that they ate food and walked in the markets . and we appointed some of you to be a trial for others : will ye be steadfast ? and thy lord is ever seer .
do they possess the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
, separate yourselves from the righteous this day , you criminals .
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
then he retreated and waxed proud ,
they are always harassing us .
it is only god who deserves all praise . he has given the lie to his own other . he has no power to protect them from his own side . say , god 's alone is too proud and he has no one to protect them .
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
verily , with every difficulty there is relief .
then moses cast down his staff and it swallowed up their lying invention ,
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it , and they ruin none save themselves , and they perceive not .
and those who say : our lord ! grant us refreshment of our wives and our offspring , and make us a model for the righteous .
no cry did they utter when our punishment came to them except that they said : surely we were unjust .
on couches , face to face ,
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the book of wisdom .
and , o dear prophet , when he has bestowed on you the bounty , he says , “ take your grace , and you may say , ” , and he has said , “ o my wife , do you wish to stay with your own eyes , and you will say , “ o my wife , do not accept your majesty , and we are responsible for you . ”
they said : if only he had a breach with him , his brother have a right to one . then he said : he is a man of falsehood ; and he said : your people are a people who do not know .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the book of wisdom .
and a sign for them is the dead earth ; we gave it life and we produced from it grain , so they eat of it .
so when he came to joseph , he said , “ do you wish to kill me , and to give me something of the wealth of the world to which you have been given ? ” nay , but i do take the decision of that which you have been working .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , we shall give them their wages ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you believe .
solomon inherited david . he said , people , we have been taught the language of the birds and have been given all things . this surely is a manifest favour .
but they will never long for it , because of whattheir hands have sent before them . god knows well the wrongdoers .
and those who belie our signs , step by step we lead them on in a way they know not .
'taste ! surely thou art the mighty , the noble .
and what shall teach thee what is the day of doom ?
so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are heedless .
so allah seized him with the punishment of this life and the hereafter .
our lord , you will gather the people for a day about which there is no doubt . god never fails to fulfill his promise .
it is god who knows the day of judgment . we shall have the knowledge of all that is in your bellies . he knows what is in your bellies . he has the knowledge of all things . he has knowledge of everything .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
so we made it an example to their own and to succeeding generations , and an admonition to the allah-fearing .
no fatigue will touch them therein , nor from it will theybe removed .
and when the anger of musawas appeased , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
soon shall we brand him on his snout .
he said , do not take me to task for what i forgot and do not be hard on me .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed will not desist
and be not haughty with that which they have been wont to do with other than allah . they will not be able to do so . and in that case , we will give them no more than allah . and to their lord they will return .
verily we we sent upon them one shout , and they became as the stubble of a fold-builder .
and he subjected for you the sun and the moon , continuous , and subjected for you the night and the day .
and if they incline to peace , then incline towards it , and put your trust in allah . indeed , he is the hearing , the knowing .
father , do not worship satan ; he has disobeyed the beneficent god .
“ and when it is said to them , “ have fear of god , the one in the heavens and the earth ” ; he will requite the sins of the sins and the shameful , and he will certainly make a place of refuge in the fire .
recite what has been revealed to you from the book of your lord . no one can change his words . you will find no refuge other than him .
had we wished , we would have sent a warner to every town .
musa said : by no means ! verily with me is my lord ; he will guide me .
which he will gulp but will scarcely swallow , and death will come to him from every side , but he will not die , and beyond him is a harsh torment .
and of the people of the town , he has made with them , and he was of the prostrates , and the people of the book , to make things blessed , for the descendants of your lord , to the children of israel . all that they had done was .
said allah , “ you are given respite . ”
by the nights twice five ;
was it not a sign for them that the learned men of israel knew about this ?
he said , “ you and your parents are in clear error . ”
indeed , when it has reached the breast-bones .
these are the verses of the clear book .
they said , ‘ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that supremacy may be yours in the land ? we will never believe in you ! ’
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it had died . likewise you will be resurrected .
and from the evil of malignant witchcraft ,
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful .
your god is one god . as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts are in denial , and they are arrogant .
and to the hypocrites , when it is said to them , “ come , and fight in the way of allah , ” they said , “ be , or you may fight in the way of allah , and they said , “ if we wish we may fight you , they will say , “ if we had so willed , we would have followed you , and they will not be deprived . ”
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
then we drowned the others .
in the gardens of perpetuity , beneath which rivers flow , in which they will abide for ever ; and allah will be pleased with them , for those who fear his lord , is the most guarded .
they will be told to see the time when their messengers had come to them . the messengers have been sent to them with clear signs , but the unbelievers try to challenge god .
surely there is a part of the people of the book but a reminder for the people of the book . it is not this but a reminder , and a guidance to the believers .
indeed , i have believed in your lord , so listen to me .
by no means ! verily , by your lord , to those who do not have any knowledge of that which they have been going to do , not at all , but do not turn your duty to them , in order that they be convinced .
wherefore eat of that whereon the name of allah hath been pronounced , if ye are believers in his revelations .
boiling water , and cast into the fire .
indeed we created man from a sperm-drop mixture that we may test him ; and we made him hearing and seeing .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then has decreed a term , a term determined with him , yet you doubt it .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires .
what is the matter with them that they do not believe ,
and we know what they say , and what they say . indeed , you do not make yourself superior to the faith , so you are afraid of it .
and remember our servants ibrahim and ishaq and yaqoub , men of power and insight .
that no burdened personshall bear the burdenof another .
they said : our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
his companion said : our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar gone in error .
and there is a variety of men for their parents , and their relatives , and the relatives , and the relatives , and the blood , a little from their parents , and a few of the sun , and a few of the sun .
and when the stars are scattered ;
by the hands of scribes .
what ! do you then go about men in the way of allah , and the way of the people of the truth ? but the answer of the people of the truth is that they said , “ bring me the punishment , if you are truthful . ”
if those who disbelieved but knew the time when they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces and from their backs , and they will not be helped .
woe , then , will be on that day to the beliers
said : your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble when the sun has risen high .
the tradition of your lord is one of the other , and we will send it down to him , so that you will be pleased with it , and you will be brought back to the same of what you have done , and god 's command is not aware of the things you do .
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth ; supreme is he above their ascribing of partners .
nay , but the unbelievers are crying lies ,
and indeed , for you is a reward uninterrupted .
so remember me , i will remember you . give thanks to me and do not be ungrateful .
then , make the earth a spring . let it be , you will then be roasted in the end of the earth , and let them fall into the ground . the matter is only upon the unjust .
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall receive the reward of what they earned and you of what you earn . and you will not be asked of what they used to do .
a bearer of good news and a warner . but most of them turn away so that they hear not .
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i : so send him with me as a helper to confirm my truthfulness , for i fear that they will reject me .
be moderate in your walking and your talking . the most unpleasant sound is the braying of donkeys .
some of them believe in it , while others do not . your lord knows best the mischief-makers .
they await just one scream , which no one can avert .
who persevere and place their trust in their lord .
i am giving them a respite . my plan is firm .
but they will not remember , unless god wills . he is the source of righteousness , and the source of forgiveness .
on the day when allah will raise them all together and inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
one of the two women said : o my father ! hire him ! for the best that thou canst hire is the strong and trustworthy one .
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus we shall deliver the believers .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to god , the lord of the universe !
and that you may find a people who wish to turn away from your people and the people of the truth and the disbelievers . when they are invited to do so , they will be made to go back in it . but if they turn their duty to you , they will not be able to make you a clear proof .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
do they not regard the earth to you , or do so that you may receive their ears , or are not their hearing ? they will be blinded by their eyes .
we have decreed death to be your common lot , and we are not to be frustrated
so woe to those that pray
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might be an enemy and a sorrow for them ; surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein , andwhat an evil abode of the arrogant !
rejoicing in what god has given them out of his grace , and they rejoice for those who have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
lo ! verily unto allah belongeth whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth . and those who worship beside allah , they follow notpartners . and they follow naught but a lie .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter he has no share .
in arrogance , as if you were abandoning a story-teller .
god has decreed : i will prevail , i and my messengers . surely god is powerful and almighty .
your lord knows very well what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is most forgiving to those who are penitent .
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
is he whose breast god has opened to islam , so that he walks in light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of god . they are clearly in error .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer , -
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
but nay ! i swear by all that you see
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus we shall deliver the believers .
we have not taught himpoetry , nor does it become him . this is only a remembrance and a clear holy quran
there is no fault in the funds where they differ about , but do not be a witness to the things they are doing , and there is no constraint on your behalf of the earth , nor are they capable of it .
gardens of eden , whereof the gates are opened for them ,
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
and no friend will aska friend ,
and as for those who are blessed , they will be in paradise , abiding therein as long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . a gift uninterrupted .
he commands you to do evil and vice , and to say about god what you do not know .
but the messenger and those who believe with him struggle with their wealth and their lives . these are the good things , and these it is who shall be successful .
and the shadows of the two groups , then say : what , do you eat of such a thing , or the blood that are forbidden ? say : what ! do you not eat of such a thing , or thosewhom allah has made a lie ? and who is a guide for the people who are zalimun .
and allah has set forth for one of them a similitude by two : but for one of them is no more than one of the other , and for him there is no way of affairs : will ye then be able to do so ?
and that our foolish one has been saying about allah an excessive transgression .
but they have taken other gods besides him , who created no thing , but they do not have any power to do it ; nor can they have any power to do it ; nor are they living .
and they will say , “ had we listened or understood , we would not have been among the inmates of the blaze . ”
those are onguidance from their lord , and it is those who are the successful .
yet they were not sent as guardians over them .
they said , 'moses , either thou wilt cast , or we shall be the first to cast . '
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter between you and me would be decided ; and god knows very well the evildoers . '
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , and do not be like the companion of the fish , when he called out choking inwardly .
but when the great cataclysm arrives .
so do not become weak-kneed and sue for peace , for you will prevail . god is with you and will never overlook your deeds .
and of your own friends is your blood or your son , or your wife in the past ; so if they turn their backs , then let them turn away from it ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
they are like those who tasted the evil consequences of their deeds before . there is a painful punishment for them .
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
and those who disbelieve say : thou art not a messenger . say : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you , and he who has knowledge of the book .
and do not pursue that of which you have no knowledge . indeed hearing , eyesight , and the heart—all of these are accountable .
successful is he who purifies it .
but we found not there any justpersons except in one house :
tell them : “ what is the matter with you , that the advice of god is ? if this is a message of god , then why do you deny the truth ? as a witness , the torah and the gospel are only the unjust . ”
like the fate of the people of nuh , and 'ad , and thamud , and those who came after them , and allah does not desire injustice forservants ;
and , o muhammad ! ask the scripture for which they have been sent down for a book which is sent down to them , so they ask the greater of the two , and they said , “ we make a clear sign for you in the qur ’ an , and they will say , ‘ we have indeed put a clear sign for them . ’
those who deny the truth , nor seek from the path of god , and seek to lead it up from his path , and in the way of god , will be made to increase in his way ; but those who deny the truth shall be brought into the fire .
woe to you ; and woe .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
they will have therein their dwelling , and therein they shall be abiders .
turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , whereupon you will not be helped .
the unbelievers who have been given the sanctity of the faithful will face the way of hell to the believers who do not realize the truth of their own tradition , and they will have a painful punishment .
those who do not expect to encounter us say , why have angels not been sent down to us or why do we not see our lord ? indeed they think too highly of themselves and are greatly disdainful .
my lord ! grant mefrom the righteous .
which continued to strike them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you could see the people lying prostrate as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees .
and the time for the ages is only to the gain of the needy and the people of understanding , the means of which they had not attained to their chins , who could have made them a caretaker for their own . and allah is knowing and wise .
faces on that day shall be downcast ,
then the fish swallowed him while he was blaming himself .
and faces shall be humbled unto the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
in the gardens of bliss .
and we do not send the messengers but as a herald of warning , but those who disbelieve , - they do not accept the faith , and that the truth may be recited to you , and that they may be left behind .
and they carry your loads to a land that you could not reach except with difficulty to yourselves . indeed , your lord is kind and merciful .
and we drape veils over their hearts , lest they should understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the qur'an , they turn their backs in aversion .
and when a bargain is appointed , or a sport , you shall have it to take it , when you have the best knowledge , say , ‘ it is allah ’ s will to be the best of the victors , and allah is the best of all providers '
on the day when they will be brought out of the fire , and it will be said to them , “ whatever you wish to be in the world , did not be responsible for what you used to do . ”
woe to the people of the book ! and they will say , this is from allah , so that he may give a respite to the enjoyment of the world . then , do you know what they will be ?
allah has given the sustenance of some of you to some of you , but some of you have more provision ; and those who spend their provisions will be given their provisions , so will they be repaid ?
who break the covenant of allah after its confirmation and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and cause corruption on earth . these are the losers .
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection . no soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least , and if the weight of a mustard seed be as small as a mustard seed , we will bring it .
for those who swear a wait of four months from their wives , if they revert , god is forgiving and kind .
“ go about in this world for us – and we have indeed been in the hereafter – indeed we do not have any guidance upon you ; and indeed , i will do as it is a mercy to those who are godwary , and give to those who are godwary in our ayat , a mercy , and those who are fearful of our mercy .
when the two receivers receive , seated on the right and on the left .
though they may be within sight of each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
and moses felt afraid within himself .
and who are constant in their prayers .
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off trading ; this is better for you if you only knew .
it is the service of true prayer , and to give you the means to turn . but if they are given you , you will have no one to be able to seek any one of them . on the day of judgment , it will be a great source of denial for those who take heed for themselves .
say : tell me ! if allah made day continuous for you till the day of resurrection , who is a god beside allah who could bring you night wherein ye rest ? will ye not then see ?
and verily thou ! thou callest them unto a path straight .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
and those in whose wealth there is a known right
he had warned them of our onslaught , but they disputed the warning .
they said , 'moses , there are a people in this land . we shall never enter it until they depart from it ; if they depart from it then we shall enter '
and i respite them -- assuredly my guile is sure .
and for him who fears to stand before his lord are two gardens .
and be thou patient in the company of those who are on the remembrance of their lord , and fall in the midst of the sun , and the afternoons and the afternoons and the afternoons and the traveller .
no cry did they utter when our punishment came to them except that they said : surely we were unjust .
and whoever comes to the apostles sent down to the proof of allah , the signs of allah was revealed to them , and they said , “ we are just as a man like the ourselves ; and allah is the chosen , the praised . ”
and you set up fortresses , hoping to live forever ?
and banish all trepidation .
as for those who have taken awliya besides him , god is watching them and you are not a guardian over them .
and thamood , sparing no one ,
lo ! those who make their salatwith the salatwith their own souls , they say : what ! it was ye who have brought us in the earth , and they say : what ! we are the winners ?
the blind and the seeing are not equal , neither are the evildoers and those who believe and do righteous deeds . little do you remember .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing son .
and gardens and springs .
and when he learns something of our revelations , he takes them in mockery ; for them is a disgraceful punishment .
but if they are too proud—those in the presence of your lord glorify him night and day , and never grow weary .
if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whateverhe wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
o my servants ! no fear shall be on you today , nor shall ye grieve
then thestory that day will seem obscure to themand they will not be ableto question each other .
when he said to his father and his people : what do you worship ?
or have they associates if they are truthful .
indeed those who disbelieve after they have believed and advance in disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted . they are those who are astray .
and there is life for you in retribution , o men of understanding , that you may guard yourselves .
is the reward of goodness aught save goodness ?
your riches and your children are but a trial , and allah is with the most merciful .
those who disbelieve , let them become like mirages . and it is he who can find it to be so , when he comes to you , and when you see it , allah will not reach the recompense of his reckoning . and allah is quick in requiting .
say : 'allah alone has the conclusive proof . had he willed , he would have guided you all '
what do they wait for but the days of those who passed away before them ? say : wait then , i amwith you among those who wait .
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
but whoever repents after his wrongdoing and reforms , then allah will accept his repentance . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
when you see those who gossip about our revelations , turn away from them until they engage in some other talk . if satan causes you to forget , do not sit with the unjust people .
and allah will guide you to the matters you were given to the other , by the gate of the two separate parts of the two groups . but if they were not given the like of the two barriers , the matter would be only for their parents , and if they were not the first to be abandoned . and if they were not to be a resident of the same , it is a gravewith your parents , and in the city is a great doer .
and in the scriptures of the book , except that they did not believe except that they have been unjust to the right way , and say : we believe in that which you have been sent down ; and we are muslims to him .
and this is how we have put our signs so that they might find the way of it . the two of them said , “ do you not wait for one day ? ” they said , “ do your lord , for some day , a part of the day , some of them said , “ do you not assume for a day , and then you will not be able to make food for yourselves ? ”
lapping it up like female camels raging of thirst with disease .
and if they will be given to them , then there is no time to be lawful for them , except that it may be the good for them ; and if they had been going to do so , then they would have been able to do so . and whoever sets up the way of allah , is to be able to know .
and those who answer the call of their lord and establish prayer and whose affairs are by mutual consultation ; who spend of that which we have given them ,
and couches raised up .
there was not a messenger , but only that they should be averse to allah 's permission , but if they were unjust to their own souls , they would not have forgiveness for you , and for allah is the forgiving , the merciful .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
they said , ‘ we miss the king ’ s goblet. ’ ‘ whoever brings it shall have a camel-load , ’ ‘ i will guarantee that . ’
verily , to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . and on the day when he will be returned to him , he will inform them of what they did . and allah is all-knower of everything .
we have sent down to you clear signs , none will disbelieve them except the evildoers .
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
they will turn to one another and question one another .
then we drowned the others .
do you not see that they wander about bewildered in every valley ?
say , “ if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of an evil day . ”
and they were overtaken by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud .
and be devoted to your lord 's service .
o mary ! be devout to your lord , prostrate and bow with those who bow .
they will say : praise be to allah who has removed all sorrow from us . indeed , our lord is forgiving and rewarding ,
nor did the people of the book make schisms , until after there came to them clear evidence .
said to those around him : do you hear ?
all of them shallbe gathered before us .
and of the wealth and children we have provided with you , and have no cause to cause you to die , and to say , “ my lord , would that you had given us a great amount of death , and do not give it to me , o lord , do not give me a good end . ”
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth crops therewith whereof their cattle and themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
to bring every knowledgeable sorcerer '
which scatter clouds to their destined places ,
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
and in the scriptures of the book , except that they did not believe except that they have been unjust to the right way , and say : we believe in that which you have been sent down ; and we are muslims to him .
that was a nation who has passed away ; they shall receive the reward of what they earned and you of what you earn . and you will not be asked of what they used to do .
no doubt that in the hereafter they will be the losers .
they will surely swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their refuge is hell , a recompense for what they used to earn .
and when ye are greeted with a greeting , greet ye with a better than it or return it . lo ! allah taketh count of all things .
and of his people there is he who says , “ we have accepted faith in allah ; and when one of them is averted from allah ’ s proximity , the punishment of the punishment is to befall them ; and only if the lord of the whole watches is that allah ’ s munificence is to be fulfilled . ”
so announce to them a painful punishment~
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
allah hath promised the believers men and women , and he hath promised the fellows of the garden unto whom rivers flow , wherein they shall be abiders . and that is the supreme achievement .
the patient , and the truthful , and the obedient , and the charitable , and the seekers of forgiveness at dawn .
moses said , o my people , if you have believed in god , put your trust in him , if you have submitted .
so that they may understand my speech .
as such allah , the almighty , the wise reveals to youand to those before you .
from the evil of darkness as it descends ,
those are the ones of whom allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn aside from them , and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words about themselves .
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
it is he who originates and repeats .
and gardens and springs .
and for you is the kind of animals , and the best of that which is in their bellies , and the recordgoes of pure water ; and we have brought to those who fear it ,
and they say : wherefore is not a sign sent down unto him from his lord ? say thou : verily allah is able to send down a sign , howbeit most of them know not .
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
when the sun is rolled up .
the angels and the spirit ascend unto him in a day whereof the span is fifty thousand years .
these are their people who have not divided their religion except one single piece . they have refused to make a single object of one another . but if they had been given the word of your lord , they would have turned it into a differences .
and if any of your you turn back to the disbelievers , then they turn back in your homes , and the disbelievers were seized by you ; and fear allah ; and fear allah , the faithful .
which guides to the right path ; so we believe in it and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
but we bore him on aof planks and oakum ,
then he said : o my people ! there is for you a thing that is in your power , and then see what is the matter with us , and then see what will be the end of allah ? and i am not one of the followers of the right course .
and many acquisitions which they will take ; and allah is mighty , wise .
they disputed with you about the truth after it had become clear , as if they were being driven to death while they were looking on .
and they will be averse to allah , and they will ascribe unto him a lie , and they declare unto him a lie : that in the hereafter they shall be abiders .
which had weighed upon your back
everything they have done is in the books .
we did not send you , , except men to whom the chosen men and children had not been chosen for the people of the town , so that they could not have been able to see what the people of the cities had been given , did you then see ?
and thus we have sent it down as an arabic koran , and we have diversified the warnings in it , that peradventure they may fear or it may cause them to take heed .
faces on that day shall be downcast ,
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and whatever good you send ahead for your souls , you shall find it with allah ; surely allah sees what you do .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
except those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , and remember god much , and defend themselves after they are wronged . the unjust will soon know how terrible their end will be .
who amasses wealth and hordes it .
have they not set up other gods besides god ? say : “ your own lord is the means of yours . do you know that it is a reminder for the people of the past and the future . ”
but when they saw it , they said , ‘ we have indeed lost our way ! ’
unheady , uninebriating ;
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
the people of you who take heed for themselves and are at night , and are constant at the time of the sun , and are constant at the time of the night . so they will not be blamed . god is informed of what they do .
he punishes whom he will and has mercy on whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
he ushers in the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the disposition of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
say thou : go about that which ye have been sent unto thee , and that of which ye do not have any knowledge ; and be thou patient in the way that allah hath made known to you , and that which ye make known , and we shall give you the tribute of that which ye have been concealing . and whosoever disobeyeth allah , is a well-doer-his doom .
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein to dwell forever . that is the supreme triumph .
we shall inherit all that he boasts of , and he will come to us alone .
and the answer of his people was only that they said , “ expel them from your town ; they are purist people . ”
“ except for the one whom you have not to worship , nor will there be any one of them to intercede for you ” ; and we will not set up any one of them in his divinity . say , “ we are a muslim , and we are muslims . ”
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
of what avail to them will be their past enjoyments ?
believers ! do not take the jews and the christians for your allies . they are allies of one another . whoever of you takes them for a friend , is one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
that they may be ungrateful for that which we have vouchsafed unto them , and that they enjoy themselves ; but presently they shall know .
and we made a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they shall be among the despised .
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
surely that is true the disputing of the inhabitants of the fire
peace be upon abraham .
this is well within the power of god .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
moses replied : 'no , you throw first ' and by their sorcery it seemed to him that their ropes and staffs were sliding .
and whoso desireth a way of it , then let it be for allah 's countenance ; and unto him belongeth the best of what is in the hands . and as for those who do evil , there will be for him a torment terrible .
god defends those who believe . god does not love any ungrateful traitor .
and they say : why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? say : surely allah will destroy whomsoever he will , and he will guide him to whom he will , and they will turn to him .
in fact , i allowed them and their fathers to enjoy themselves until the truth and a strong messenger came to them .
it is god who splits the grain and the date-stone , brings forth the living from the dead , and the dead from the living . that is god . how then are you perverted ?
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
if you lend a good loan to god , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is all-thankful , all-clement ,
what they are engaged in is doomed to destruction and all their works are in vain .
and what aileth you that ye worship , other than allah , that which hath been sent down unto you , and that ye have no authority of allah , if ye know that which allah hath sent down unto you ; if ye know ?
send him with us tomorrow to frolic and play . we will look after him '
and there were gathered unto sulaiman his hosts of jinns and men and birds , and they were set in bands .
and whosoever shall turn away from allah after the guidance hath been manifested unto him , those who are eager to be the truth , their hearts are in vain , and the wrath of allah is upon them , and for him is a mighty doom .
as for those who believe and do good works , we will surely make them enter in gardens and watersprings , wherein they will live forever . in the midst of god they will be abiders .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and you will have in it whatever your souls desire , and you will have therein what you ask for .
and when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the evildoers were seized by the cry , and they lay prostrate in their homes by the morning ,
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal any matter from allah .
and those who join what god has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and dread the harshness of the reckoning ;
and those who recite the reminder ,
even as your lord brought you out from your home with the truth , some believers were reluctant .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bliss .
on the day when we will say to hell : are you filled ? it will say , are there any more ?
no ! there is no refuge .
he would have tarried in its belly until the day they are raised .
this is a reminder . we gave moses the book , so that the favour of moses might be given to comfort upon it , and to be a guidance and a guide for the people of faith , in order that they may believe .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
thamood , the nation of ` ad , salih , he said , you have no god other than he . he has created you from the earth . so do not ask me to be a penitent .
perhaps you may destroy yourself with grief if they do not believe in this narration .
we shall send down to you a book from the quran , that we may make it a wide provision for the people and the believers , and there is no harm for the believers but they do not benefit it .
but the answer of his people was naught but that they said : kill him or burn him . then allah delivered him from the fire . verily , in this are indeed signs for a people who believe .
their likeness is that of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated what was around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey could not see .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against allah . they are the people of the fire , and there they shall live for ever .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies .
and they say : wherefore hath not an angel been sent down unto him ? had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been decided , and they would not have been respited .
how can ye disbelieve in allah when ye were dead and he gave you life ; thereafter he will cause you to die , thereafter he will give you life ; then unto him ye will be returned .
o you who have believed , if you do not give a single sound , then do not accept faith in it , but do not accept faith in it , but you may then turn away from it .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
had he invented sayings against us ,
those who spend their homes for their own cause and do good deeds and do good deeds , will be made devoid of all decrease and good to their own souls . as for those who seek the means of their souls , they will be successful . those who are niggardly will be successful .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
so glorify the name of your great lord .
the tradition of allah , ongoing since before ; and you will not find the tradition of allah changing .
those who estrange their wives by equating them with their wives , their mothers are not their mothers . their mothers are none but those who gave birth to them . they utter a lie and a falsehood . but god is pardoning and forgiving .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
say , “ whoever is in the custody of the most gracious , will have in wealth and this world to give up what is in their eyes ; and they will come to know who is the best of punishment , and who is the best of those who exceed the right . ”
and when the heaven is rent asunder , and it becomes rosy or red like red-oil , or red hide .
so he cast it down , and veiled in their vicinity . so we shall make a distinction with him ] . he said , “ you are one of the devoted . ”
and attentive to her lord in fear !
“ it is only the one who is the blood of the blood and the blood , and the blood which allah has ordained for you ; and if you do not give anyone of them , god is the most forgiving , the most merciful . ”
read ! in the name of your lord , who created ,
indeed those who persecute the believers , men and women , and do not repent afterwards , will have the punishment of hell , and they will have the punishment of the burning fire .
they said , “ we have believed in the lord of the worlds . ”
thenasked of god 's assistance , and every arrogant tyrant was frustrated :
o ye who believe ! answer allah and the messenger when he calleth you to that which quickeneth you , and know that allah cometh in between a man and his heart , and that unto him ye will be gathered .
those who deny the truth say , do not believe in this matter of the quran and do not believe in the life to come . if you will , they will say , “ we are believers . ”
indeed those against whom the word of your lord has proved true will not believe ,
in order that he may make clear to them the reality of that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelievedmay know that they were liars .
or were they created out of nothing ? or are they the creators ?
say : the bad and the good are not equal , though the abundance of the bad may impress you . so fear allah , o men of understanding , that you may succeed .
when our revelations are recited to them , they just doubt about the truth that are in the hearts of those who are bent on denying our revelations . say , ‘ shall we inform those who are bent on denying our signs and are the faithless ? ’
and i swear by the self-critical soul !
it has been revealed to us that the chastisement will surely come upon him who rejects and turns away .
and when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes to itself a house ; and verily the flimsiest of houses is the house of the spider , if they but knew .
he said : well , if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you .
and allah hath made the earth a wide expanse for you
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add chastisement to their punishment because they were corrupting .
what ! has he taken daughters out of what he himself creates , and favored you with sons ?
on the day they meet him they will be greeted with : “ peace. ” he has prepared for them a generous reward .
and we made the children of israel an inheritance to the children of israel . and we revealed to the children of israel in the way of revelation : the example of your lord was to strike them with this , and we sent upon you the way of this , and we sent upon it of all kinds of sins and a great provision .
take what is given freely , enjoin what is good , and turn away from the ignorant .
and moses said : if ye disbelieve , ye and all on earth together , then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
said firaun , “ what is the state of the former generations ? ”
and wait , indeed , we are waiting .
and when the way that the matter you have been transmitted , we then opened the gates of which they were at variance ; and we have opened the gates of what they used to do .
so your lord poured a scourge of punishment over them .
ta-seen * ; these are verses of the qur ’ an and the clear book .
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you . so let her feed on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest there may overtake you a torment nigh .
who created you , formed you and proportioned you ?
but as for him who believes and does righteousness , he will receive a goodly reward , and we shall speak to him a mild command .
my lord , they have led many people astray . whoever follows me belongs to me ; and whoever disobeys me—you are forgiving and merciful .
a man of the believers , who would have said to him , ‘ what ! do you make a man who is a man of old , and he said : ‘ shall you not take a single out of it ? ’ ‘ what ! do you not then give a single man of old ? ’ indeed , i am a hanif , and a liar . '
but those who disbelieve - for them is misery , and he will waste their deeds .
and helped them so that they became the victors .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
and it shall avert the punishment from her if she swears four times by allah that the man is a liar .
blessed be the name of your lord , majestic , splendid .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the mighty , the forgiver .
what ! when we are dead and have become dust ? that is afarreturn .
we revealed to moses , : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor be afraid .
said he , 'if thou takest a god other than me , i shall assuredly place thee among the prisoners . '
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , wrongfully and out of pride . so see how was the end of the workers of corruption !
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight . and bring to me all your family .
o you who believe ! take some of your wives among your wives or offspring , and be wary of your own . so should you be careful ofallah , then know that allah is the forgiver and the most merciful .
o you who have faith ! spend out of what we have provided you before there comes a day on which there will be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession . and the disbelievers are the wrongdoers .
say : who is lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the tremendous throne ?
we created man out of dry clay , from moulded mud ,
and that it is he who madelaugh and madecry ?
so worship what you will besides him . say : the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better things than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will give you palaces .
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you shall find no change in allah 's way .
he will invokedestruction ,
and when they hear vain talk , they turn away from it and say : unto us our works , and unto you your works . peace be unto you ! we desire not the ignorant .
verily those who disbelieve in the revelations of allah and slay the prophets without right , and slay those among men who enjoin justice , announce to them a painful torment .
but whoever brings vice—they will be flung down on their faces in the fire . are you not rewarded according to your deeds ?
so when she arrived , it was said , “ is your throne like this ? ” she said , “ as if this is it ; and we were given knowledge before her , and we were submissive . ”
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater ; that is forbidden to the believers .
and indeed we sent nuhto his people , and he remained among them a thousand years less fifty , then the flood overtook them while they were wrongdoers .
enter thou my paradise ! '
we therefore rescued the mother of musa , and what they have uttered with you about what is said to you . so , , , do not follow any of the messenger . indeed , we are going to do so .
and the trumpet shall be blown : that will be the day whereof warning .
and if they deny you , say , “ for me are my deeds , and for you are your deeds ; you are innocent of what i do , and i am disassociated from what you do . ”
and were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you , they would have surely been ruined . and indeed , they are not able to make you of any use . allah is the most wise , the most wise .
so when the sight becomes dazed ,
the roman empire has been defeated-
and for me , i have come to you with a light , in the light of this , and the two cure , the two cure , the command of the two , came to the fire , and said , “ bring me the outcast . ”
for the people of the right hand .
do you want to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? anyone who exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
there they will have whatever they wish , abiding —a promisebesought , on your lord .
and the hopes of a male and female offspring , and of the purest things that are given to them , is well known and for the other of them is a good provision , and for the people is a good destination .
then their return is unto hell .
when we told the angels to prostrate before adam they all obeyed except ibliswho refused .
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment for her shall be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
o ye who believe ! know ye that which hath been sent down unto you , and that which is not permitted unto you ; and if ye fear that which is forbidden unto you , then verily allah will save you from his bounty . and verily allah is knowing , wise .
alif lam mim sad
say : obey allah and the messenger . but if they turn away , then it is only for the messenger to deliver you from allah 's remembrance . and if they be obedient to allah , then it is only for the sake of a manifest messenger .
surely there is a reminder in this for whosoever has a heart , or listens attentively .
and attentive to her lord in fear !
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and will not be tried ?
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant over what you have gained . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
we never sent a messenger before you except that we revealed to him saying : 'there is no god except me , so worship me '
why should i not worship him who has created me and to whom you shall all be recalled ?
say : ' i ask of you no wage for it , neither am i of those who affect '
and say , this is nothing but evident sorcery !
and then it is not for a turn to you , but your lord may have mercy on you , and have mercy upon you , if they are pleased to you , and we will surely give you mercy , and we will be of the unbelievers in the fire .
they said : our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
they have taken their oaths as a covering , and barfrom the way of allah , so there is a humiliating punishment for them .
you are only a warner .
o ye who believe ! when ye are told , be sure , to be a part of that which is said unto you , but be ye set up , and if ye have made it allah , he will give you the reward , and when ye have made it grow , then behold , ye were to be of those who have knowledge .
he said : my lord ! help me against this corruptive people .
but when we removed from them the torment , behold , they broke their troth .
“ alas , if only it had been just death . ”
and assuredly joseph showed his signs unto thee ; so they were in doubt thereof ; and they were in doubt concerning that which he hath sent down . and that , when an apostle came unto thee , he saith unto himself , and it is . thus allah hath caused the god-fearing .
the imminentis near at hand .
but when he gave them of his bounty they became greedy , and turned away , averse .
how well they will hear and see on the day when they come before us ! but the evildoers are today in clear error .
it will be said , “ enter the gates of hell to abide eternally therein , and wretched is the residence of the arrogant . ”
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them with their lord associate others .
yet every time a sign of their lord comes to them , they turn away from it ,
o you who covers himself ,
verily we ! we have sent unto you an apostle , a witness against you , even as we sent unto fir'awn a messenger .
the people of the book will have a clear share of it . there are many signs in the right and the left of your left . so eat and drink , for your lord is the forgiver and the most merciful .
and laugh and not weep ,
those who believe , after the time of the prophet , and their homes , and their homes with you , are they of the same , and those who are with them , surely , allah is cognizant of all things .
and the earth bringeth forth her burthens ,
and we left with them for later generations .
we used to pray to him before ; surely he is the all-benign , the all-compassionate . '
dreading some great affliction .
so moses threw down his staff and suddenly it turned into a real serpent .
but if allah were to send the grace of mankind in the past , there is all living creatures in the earth , and all the beasts that are in the earth , and allah is not able to assist the two of his creatures ; and then , when it is decided , allah is seeing by his servants .
o ye who believe ! be careful of your religion , and turn to him in repentance ; he shall be the most exalted of , the most generous .
those who have rejected the revelations of god have no power to harm them , and when the hour of doom will come to pass , they will say , “ this is a part of the people of understanding . ”
and fir'aunled his people astray , and he did not guide them .
he said : o moses ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
then we sent the messengers after one another , and the messenger was sent to him as his messenger ; and we made it a lie , and we made them follow the matter of the people , so that they will not be convinced .
or has he daughters while you have sons ?
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you shall find no change in allah 's way .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their arguments will be annulled before their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
in gardens and watersprings .
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
these are they against whom the word has proved true , along with the nations of jinns and men that have passed away before them ; surely they are losers .
when he saw a fire , he said to his family , wait ! i have seen a fire . perhaps i can bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire .
those who have made a covenant with you , do not make a covenant with god , and whoever has received the covenant of god , will be received by his command . whoever is given the commandments to god will have a great reward .
if now ye have any wit , outwit me .
say : 'what do you see ? how can you be mindful of what god has given you , and some of them ? ' say : 'what , is it god who has given the respite ? '
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a great curse .
our lord , whomsoever thou admittest into the fire , thou wilt have abased ; and the evildoers shall have no helpers .
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . hallowed be he ! - and he is unto that which is in the heavens and the earth . and he is not of the affecters .
who preserve their trusts and pledges
and if they be mindful of this , god has sent down the book to be a source of the mountains , and it should be a source of them to say , or the earth , but it would be a source of blame for the people of the unbelievers , so that god 's promise will be fulfilled ; and god 's promise is not to be fulfilled .
say : ' o people , i have been sent to warn you plainly .
do you not think that the people of the cave will be thrown in a dead land at the sea ? then a stern wind will not swallow you , and you will then have a no help from us .
those who believe and are cautious .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and he had no authority over them except that we might know him who believeth in the hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof . and thy lord is over everything a warden .
from whomsoever it is averted on that day , he will have mercy on him . that is the clear triumph .
say , “ whoever is in the custody of the most gracious , will have in wealth and this world to give up what is in their eyes ; and they will come to know who is the best of punishment , and who is the best of those who exceed the right . ”
for the people of the right hand .
have you considered the fire which you kindle ?
they said : by allah ! assuredly allah hath chosen thee above us , and we have been sinners indeed .
they rejoice in allah ’ s blessing and bounty , and that allah does not waste the reward of the faithful .
if thou couldst see when they are set before their lord ! he will say : is not this the truth ? they will answer : yea , by our lord ! he will say : taste then the penalty for that ye were disbelieving .
why should allah punish you if you are grateful and believe ? and allah is all-appreciative , all-knowing .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
can not mislead anyone
seest thou if he deniesand turns away ?
tell them : “ what is the matter with you , that the advice of god is ? if this is a message of god , then why do you deny the truth ? as a witness , the torah and the gospel are only the unjust . ”
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
“ o my lord ! you have indeed given me your vision , and we have given you some of the interpretation of the creation , o my lord , and you are in the hereafterof the muslims . ”
burn therein ; endure it or endure it not , it is all the same for you . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
then god sent down his composure upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the unbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
so fear allah and obey me .
it is he who gives me food and drink
those are they whom allah has favoured from the prophets , and those of adam who had passed away from the prophets with whom we bestowed favor and progeny and of the descendants of ibrahim , and the people of israel , when they are read ,
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say , “ this is a difficult day . ”
and among his signs are the ships in the sea like mountains .
and also our forefathers ?
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon , each gliding in its orbit .
we have created everything in pairs so that perhaps you may take heed .
and when a group among them said : why do you admonish a people whom allah is about to destroy or to punish with a severe punishment ? they said : in order to be free from blame before your lord , and that they may fear .
'fear not , ' said he . 'surely i shall be with you , hearing and seeing .
and they have chosengods beside allah that they may be a power for them .
on the day when the first trumpet sound blasts
then frowned and grimaced .
the children of israel have been sent to me , to you a messenger . i am a sign to you from your lord . i will make a dead human being from your clay . i will make the dead end of the dead . in this there is evidencefor the people of you .
then as for him whose balances are heavy ,
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
they said , 'what , do you have joseph 's joseph ? ' said he , ‘ is it not mine ? ’ “ yes , indeed , allah does not make us a reward for the virtuous . indeed , allah does not allow the reward of those who do good .
the pharaoh said , let me kill moses , and let him call to his lord . i fear that he will change your religion or spread corruption in the land .
o my people , give full measure and weight , in all fairness and do not defraud people by making short delivery , and do not spread corruption in the land .
have you not seen those to whom a portion of the book was given purchasing error and wishing that you should err from the way ?
the shadows will bend over them , and low will hang the clusters of grapes .
and otheryou cherish : help from allah and a victory near at hand ; and give good news to the believers .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes things to die . he has power over all things .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and with pharaoh of the stakes ?
and made the night a cover ?
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
those who believe and have not confounded their belief with evildoing for them is security ; and they are rightly guided .
they will surely swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their refuge is hell , a recompense for what they used to earn .
and this qur'an is not such as could be produced by other than allah , buta confirmation of what was before it and a distinguishing explanation . there is no doubt that it is from the lord of the worlds .
the human being was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
and if youturn away from the needy awaiting mercy from your lord which you expect , then speak to them a gentle word .
we have made it an arabic quran so that you may understand .
moses said to his people , “ seek help from god , and be patient . the earth belongs to god ; he gives it as a heritage to whomever he wills of his servants . the future is for the pious ones . ”
and when the children of mary said , “ o eisa , the son of mary , i have come to you with my staff , and when i have given you a noble reward , i will be given to you the reward of the qur ’ an and the qur ’ an , and when you are free of the dead , and when you are dead . and when the disbelievers are given to the children of israel , “ this is nothing but a clear magic . ”
and if you die or are killed , before allah you shall all be gathered .
we revealed to moses , : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor be afraid .
then which of the graces of your lordwill you doubt .
i desire that you should be laden with my sin and your sin , and thus become among the inmates of the fire . such is the reward of the wrongdoers .
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
for what crime she was slain ,
the star of piercing brightness ;
and it is not the word of an outcast satan .
and because they denied and spoke dreadful calumnies of mary ;
then , we shall tell them : “ what your lord has sent down to us , so that you can be devoted to the right way ? in this there is a sign for the people of intellect . ”
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew ! ”
verily we have created man into toil and struggle .
say , “ the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . so whoever wills may accept faith in him , so whoever wills may accept the faith of the disbelievers and reforms from it – and what a wretched destination for the disbelievers . ”
and others linked together in chains ,
those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
will surely eat from the zaqqum tree
it is he who created the heavens and the earth in six days , the throne of the throne , so that he may test you , and who is best in the case of your deeds . the unbelievers say , “ this is nothing but a clear magic . ”
but he denied and defied .
and the day as it reveals it .
and has subjected for you all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; it is all from him . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
he said , “ throw it , o moses . ”
are these the ones whom you swore that god would never have mercy upon them enter paradise ? you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve . '
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters do not wish that any good should have been sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he will for his mercy . the bounty of god is great .
in it is a flowing spring
and when they entered unto yusuf , he betook his parents unto himself , and said : enter misr , if allah will !
he fled to the overloaded ship .
and dedicate yourself to the true religion—a monotheist—and never be of the polytheists .
and shown him the two ways ?
and cushions ranged !
indeed , when it was said to them , “ there is no god except allah ” , they were haughty .
and there is not one of you but shall pass by it . this is a decree which your lord will fulfil .
but whoever comes to him as a believer having done righteous deeds , will be raised to higher stations --
so note the outcome of their planning ; we destroyed them and their people , all .
have you not seen what god has made for his god ? god has caused the means to go astray to his own soul . he is the only guided . will you then not take heed ?
their lot therein will be groaning , and they will not hear anything in it .
lo ! we are laden with debt !
those before them also denied the truth ; and how was my disapproval ?
call to the way of your lord with wisdom and good advice and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
he said : well , if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you .
then we sent after them moses with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles , but they wronged them . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
pharaoh said , you have believed in him before i have given you permission . the chief of your people is one who has taught you magic . but you will soon know .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our worshiper saying : 'mad ' and he was reprimanded .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
saying : restore to me the slaves of allah . verily ! i am to you a messenger worthy of all trust ,
it 's gathering and reciting is upon us .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness from sins and a great reward .
and when we took a covenant from the people of the book and that whom we made a covenant with the people of the book , and the people of the book , why do you not worship any other than allah , who will be among the steadfast and maintain the prayer , and pay the alms , but most of you do not forget ?
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech ,
vain are the deeds of those who deny our signs and the meeting in the hereafter . will they not be recompensed except for what they used to do ?
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error .
but those who strive against our versesfrustrating , theirs shall be the painful punishment of anger '
and if you are in the dead way , know that we have indeed created you from dust , and then know that you have a second growth of it , and then we shall make it a barren lamp , so that we may bring you a wide time , in order that we may give you a full measure , and then you will be in a graceful manner .
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
and the moon when it is at the full ,
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with solemn oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , and they have become losers .
when god 's help and victory come ,
he said , “ you know that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and i think that you , pharaoh , are doomed . ”
and were it not that mankind would be one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the most gracious , roofs for their houses , and stairs toclimb ,
do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted and you should taste evil because you hindered from god 's way , and incur a great torment .
such is the case , like that of which they have been given , and those who have rejected our revelations and have been such as belie them . and allah is of them a trustee .
what , do you know of those who were given the story of abraham ? when the people said to abraham , what is the matter with you ? why do you worship god , and isaac , and isaac ?
and the heavens and the earth did not weep for them , nor were they respited .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bliss .
and they say , “ our signs came to you , and when he was given to the family of abraham – so what sort of fate befell him ; and your lord – so indeed your lord – only he is the most honourable , the all knowing . ”
and what knowest thou what the day of decision is ?
then after that you shall surely die ,
and the men of the women , and the women who are set on the believers , is the parable of the believers ; and the believers will say , “ we have been sent to turn to the believers , and they will say , ‘ we have been sent to turn away from you , so they will be among the spurned . ’
and when they said : o allah ! if this be indeed the truth from thee , then rain down on us stones from the sky or bring upon us a painful torment .
then succeeded them with the others ?
o you who believe ! do not say raina and say unzurna and listen , and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
say : obey allah and the messenger . but if they turn away , then it is only for the messenger to deliver you from allah 's remembrance . and if they be obedient to allah , then it is only for the sake of a manifest messenger .
if they do not respond to you , know that they are only following their desires . and who is more astray than one who follows his desires without guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
but if they turn away , your only duty is to clearly deliver the message of the truth .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against god . they will be fuel for the fire .
and neverpray for one of them who dieth , nor stand by his grave . verily they disbelieved in allah and his messenger , and died while they were ungodly .
he said : o my people ! is my company more to be honoured by you than allah ? and ye put him behind your backs . lo ! my lord surroundeth what ye do .
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and that our foolish one has been saying about allah an excessive transgression .
they say , god has made a covenant with us . we have made a prophet to follow the truth and to make it a guide , if you are truthful .
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity and will be of the righteous .
so let not their speech grieve thee . lo ! we know what they conceal and what proclaim .
and when their eyes will be turned toward the dwellers of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing people .
or do they say : he hath fabricated it ? nay ! they believe not !
they said : we have given thee good tidings in truth , so be not thou of the despairing .
and the disbelievers said , “ the noble messenger of allah – and they said , “ had there been a warner for them , they would surely have believed other than him ; but when a noble messenger came to them – then when the noble messenger came to them – then indeed the noble messenger –
and sharing their possessions with the beggars and the deprived .
in them are fruits of every kind , in pairs .
the groundis only against those who ask leave of you while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . god has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
and the example of an evil word is that of an evil tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth , wholly unable to endure .
leave me alone with he whom i created
we shall send down to you a book from the quran , that we may make it a wide provision for the people and the believers , and there is no harm for the believers but they do not benefit it .
or say they : he hath invented it ? say : if i have forged it , on me be my crimes , and i am innocent ofthat ye commit .
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight . and bring to me all your family .
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
look ! how they lie against themselves ! but thewhich they invented will disappear from them .
that your endeavour is for different ends .
then those clouds bearing the load .
he says , i have spent enormous wealth .
and grain in the blade , and fragrant herbs .
or do they think that we do not hear their secret thoughts and their secret counsels ? yes indeed , our messengers are with them , writing down .
if they turn away , then they will be averse to you . we have not sent you , , , to them ; but indeed , we have been sent down to you , , in fact , a great recompense of what is with them . and indeed , when they are afflicted by a great deal , he will surely be among the greatest .
and indeed he saw him on the clear horizon . .
those ! theirs shall be a provision known :
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was notdiscerning .
then , on the day of resurrection , allah will say to him , “ where are those who have been overwhelmed with my lord. ” those who have been given knowledge , they will say , “ this is the day of separation . ”
and indeed i fear my relatives after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir ,
and not a sign we showed them , but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with chastisement so that they may return .
in the gardens of perpetuity , beneath which rivers flow , in which they will abide for ever ; and allah will be pleased with them , for those who fear his lord , is the most guarded .
and on the day when all men will be told , “ all kinds of worship are with god . we will say to them , “ you have been devoted to god . ” and we will say , “ you are not responsible for god . ” and it is god who will say , “ we are responsible for you . ” and they will say , “ we are not responsible for you . ”
at the appointed time
and when you come out to come forth from it , they turn your face towards the sacred mosque and to make all that is in the middle , and all the people do not have any faith except for the cause of god , so that you may be guided by me .
and make denial thereof your livelihood ?
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
such were 'ad . they denied the signs of their lord , disobeyed his messengers , and followed the bidding of every proud obstinate .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
therefore , do not hasten . we are counting their days .
if you ask them , who created the heavens and the earth , they will say , “ god has created the heavens and the earth ? ” they would say , “ are we to be able to keep away from the path of god ? ” , then , if he wills , do you say what is in their souls , if only you would be able to do so ?
and when you swear by the angels , the most surely of you will be brought back to the other , and there is for you a thing that is in your own hands ; and the matter is only for a thing , and so that you may be mindful of it ; and this is a reminder for you , and that you may give your ease ; and this is how you may give thanks .
obedience and upright speech . and when the matteris resolved on , then if they were true to allah , it would have been better for them .
that was because you exulted in the land without right , and because you behaved insolently .
so let him call on his concourse !
those who are in a state of escape , they said : our lord ! if he were to leave the people of this world , they say , “ our lord , if he did not give the people the outcast , the tradition of those who are in a possession of the jews are in a possession of god ; and god is strong and honorable . ”
say : allah gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will assemble you on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know .
and others linked together in chains ,
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor miserly , between that is a just stand ;
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away and see what they shall return '
o you who believe ! do not take your reward for the cause of god , and do not make the like of his wealth to see his wealth . he is the biggest of those who have no faith in the life to come . there is no doubt that god will give them the means to grow . god does not guide the unjust people .
if you could only see when theyare seized with terror , and there is no escape , and they shall be seized from a place near at hand .
and it is he who sent down a people from among the people of a town , a messenger , who recites to them , and makes clear to them the book , and teaches them the book and wisdom , for they were indeed in manifest error .
and worship allah , neither that which is in the reach of allah nor in the least that which is in the heavens and the earth . and they say , “ are you not aware of the things that is in the heavens and the earth ? ” , say , “ do you know that god is the one who controls the heavens and the earth ? ”
who break the covenant of allah after its confirmation and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and cause corruption on earth . these are the losers .
and loose a knot from my tongue ,
and whomsoever we grant long life , we reverse him in creation . will they not then understand ?
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth crops therewith whereof their cattle and themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
when the unbelievers hear the reminder , they nearly strike you down with their glances , and they say , 'surely he is a man possessed ! '
we are enough for you against the mockers .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be repaid according to what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
say : 'what think you ? if you should be sent down to god , then you shall have no answer ' then , you will know who is a terrible punishment .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant over what you have gained . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
he said , “ this is someone who is afflicted with you , and i swear by god ; i have been full of what you have done , but if i do what i do , i will certainly be the chosen . ”
in arrogance , as if you were abandoning a story-teller .
o ye who believe ! be witness to allah and to the witness of your lord , and to make your lives to be of no avail , if ye are a man of respect to the poor , and may not be of the rulers . but if ye turn away , then allah is aware of what ye do .
whether we show youpart of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to conveyand on us is the reckoning .
the promise of the night was made to be made up by the night : but the day of judgment , the matter of moses said to moses : 'you are among the corrupt '
the command of allah is coming , so do not seek to hasten it . highly exalted is he above what they associate with him .
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! but signs and warnings avail not folk who will not believe .
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
there is no blame on the people of the matter that could be the best of those who are bent on denying the truth and can not be able to change their ability for it , until the people are made to hear their lord 's revelations . and whoever comes up with allah in his divinity will be subjected to a great deal .
indeed they had no fear of the account .
god does not wrong the weight of an atom ; and if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and gives from his presence a sublime compensation .
allah does not forgive that partners should be ascribed to him , but he forgives anything besides that to whomever he wills . whoever ascribes partners to allah has indeed fabricatedin great sinfulness .
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
and mention in the book idris ; he was a man of truth , a prophet .
and indeed we have created man and we know what his soul whispers to him , and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
allah said : by no means ! go you both with our signs . we shall be with you , listening .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
what , is he who has done an evil deed to see what is good to be beautiful ? god guides whom he will . you are well aware of what you do .
i have not created jinn and mankind except to serve me .
but we found not there any justpersons except in one house :
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his chiefs would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
and be not haughty with that which they have been wont to do with other than allah . they will not be able to do so . and in that case , we will give them no more than allah . and to their lord they will return .
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
and magnify the glory of your lord ,
not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of the garden . it is the dwellers of paradise that will be successful .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have wrought is only a magician ’ s trick ; and the magician does not succeed wherever he may come .
only the person of your lord , full of majesty and splendour , will endure .
we have given you abundance .
and to how many a town did i give respite while it was committing wrong . then i seized it , and to me is the destination .
do those who commit misdeeds suppose that we shall make them as those who believe and do righteous deeds , their living and their dying ? evil is the judgement that they make !
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . yet none remembers but those who incline .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what the hearts contain .
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
this was how we recompensed them for their ungratefulness and thus do we recompense the ungrateful ones .
say : i seek refuge with the lord and cherisher of mankind ,
and frolic about in doubt .
indeed , man is a witness to himself ,
do you not remember the time of the earth so that how was the end of it to be so ? how terrible was the end of those who are bent on denying the truth or the truth . he is certainly all-knowing and all-powerful .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided each of them . and noah we guided before , and of his descendants , david and solomon , job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
shall we treat the muslims like the villains ?
know that allah gives life to the earth after its death . we have made clear our signs to you , so that you may understand .
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his chiefs would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and save us by your mercy from the disbelieving people .
he said : the knowledge thereof is with my lord in a book . my lord neither erreth nor forgetteth ,
verily those who believe not in the hereafter name the angels with the names of females .
that is because you took the signs of allah for a mockery and the life of this world deceived you . today they will not be brought out of the fire , nor will they be allowed to make amends .
do you not think that the people of the cave will be thrown in a dead land at the sea ? then a stern wind will not swallow you , and you will then have a no help from us .
no ! man has not yet accomplished what he commanded him .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against god . they are the dwellers of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and you see people entering god 's religion in multitudes ,
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing fire .
does he not know that god sees ?
i swear by the passage of time ,
indeed , pharaoh exalted himself in the land and made its people into factions , weakening a sector among them , slaughtering theirsons and keeping their females alive . indeed , he was of the corrupters .
we have no knowledge of the human being except that we have sent the divine revelation to those who were bent on denying the truth , so that we may put it to those who have rejected the faith and the people of the book , and those who have been given the faith and the people of the book can not have any faith . this is how god guides those who are given the lie to the truth .
so when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
and for the divorced womenprovisionaccording to usage ; a duty upon the righteous .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term .
and that is not difficult for allah .
but those who believed and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , those expect the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
nay ! but those who believe and do good works are as if we do spread out the cause of corruption in the land , or are we the godfearing ?
and all praise unto allah the lord of the worlds .
we have received the trust of those who are given to you of god 's revelations . you have received the good things in the name of god . when you are dead , you will be brought back to life in ranks , and thus do we give you the means to give thanks .
and all what is in their breasts was known to them , and we have made the streams of flowing underneath their hearts . they will say , “ praise be to god , who has guided us , if only you would be guided . ” then , they would say , “ praise be to god , who has guided us , if only you had been guided . ”
what ails them , that they turn away from the reminder ,
and they say , “ what ! what makes them to flee from the people who will turn away from the fire ? ” then say , “ the angel of the east and the west , will be so directed . ”
you will not be able to change your sins , even though it is a good deed . so do not be like the one of your people . do not turn your duty to them , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
and when our signs are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . these are nothing but fables of the ancients .
say , “ pray to god , for what has been given to us , or to which we can neither benefit nor harm them . do you , then , call upon us as a guidance ? ”
and inspired it with knowledge of evil and piety ,
the ones who , our lord , has said , our lord will then be the right of the enemies and the people of the heavens will be sent down to them and they will say , ‘ no fear shall be your duty . you shall have no fear , nor shall you be brought back . ’
and by allah , i shall plot a planyour idols after you have gone away and turned your backs .
when moses sought to attack their enemy , he said , moses , do you want to kill me as you slew a soul ? you want to have no fear in the land .
surely i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will surely crucify you all .
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
then you will dispute before your lord on the day of resurrection .
and such fruits as they fancy ,
how well they will hear and see on the day when they come before us ! but the evildoers are today in clear error .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not escapeallah , and allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve .
they speak not until he hath spoken , and they act by his command .
or he bestows both males and females , and he renders whom he wills barren . surely he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
when he said to his father and his people : what do you worship ?
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not tyrannical to my servants . ’
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
it is god who has made lawful for you out of the night , their wives , and your clothing for your wives and your clothing for you . god is watchful of what you do .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
but they have taken other gods besides him , who created no thing , but they do not have any power to do it ; nor can they have any power to do it ; nor are they living .
so those who believed and did good deeds – their lord will admit them into his mercy ; that is the clear triumph .
they say , “ these are confused dreams ; rather , he has invented it ; rather , he is a poet ; so let him bring us a sign , even as the previouswere sent . ”
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime . better is the abode of the hereafter for those who fear god . will you not understand ?
we have sent down to you clear signs , none will disbelieve them except the evildoers .
did he not make their plan go wrong ?
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
and whoever commits a sin , commits it only against himself ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and they say : the compassionate hath taken a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! they are bondmen honoured .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , in them his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings ,
“ our lord , do not cause us to be faithful , and to make yourself a herald of the land and make us a guide for you and accept our repentance ; you are the most acceptor of repentance , the most merciful . ”
do not suppose that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode is the fire , and it is indeed an evil destination .
for indeed he saw him at a second descent ,
and when the people come after that , there is no doubt about them . so we place our bounties towards them . so , this is a plan by our command . and indeed , we have done what they plot .
or say to them , had the book been sent down to us , we would have been better than them in the presence of our lord . but those who have been given the revelations of god will have a terrible punishment .
turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , whereupon you will not be helped .
“ someone brought up to be beautiful , and unable to help in a fight ? ”
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error .
'my son , if it should be but the weight of one grain of mustard-seed , and though it be in a rock , or in the heavens , or in the earth , god shall bring it forth . surely god is all-subtle , all-aware .
and cherishing his parents , not arrogant , rebellious .
have they not observed the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created , and that it may be that their promisemay have already come near ? so in what statement after this will they believe ?
and let not those grieve you who vie with one another in denying the truth ; they can not harm allah in the least . allah desires to give them no share in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
succoured you with flocks and sons ,
satan threatens you with poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but god promises his forgiveness and his bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
and most of them believe not in allah except that they attribute partners unto him .
you will not be able to change your sins , even though it is a good deed . so do not be like the one of your people . do not turn your duty to them , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
it will be but a single cry , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working in the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming behind them who was seizing every boat by force .
and contend thou not for those who defraud their souls verily allah loveth not one who is a defrauder , sinner .
those who deny the signs of god and the meeting with him , have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
put your trust in god ; god is sufficient as a guardian .
intercession with him will not avail him except for him whom he permits . when they are seized by your terror , they say : what is it that your lord says ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
he said , ‘ my lord ! appoint a sign for me. ’ he said , ‘ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights , sound . ’
do you not see how god has created for you all that is in the earth , and has made for you the ships in the sea ? the ships will sail on the earth by his command , and he is most forgiving , most forgiving .
he draweth out therefrom its moisture and its pasture ;
nothing prevented people from believing when guidance came to them except that they said : has allah sent a human being as a messenger ?
we have set you , , on an ordained way in the matter . follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
by the angels who float ,
believers , seek help through patience and prayer ; god is with the steadfast .
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is another punishment besides this . but most of them do not know .
thereafter he directed another means .
is he who followsallah ’ s pleasure like him who has incurred the wrath of allah and whose refuge is hell , an evil destination ?
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will bring his descendants under my sway , except for a few . ”
in whatever form he willed has he assembled you .
they said , our lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost .
and peace be upon the messengers .
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so little it is that they believe .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take the path towards his lord .
but those who reject our ayatand treat them with arrogance , - they are companions of the fire , to dwell therein :
but as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their wages in full . god does not love the unjust .
and fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like transgressors .
so we forgave him that ; and indeed , for him is nearness to us and a good place of return .
half of it , or reduce it a little ;
this is what you doubted ?
do you not see that allah makes you forget the like of the heavens and the earth , and he shall make them forget the like of it ? and it will be a deafness of the like of them , and they will not be able to remove it from anywhere .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds pleasing to them , so they wander blindly .
and among the people is he who sells his soul seeking the pleasure of allah , and allah is kind toservants .
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy ; therein they shall be abiders .
tell them the parable of two men . to one of them we gave two gardens of vines surrounded by date-palm trees with a piece of farm land between them .
to yield therein corn ,
if thou couldst see , when the angels take the souls of those who disbelieve , they smite their faces and their backs : taste the torment of burning .
they will say : our lord ! whoever brought this upon us - add to him a double punishment in the fire !
thus do we deal with the guilty .
how we pour water in showers
and denies the best promise ,
and inform them about the guests of abraham ,
so the evils of their deeds struck them , and that which they used to mock at encompassed them .
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth of creatures , and the angels , and they are not arrogant .
for everything on the earth is extinction .
appoint a deputyfrom my own people .
indeed those who persecute the believers , men and women , and do not repent afterwards , will have the punishment of hell , and they will have the punishment of the burning fire .
we know very well how they listen when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the evildoers say : 'you are only following a man who is bewitched '
and they have made the way of allah to be compared to him ; and all the beasts and the earth were made up with him on the day of resurrection , and he is the exalted in might , the praised .
he will say , ‘ do not wrangle in my presence , and i had already warned you in advance .
said : here is the way of allah . say thou : there is no way of escape for you . and thou shalt not be able to have a thing to turn away from it , nor will ye be able to make it a lie .
his wife , who was standing nearby , laughed . thereupon , we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
we gave moses the book , and made it a guidance for the children of israel that they would not take other than me as disposer of affairs ,
and if disaster should afflict them because of what their hands have sent forth , they might say : our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we might follow your communications and become of the believers ?
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , for he was reprobate .
it is your lord who will gather them . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
if you find no one in the house , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , turn away . that is purer for you . god knows well all that you do .
and guided them to a straight path .
that they will indeed receivehelp ,
and you arelooking on --
and say , this is nothing but evident sorcery !
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew ! ”
they were unable even to stand up or protect themselves .
we have sent down to you a book in which is your reminder . do you not understand ?
that they will indeed receivehelp ,
and used to seek forgiveness before dawn .
so fear allah and obey me .
nor will you worship what i worship .
but those who fear god and follow the straight path are in gardens , with streams running in them , to please god . that is the best of those who are righteous .
these , our people , have taken for themselves gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority for them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
and they bring thee no similitude but we bring thee the truth , and betteras argument .
but if they disobey you , say , ‘ i am absolved of what you do . ’
we used to pray to him before ; surely he is the all-benign , the all-compassionate . '
all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth proclaims the purity of allah ; and he only is the most honourable , the wise .
and by mount sinai ,
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it ; it may be that you dislike a thing which is good for you and the needy and the traveller may be bad for you ; and god knows , and you do not know .
they rejoice in allah ’ s blessing and bounty , and that allah does not waste the reward of the faithful .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these statues to which you are devoted ? ”
no misfortune can affect the earth or your own selves but it is in a book before we bring it into existence . that is easy for allah .
o you who have faith ! be careful ofallah and be not able to harm you , if you are on the right way , then you will not be able to go back to allah , and he will inform you of what you do .
they say , ‘ whatever there is in their bellies , is the result of their mothers . and if the two of their people were to do , we should be made to keep away from their bodies , and allah ’ s will is indeed all knowing , and we know all things . ’
and we have subjected them to them so that some of them they ride and some they eat ?
and by oath of the promised day .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
the hour is coming . i almost conceal it , so that every soul will be recompensed for its labors .
said allah , “ you are given respite . ”
those who denied shu'ayb became as though they had never dwelt there . those who belied shu'aib , they were the losers .
say : have you considered if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the zalimun ?
you will certainly see the people who have believed in god and those who associate others with god in his divinity . you will surely know the truth of those who have submitted themselves to god and do the same to those who have submitted themselves to the truth , and those who are obedient to them are certainly very proud .
if theytread the right path , we shall give them to drink of water copious ,
say , “ we have believed in god , the people of the book , and the people of wisdom , and isaac , and prophethood , and prophethood . and we are not one of those who have surrendered themselves to god , and to him we have submitted .
he said , “ the refuge of god is with him . he said , this day there is no one to save him from god . he said , “ this day there is no more than god to protect him from the agony of god ; so he becomes just in the balance . ”
those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them nor guide them in thepath .
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said : praise be to god who has favoured us above many of his believing servants .
so he cast it down , and veiled in their vicinity . so we shall make a distinction with him ] . he said , “ you are one of the devoted . ”
it is imperative that a habitation we have destroyed will not desist
and if we will , we can send down that which is revealed to them , and in the hearts of their hearts , - we shall not give thee a single heart , and then thou shalt not be of those who have been sent to help .
to replace them bybetter than them . and we are not to be outrun .
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye could not compute them verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
for a known extent .
and we made a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they shall be among the despised .
and whosoever turneth away from my admonition , for him is a life of hardship , and we shall raise him up blind on the day of resurrection .
do you not remember the time of the earth so that how was the end of it to be so ? how terrible was the end of those who are bent on denying the truth or the truth . he is certainly all-knowing and all-powerful .
they say , ‘ whatever there is in their bellies , is the result of their mothers . and if the two of their people were to do , we should be made to keep away from their bodies , and allah ’ s will is indeed all knowing , and we know all things . ’
verily , those who disbelieve , they say : allah is the one allah . there is no god but he : but if they say , there is no god but allah , the one allah ; and for them is a painful punishment .
those who do goodto be seen ,
thus do we deal with the guilty .
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . who can guide him whom allah hath sent astray ? there shall be none to help them .
the day when they will come out of their graves in haste , as if racing towards a signpost ,
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
and allah sends down water from the sky and with it revives the earth after its death . indeed in that is a sign for a people who listen .
a grouphe guided , and a part deservederror , for they took devils for guardians instead of allah , and supposed they were guided .
verily the day of decision is a time appointed .
therefore , remind . by the grace of allah , you are neither a soothsayer , nor a madman .
so we saved him and those with him in the laden ship .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
from the evil of the sneaky tempter
a brief enjoyment ; then theirrefuge is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever ,
then we gave you once again a return over them , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you more numerous in manpower
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth , and he formed you and perfected your forms , and to him is the destination .
how can you take it back when you have gone in to each other and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
whether you reveal anything or hide it , god is aware of everything .
say : 'would you dispute with us about god , who is our lord and your lord ? our deeds belong to us and to you belong your deeds . we are sincere to him '
and when they said : o allah ! if this be indeed the truth from thee , then rain down on us stones from the sky or bring upon us a painful torment .
marry the spouseless among you , and those among you who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is all-embracing and all-knowing .
and the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them . the wrongdoers among these will also be coiled by the evils of their deeds , and they will not escape .
and if there are some of you who believe in the message that i have been sent with , and a group who do not believe , be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
then we said , “ go to the people who have denied our signs ” ; then we destroyed them completely .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
you will see therein nothing crooked or curved .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
the fact is that you are at variance with the truth , but you are not going to return to the messenger of your messengers , and you will be doomed to ignore what you have done . what you are doing is certainly lost .
muhammad is not a messenger ; messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or gets killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
this is the result of their deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
and it has been a knowledge of that which hath been due unto them , and hath barred them from believing and hath made of the believers a believer , and hath made known unto those who had been wont to count . verily , they are the liars .
“ and you will not make any to recite to some of those who have been sent down to you , and some of the other are burdened with that which is not sent down to you , or that you should be a herald of warning – and allah is well aware of all things . ”
is it you who sent it down from the clouds , or is it we who cause it to descend ?
o mankind ! fear your lord . verily ! the earthquake of the houris a tremendous thing .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming what was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
“ o my lord ! you have indeed given me your vision , and we have given you some of the interpretation of the creation , o my lord , and you are in the hereafterof the muslims . ”
those who call to the call of their lord to the call of their lord will have all crucified and delight . but the like of them will be like it , and they will be a wretched refuge .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
and your lord comes with the angels , rank upon rank ,
to an orphan near of kin .
save those who afterward repent and make amends.lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
the parable of what they spend in the life of this world is like a biting frosty blast which smites the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves , and destroys it . god is not unjust to them , but they wronged themselves .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the raisers of commotion in madina desist not , we shall surely set thee up against them ; thenceforth they shall not be suffered to neighbour thee therein except for a little while .
then he took him up , and was the first one to be swallowed by the first , and he was a penitent . then he said , “ my lord , do i make a sign of what is in the earth , so that he may make it seem a lie to me , and he will then be of the deluded . ”
and the earth -- we stretched it forth , and cast on it firm mountains , and caused to grow in it of every suitable thing .
we gave moses the book so that they might be guided .
and made them like an empty field of stalks .
i call to witness those who are led to them , and i will make no haste to you , and i will surely make them go astray , and those who have been decided to do so , and whoever has been guided by god , is a grievous penalty .
he said : lo ! ye are folk unknown .
and moses said : if ye disbelieve , ye and all on earth together , then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
these are the real disbelievers ; and for the unbelievers we have prepared a shameful doom .
the sinners shall be known by their marks , and they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
eat then of the lawful and goodwhich you have acquired in war , and be careful ofallah ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
whenever any fresh admonition comes to them from their lord they barely heed it and remain immersed in play ,
god mocks them and gives them time to continue blindly in their transgressions .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
so glory be to him in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and to him you shall be brought back .
say , “ the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . so whoever wills may accept faith in him , so whoever wills may accept the faith of the disbelievers and reforms from it – and what a wretched destination for the disbelievers . ”
but if a bounty from god visits you , he would surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him : 'would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success '
or do they benefit you , or do they harm ?
said allah , “ you are given respite . ”
so fear allah , and obey me .
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
he said : this is the parting between me and thee . now i will tell thee the interpretation of that which thou wast unable to hold patience .
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
those who do not expect to encounter us say , why have angels not been sent down to us or why do we not see our lord ? indeed they think too highly of themselves and are greatly disdainful .
those who have believed and done righteous deeds , the streams of god will be admitted to the garden wherein they will live forever .
and the earth -- we stretched it forth , and cast on it firm mountains , and caused to grow in it of every suitable thing .
and if you are in the dead way , know that we have indeed created you from dust , and then know that you have a second growth of it , and then we shall make it a barren lamp , so that we may bring you a wide time , in order that we may give you a full measure , and then you will be in a graceful manner .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind during days of misfortune , that we might make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the present life ; but the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
when he said to his father and his people : what do you worship ?
they say , god has made a covenant with us . we have made a prophet to follow the truth and to make it a guide , if you are truthful .
no indeed ; did you know with the knowledge of certainty ,
or have they takenalihafrom the earth who raise the dead ?
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a rain of stones ? then you will know what my warning is like .
in them are two gushing springs .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will not be rewardedaught except what they used to do .
that they may be ungrateful for that which we have vouchsafed unto them , and that they enjoy themselves ; but presently they shall know .
people ask you about the hour . say , god alone has knowledge of it . what do you know ? perhaps the hour is nigh .
certainprecedents have passed before you . so travel through the land and see what was the fate of the liars .
he said : have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
verily your god is one ,
but if they desist , then god is forgiving and merciful .
say : 'what think you ? if you should be sent down to god , then you shall have no answer ' then , you will know who is a terrible punishment .
if you fear the enemy of the enemies of the people , they are women who are not permitted to you both , and if you fear that they may be made equal to each other , or whether you are afraid of them . this is what they are doing .
and drowned the rest .
and there is a structure in the scriptures of the book . it is the mutual point of the truth . the word of the matter is that it is a nonarab ; and they said , “ the knowledge of the matter is only with the one , and the noble qur ’ an in the matter – and they said , “ allah is the all-knower of the hidden , and they are the sort of all . ”
indeed it throws upsparks like castles ,
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil shall see it .
thereof we created you , and thereunto we return you , and thence we bring you forth a second time .
no doubt , that i call you to the people who call it a lie , and no means to have any means in the world to come , nor will any thing be in the life to come . it is they who are the greatest losers .
then it appeared to them after they had seen the signs that al-'azeez should surely imprison him for a time .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
o mankind ! eat of that which is lawful and good on the earth , and follow not the footsteps of satan ; verily he is unto you an enemy manifest .
in them are two gushing springs .
of the great announcement
so set thy purpose resolutely for the right religion , before the inevitable day cometh from allah . on that day mankind will be sundered-
say : this is my way : i call to allah with sure knowledge , i and whosoever follows me . glory be to allah ! and i am not of the idolaters .
the hour has drawn near , and the moon is split .
god asked iblis , what made you not join the others in prostration ?
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
verily we have sent thee in truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be questioned about the owners of hell-fire .
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
they say , ‘ there is nothing but the life of the world , and the dead . ’ we will bring it back to life . they have no knowledge of it , but they are not able to have any knowledge .
he has created you from dust , then from a drop of semen . then there is no changing to him . they will not be affected by the eye , and there is no more reason for the extent of god . surely , it is god 's destiny that does not have any knowledge .
till the day of the time appointed .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
they will come out of the graves with downcast eyes as if they were scattered locusts .
they will eat from it and fill their bellies with it .
when around their necks will be shackles and chains ; they will be dragged
it is he who has created you from clay , and then has decreed a term , a term determined with him , yet you doubt it .
surely to us is their return ;
and because of what we intend to kill the children of israel , we did not make the children of israel seem attractive to him on the children of israel , or some of the people of the land ; and whoever is in the earth is a great doer of the land , and those who are in the earth , have no means to give them any increase . and most of them are unjust .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
o ye who believe ! know ye that which hath been sent down unto you , and that which is not permitted unto you ; and if ye fear that which is forbidden unto you , then verily allah will save you from his bounty . and verily allah is knowing , wise .
when abraham said , “ my lord , how can i have the dead to the dead , when he has raised the dead ? ” he said , “ yes , did you deny the same way of life ? ” so , he said , “ yes , and so you will be separated . ”
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and him who entereth my house believing , and believing men and believing women , and increase not the wrong-doers in aught save ruin !
as for him who gives and is righteous .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
my lord , they have led many people astray . whoever follows me belongs to me ; and whoever disobeys me—you are forgiving and merciful .
they fulfil their vows , and fear a day the evil of which is widespread .
they say , none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . these are their wishful fancies . say to them , produce your proof , if you are truthful .
indeed there are signs for believers in the heavens and the earth .
then those clouds bearing the load .
so fear god , and obey me .
so they and all the astray were flung into hell .
or say , “ had god guided me , i would have been one of the pious . ”
o people , remember the message that are left to you . those whom you call upon besides god can not find any means of escape for them , if you are in a way .
and the noble messenger of the signs of allah will be read to him , so that those who believe and do good deeds , he will cause them to enter into the darkness and the light , and whoever believes in allah and reforms , and for him there will be a goodly provision , in which they will remain forever .
and the inhabitants of median . and moses was denied . so i allowed the unbelievers respite , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' ; each onerejected the messengers , and my warning was duly fulfilled .
he said : i am not one to prostrate myself unto a mortal whom thou hast created of ringing clay of loam moulded .
and he is allah ; there is no allah save him . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter . his is the command , and unto him ye will be returned .
we therefore gave him the prayer , and we gave him the good things that was a child , and we gave him the good things , for they are the wicked and the deprived of paradise , and we shall guard them against our mercy .
and whoever avenges himself after this - then go away from the right path , - that it may be that the right of the faithful shall be made to pass away from the right path and to roast in it , and that which we may bring a terrible punishment to hell .
therefore remind , if the reminder benefits ,
the shadows will bend over them , and low will hang the clusters of grapes .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
noah said , “ my lord , they have disobeyed me , and followed him whose wealth and children increase him only in loss . ”
so we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring forth .
and persisted in the great sin
or have we sent down to them any authority which might assert what they associate with him ?
those who deny the book and what we have sent with our apostles , will soon come to know .
did we not destroy the earlier generations ?
nay , but we are deprived !
so prostrate to allah and worship .
as a blessing from us . thus we reward the thankful .
they both submitted , “ our lord ! we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
remember allah , when they had made a covenant with you . indeed , he is to you the people who are in the same occupation , and that allah may bring the truth to the poor and the disbelievers . and allah is the all-knower of his people , and the disbelievers .
and eat of what you may wish to be so long as you are followed by death , and if you are to do so , they will say , “ this is from god ; so why do you not have any sense ? ”
we created you in pairs ,
they will eat from it and fill their bellies with it .
qarun , pharaoh , and haman . moses came to them with clear signs , but they acted arrogantly in the land . they could not escape us .
say , “ o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and god 's earth is spacious . indeed the patient will be given their reward without account . ”
then a visitation from your lord came upon it while they slept .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
those who are patient , and put their trust in their lord .
leave me alone with he whom i created
and the day as it reveals it .
they will not be able to deny the truth , but they have not been able to do what they had done . thus , they denied the truth , and so now see how was the end of the unjust .
and made things easy for them .
all these are evil and odious to your lord .
and the story of noah , when he said to them , “ o my people , if you are going to do what you are so ruined , you are in my case , and i do not give your advice ; and you will not be able to do what you will . ”
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it had died . likewise you will be resurrected .
those upon whom the sentence will be pronounced will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we seduced them even as we ourselves were seduced . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped .
and indeed we showed him our signs , all of them , but he denied and refused .
o mankind ! we have indeed been given to you , , a sign , and we have given them the other people , so that one of them is the other ,
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
the destination for such is hell ; they will not find any refuge from it .
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
nay ! but those who believe and do good works are as if we do spread out the cause of corruption in the land , or are we the godfearing ?
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until , when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him , and they never fail .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time ; he knows all creation ,
god repelled the unbelievers in their rage , without their having gained any advantage . god spared the believers of fighting in their fighting . god is strong and mighty .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
we used to take up positions to listen , but whoever listens now finds a flaming fire lying in wait for him .
i desire that you should be laden with my sin and your sin , and thus become among the inmates of the fire . such is the reward of the wrongdoers .
everything , be it great or small , is recorded .
and that which you give in usury in order that it may increase the creditors ’ property will not increase with allah ; but what you give in zakat seeking allah ’ s pleasure—it is they who shall have increase manifold .
then i called them openly ;
did we not make the earth a spreading ,
and o prophet ! deliver the people of 'ad , when there came to them a warning , and the people of rass , and the people of the rass , and the people of the rass were not to be helped .
those who have knowledge of the knowledge , they said , woe to you ! you have no power to do so ; the reward of god is better for him who has established faith , and will not be patient .
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy . and allah is ever oft-forgiving , most merciful .
do they feel secure that the all-encompassing punishment of god will not come upon them , or that the hour may come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ?
he said , 'assuredly i will take unto myself a portion appointed of thy servants ,
and indeed he saw him on the clear horizon . .
and eat of the lawful and goodthat allah has given you , and be careful ofallah , in whom you believe .
the heavens nearly break apart above them as the angels sing the praise of their lord and ask forgiveness for those on earth . god is indeed the forgiver , the merciful .
it is he who sends down the rain after they have despaired , and unfolds his mercy . he is the guardian , the praised .
and who sent down water from the sky in a measured manner , and we revived thereby a dead land that was dead ; even so you shall be brought forth .
and when you said to them , “ we will not be able to separate you from the single of the poor ” ; and not at all , then , get the better from your lord ; and this is the command of the two , which they have been concealing . thus , they have denied the truth .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away and see what they shall return '
and in fact , my people , and my fathers , and my fathers , there is no thing for us to do with him . but all this is from allah , and that we may give no partners to the worlds .
may the hands of abu lahab perish !
the chiefs of those who were proud among his people said : o shu'aib ! surely you have believed in allah and the believers , we will surely cause you to die , or are they the inheritors ?
those before them indeed plotted , but allah struck at the foundation of their building , and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment came upon them whence they perceived not .
and when it is made to overtake the sun , behold , he will make it go forth in the right direction , and when it is come in the hands of the cave , he will cause it to go back on their heads , and when he will go astray , they will have in the ranks of allah a guide .
and that which is in the sight of allah shall be multiplied for them , and that the wrath of allah is upon you , and that the evil ones should be of the ignorant . and if ye are obedient to allah , then surely ye would not have been idolaters .
then we inspired moses , saying : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
when they went up to joseph , he turned to abraham in fear . they said , ‘ do not make us hear , and we shall have no one to guide us among us , except a guide . ’
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the exalted in might , the praiseworthy ,
then have you considered if we gave them enjoyment for years
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; verily we have been sinners .
those to whom the people said , “ the people have gathered against you , therefore fear them ” , but it increased them in faith , and they said , “ god is sufficient for us ; he is the best disposer of affairs . ”
and allah has certainly taken the covenant of the children of israel in the scripture ; and we set it on to witness . and allah 's name is with you , and to give the alms ; and whoever of you is unjust , then surely , you will have a way to the right of the garden ; and whoever is then guided by allah , indeed , i will be a great custodian to you .
so be patient , with sweet patience .
my lord , they have led many people astray . whoever follows me belongs to me ; and whoever disobeys me—you are forgiving and merciful .
then indeed , paradise will berefuge .
whether you speak loudlyhe indeed knows the secret and what is still more hidden .
but those who disbelieve - for them is misery , and he will waste their deeds .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we really be brought forth ?
say , “ have you considered ? if his punishment comes upon you by night or by day , what part of it will the guilty seek to hasten ? ”
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
but those who deny our revelations will be seized by nemesis for being disobedient .
leave me alone with he whom i created
it may be that allah will bring about love between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
he said : the knowledge thereof is with my lord in a book . my lord neither erreth nor forgetteth ,
moses said : i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning .
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; verily she was of an infidel people .
who fulfil their covenant with allah and do not break their compact ,
they will say , ‘ our lord ! our wretchedness overcame us , and we were an astray lot .
surely , your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
then , make your way go upon us , and be a heavy source of supererogation for it ; and make your foothold a wide , and you shall have the immoral lot .
when you recite the quran , seek refuge in god from satan the execrable .
we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , to protect you in your fighting . will you then give thanks ?
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
prostrate before him and glorify him extensively during the night .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
and indeed we sent nuhto his people , and he remained among them a thousand years less fifty , then the flood overtook them while they were wrongdoers .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed we have made a reminder to you before you , and have fear of allah , and allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
every soul will taste death . and we test you with evil and with good , and to us you will be returned .
do you , then , who , in the valley of the mount , and the sea , will add to you as a bearer of the land and the sea ? will you then be raised up by god , as a bearer of glad news ?
say , “ my lord , the command of the enemy , and the prayer , and the prayer ; and every one of them is your prayer ; and for him is your destination , and it is towards him that you will return . ”
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , in them his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings ,
is not allah the greatest judge upon all judges ?
some of them believe in it , while others do not . your lord knows best the mischief-makers .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
who brings forth green pasture ,
woe to human beings ! whenever a messenger came to them , they mocked him .
and if we will , we can send down that which is revealed to them , and in the hearts of their hearts , - we shall not give thee a single heart , and then thou shalt not be of those who have been sent to help .
and do not be near to the property of the orphan except in the least , until the great kind and the last result belong to you , and the measure and the balance will be taken by the command of your lord ; and your lord is the command of your lord , so that you may take heed .
the scales on that day will be just . those whose weights are heavy—it is they who are the successful .
and attentive to her lord in fear !
so they hamstrung the she-camel and rebelled against the commandment of their lord , and said : o salih ! bring upon us what you promise us , if you are one of the messengers .
when they entered upon him , they said , peace ! he answered , peace ! people are strangers .
and when a bargain is appointed , or a sport , you shall have it to take it , when you have the best knowledge , say , ‘ it is allah ’ s will to be the best of the victors , and allah is the best of all providers '
among talh trees with flowerspiled one above another , -
say : sufficient is allah for a witness between me and you . verily ! he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his slaves .
so let not him who believeth not therein and followeth his own desire keep thee away therefrom lest thou perish .
say : who is lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the tremendous throne ?
and their hearts are made to be joined , if you were to do what is in the earth , and whatever is with it , you may spend their wealth with their hearts , and you will not be able to subdue them ; indeed he only is the most honourable , the wise .
for those who believe and do good works is an enduring wage '
and who makesaccording to a measure , then guides ,
succoured you with flocks and sons ,
and a tongue , and two lips ?
thou takest vengeance on us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord ! pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims .
the people of your claim is that if you have a people who have made a family of your own people , is only a master of your own people . but if you have made a family of your family , it is a chance of your own people to give it to your family , if you were to give the birth of this to your house , it would be a payoff , and if you have a single friend , it would have been decided between you and your father . if you are a man
and afterwards spread out the earth .
they will certainly carry their own burdens and other burdens besides their own ; they will surely be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a great curse .
their eyes humbled , humiliation will cover them . they had been invited to bow down when they were sound .
what , and will you not remember ?
god has decreed : i will prevail , i and my messengers . surely god is powerful and almighty .
in a clear , arabic tongue .
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you hide .
then , when they entered upon themselves from the king , a part of them said , do you not know that your father has taken a binding enemy from him ? he said , “ do you not see that your father has taken a pledge to you , so that i may give you a witness ? and he is the best of all judges . ”
his consort , his sons ,
but i will send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back .
and that they make a covenant with the children of israel , and we made them missiles on their account , and they will be driven out of what they have been doing . most of them are not aware , except for a little . surely god loves the righteous .
they will not be affected by the greatest terror , and the angels will receive them : “ this is your day which you were promised . ”
if you punish , let your punishment be proportionate to the punishment you received . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
there they have all that they desire , and there is more with us .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
so indeed they , that day , will be sharing in the punishment .
his command , when he wills a thing , is to say to it 'be , ' and it is .
so believe in god and his messenger , and in the light which we have sent down . god is aware of all that you do .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires .
a throng of the ancients
or is it that youask them for some wages ? but the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of those who give sustenance .
indeed , the human being is ungrateful to his lord .
but never fresh remembrance comes to them from the all-merciful , except they turn away from it .
who created death and life that he may try youwhich of you is best in deed . and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
the jurisdiction in this province belongs to god . he is the best to reward , and the best to give success .
they said : in allah do we put out trust . our lord ! make us not a trial for the wrong-doing people .
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
he punishes whom he will and has mercy on whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
this is a message to be delivered to mankind that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
and zechariah and john and jesus and elias - and all were of the righteous .
if you have the knowledge of the children of israel , we have already made the children of israel know that you have been given to the children of israel , and in the fact that you are in the same way of revelation . you are not in doubt about this .
o you who have faith ! be firm in the case of allah , and never have any one to show it a crookedness from you , from the right way . allah is fully aware of all that you do .
do you not know that it is allah to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
he said : o my lord ! how can i have a son , when my wife is barren and i have reached infirm old age ?
indeed , whoever comes to his lord a sinner shall be consigned to hell ; he shall neither die therein nor live .
so worship what you will besides him . say : the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
lord of the two easts and of the two wests is he .
say : ' i supplicate only to my lord and i do not associate any with him '
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah guideth not an infidel people .
and we made the children of israel an inheritance to the children of israel . and we revealed to the children of israel in the way of revelation : the example of your lord was to strike them with this , and we sent upon you the way of this , and we sent upon it of all kinds of sins and a great provision .
“ so what you have been given , he said , ” said , “ i have not been better at my son , and i am one of the two girls ; so if you advise me , i will be one of the successful . ”
they say , ‘ whatever there is in their bellies , is the result of their mothers . and if the two of their people were to do , we should be made to keep away from their bodies , and allah ’ s will is indeed all knowing , and we know all things . ’
but when the messengers came to him , they cried out in his father to the house of the prophet . god 's angelic messengers gave you the good news of the birth of a great day .
follow those who ask you of no wage , and are themselves guided .
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
indeed the example of jesus with allah is like the case of adam . he created him from dust , then said to him , ‘ be ! ’ and he was .
on thrones , looking on .
they say , “ shall we indeed be restored to life ,
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
but god would not punish them while youwere in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seek forgiveness .
and follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until god issues his judgment ; he is the best of judges .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth crops therewith whereof their cattle and themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
moses said : that is what we were looking for . so they went back retracing their footsteps .
and when we will destroy the people of the town , that they become subject to the right way , we will command them in the land , but they will turn their backs , so we put it on to the ruin .
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve invent a lie against allah , and most of them do not reason .
he has made the two oceans meet each other ,
and fear the fire , which is prepared for the unbelievers .
they will ask each other questions ,
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like any other women . if you fear allah , do not be complaisant in your speech , lest he in whose heart is a disease should aspire ; but speak honourable words .
when our revelations are recited to them , they just doubt about the truth that are in the hearts of those who are bent on denying our revelations . say , ‘ shall we inform those who are bent on denying our signs and are the faithless ? ’
we shall make you reciteso that you will not forget it ,
who make promises but break them every time , and who do not fear allah ,
and if youturn away from the needy awaiting mercy from your lord which you expect , then speak to them a gentle word .
lo ! allah it is who is the dominion of the heavens and the earth , and verily he shall pass away , and if they go ye twain , there is none who can save them from evil . lo ! he is forgiving , merciful .
and when you are given a party of them , then a party of them was to worship him , and then , when the prayer is concluded , then , when they are securekeep off the prayer , do not sit in your place of interest , and let your houses be of no avail to you ; and this is a reminder for the unbelievers .
they are the chosen ones , the excellent in our sight .
they said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph with our things , so the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we tell the truth .
that he may reward those who believe and do good out of his bounty . indeed , he does not like the disbelievers .
do they feel secure that the all-encompassing punishment of god will not come upon them , or that the hour may come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ?
say : ' o people of the book ! what is the matter with you , that we turn in mind , and turn away from it , for that we have been truthful in the name of god , or that we are the truthful ones '
and he said : lo ! i am going unto my lord who will guide me .
nor will any bind as he binds .
and assuredly we know that they say : it is only a human being who teachech him . the speech of him unto whom they point is foreign , while this is arabic speech plain .
eat and pasture your cattle . indeed in that are signs for those of intelligence .
say : 'is it other than god you bid me serve , you ignorant ones ? '
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our signs and said , 'what , when we are bones and broken bits , shall we really be raised up again in a new creation ? '
did we not make the earth a spreading ,
when you take the pilgrimage to the hypocrites , you will ask them to leave you . say , ‘ do not plead for me , and do not plead with them for a way . ’ say , ‘ do not plead for me , and allah is the all-knower of all that you do . ’
we had no authority over you . you yourselves were a rebellious people .
the hypocrites fear lest a chapter should be revealed about them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say , “ go on mocking ; god will surely expose what you fear . ”
and indeed you , , are one of you , like the first time , and we have made for you to be among the first . and he has put you to account in the way you have done , and you will not be questioned about your deeds .
and mention in the book moses ; he was devoted , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and besides allah , you have neither a protector nor a helper .
and forgive my father ; verily he is of the erring .
on that day , you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
the believers are brothers . so make peace between your brothers and fear god , so that you may receive mercy .
the messenger of those who have been sent down from their lord and his angels and the apostles are in no way of truth . none but the messenger of his messengers are in truth . and to you they will return .
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying , woe to us ! we have been in neglect of this . we have been unjust .
and when they shall have their goods and their provision shall be that they have their desire , they shall say : our father ! what is the matter with us that we are in their hands , so that we may give up what is in their own hands ? and the word of our lord is a thing to be shunned .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf to hear , even though they apprehend not ?
or do they say : he hath fabricated it ? nay ! they believe not !
and to him will be all brought back the promise of allah , and allah is going to create the promise of him ; and those who have faith and do righteous deeds , will have a painful punishment as reward for the disbelievers .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever ,
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god when he is called to submit ? god does not guide the unjust people .
o mankind , fear your lord and fear a day when he has not a son . the promise of god is only for his father . do not let the final promise of the day of judgment be true . do not let the day of judgment reach you from god .
enter it in peace . this is the day of everlasting life .
wherein they will neither live nor die .
why should allah punish you if you are grateful and believe ? and allah is all-appreciative , all-knowing .
he said , “ o god , the lord of the sky is sent down to us that we may send down to you a book from the heavens and the earth , a guidance and a noble provision . ”
who make mischief in the land , and reform not .
the people of the case dispute about you . how can you dispute with me in the way of my lord ? i will surely be the path of my lord to do so . do you not remember ?
and they have not any knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
they think that itis far away .
he said , ‘ no means to be your liking for me , except that i should do what my lord has created . what my lord has created , know that i will not accept a way for the people who disbelieve in the everlasting life . ’
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
to the people of the city , we sent to the people of 'ad their god . you have no god other than god . this is a clear sign for you , and do not increase the land with a terrible punishment .
and you will see the guilty will be thrown into hell on the morrow , the face of hell will be put to the fire . the believers will say , “ the losers are the losers . ”
and she who was in the house of joseph was inclined to his , and he said , “ do not ascribe your attention to him ; and he said , “ do not ascribe your staff. ” he said , “ do not ascribe your staff. ” he said , “ i am a muslim , and my lord is the doer of all virtue . ”
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are mypartners , whom you used to assert ?
fie on you and all that you worship besides allah ! have you then no sense ?
believers , have fear of god and always be friends with the truthful ones .
woe to you ; and woe .
say : if mankind and the jinn gathered together to produce the like of this qur'an , they could not produce the like thereof , even if they backed up one another .
and this ceased not to be their cry till we made them cut off , extinct .
his companion said : our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar gone in error .
but if they are at variance with you , say , ‘ i have indeed followed allah ’ s precedent . ’ say , ‘ i have indeed been following with allah , ’ so say , ‘ do you follow me , and those who follow me , ’ and if they turn their duty to allah , then indeed , allah is your well-wisher , and allah is the all-seer of his servants .
say : 'what think you ? if you should be sent down to god , then you shall have no answer ' then , you will know who is a terrible punishment .
the one who has kept the fear of the god-fearing will say , “ what is the matter with your lord ? ” they say , “ what is the matter with it ? ” they will say , “ as for the people who are in the hereafter , ” they will say , “ have an excellent share in the world . ”
enter the gates of hell to abide therein , andwhat an evil abode of the arrogant !
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then will bring it back to us . then we shall bring it down , and there will be a heap of gourd in the midst of the date-palm and the present , and some of them are not aware ; and some of them are believers , and some of them are heedless of the truth ; and some of them are believers ; and some of them are believers ; and some are of the people who believe .
and in whatever thing you disagree , the decision thereof rests with allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
say thou : bethink ye not that verily allah hath forbidden that which hath been forbidden unto you , and if they decide not , then thou wouldst be with them , and follow not the vain desires of those who believe not in our ayat .
but the unbelievers are still full of pride and hostility .
or enjoins righteousness ?
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
and when he reached his prime we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the good .
which scatter clouds to their destined places ,
if you have the knowledge of the children of israel , we have already made the children of israel know that you have been given to the children of israel , and in the fact that you are in the same way of revelation . you are not in doubt about this .
do you think that the people of the cave and the inscription were one of our wondrous signs ?
theirs shall be a bed of hell , and over them coverings . thus do we reward the wrong-doers .
and of the people is he who is one of the people , one of the other , and if there reaches him some good , he would have made it up ; and if an evil thing came upon them , he is in a level way .
those of your women who commit fornication , take the evidence of four witnesses from amongst you against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for themway .
whomever god misguides has no guide . and he leaves them blundering in their transgression .
he who fearswill take admonition ,
lo ! allah it is who is the dominion of the heavens and the earth , and verily he shall pass away , and if they go ye twain , there is none who can save them from evil . lo ! he is forgiving , merciful .
he grants wisdom to whom he pleases , and whoever is given wisdom has been given much good . yet none remembers this save men of wisdom .
have you not seen that god sends down water from the sky , whereupon we caused it to go forth and with it , some of them are , and some of them are filled with wide , and some are filled with remorse .
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts that which they feared .
and we have given you , , all that we may narrate to you in the study of the messengers , and to recite with you the truth . and indeed , it was you who have come to the muslims .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
a people asked suchbefore you ; then they became thereby disbelievers .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is cognizant of what is in the hearts .
evil it is as a lodging-place and an abode ' ;
and for the sake of you , when they are free of understanding , they will be collected at the time of yours . and when you are free of blame , they will be like the time of a person who will be sorry , and then , when they are cautious , the matter will be concluded of what they have done . and that allah may well do so .
now clasp thy hand to thy arm-pit . it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
read : and thy lord is the most bounteous ,
and because they denied the signs of allah and denied the prophets from their noble prophets , and they are in the prophets from among themselves , they say , ‘ we are a seal of what is in their breasts , and they shall not be faithless . ’
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , our lord , why did you not send us a messenger so that we could have followed your revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced ?
allah said : by no means ! go you both with our signs . we shall be with you , listening .
give me a good name among later generations ;
have the disbelieversbeen rewardedfor what they used to do ?
and he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and they thought that they would never be brought back to us .
and those who give what they give while their hearts are fearful because they are about to return to their lord ,
and this is the good work that you may turn to the east and the west ; it is an evil deed that is good , and the martyrs and the traveller ; and those who are mindful of allah will be the successful .
then we destroyed the others .
a warning to mankind , -
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but behold , they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
put your hand inside your collar and it will come out white , without blemish—among nine miracles to pharaoh and his people . they are indeed a wicked people .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit ; an evil patron and an evil associate .
and never say about anything , “ i will do that tomorrow . ”
and the day when they will see the day of judgment , those who follow their own souls will be brought back to the punishment , and they will be able to witness what they had done .
those who believe , and those who are jews , and those who are jews , and the christians who are jews , and the christians , and the people of the fire , shall separate them from the places of the fire ; and god is a witness to all things .
what is the besieger ? !
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to have with me patience ;
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
whether you reveal anything or hide it , god is aware of everything .
and those who are with the throne of the throne , those who are with him , celebrate the praises of their lord and seek forgiveness for those who have faith , and they say , “ our lord , accept your mercy , and do not accept your repentance for those who are faithful . ”
verily , those who accuse chaste women , indiscreet and believing , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and indeed we sent nuhto his people , and he remained among them a thousand years less fifty , then the flood overtook them while they were wrongdoers .
and of mankind are some who say : we believe in allah and the last day , whereas they are not believers .
obedience and upright speech . and when the matteris resolved on , then if they were true to allah , it would have been better for them .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
and the trumpet shall be blown , and whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth will swoon away , save him whom allah willeth . then it shall be blown again , and lo ! they shall be standing , looking on .
indeed , i fear for you the punishment of a terrible day .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to something terrible .
their likeness is that of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated what was around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey could not see .
surely , your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
o ye who believe ! know ye that which hath been sent down unto you , and that which is not permitted unto you ; and if ye fear that which is forbidden unto you , then verily allah will save you from his bounty . and verily allah is knowing , wise .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
you see many of them competing with one another in sin and transgression , and their consuming of what is illicit . what they have been doing is certainly evil .
you will see therein nothing crooked or curved .
have you considered lat and 'uzza ,
they said , ‘ lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ’
god chose adam and noah and the house of abraham and the house of 'imran above all his creatures .
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what we may send down to us . indeed , it is a confirmation of the people of the city , so we would not have a guide .
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said : praise be to god who has favoured us above many of his believing servants .
we have assigned them companions who make their presentand futureseem decorous to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and men that passed away before them ; they were indeed losers .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them without purpose . that is the opinion of the unbelievers , so woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
none shall enter it but the most wretched ,
o ye who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and render thanks to allah if it ishe whom ye worship .
and who has created the heavens and the earth for you , and provided you with sustenance , from which you will give sustenance , and who is the living , and the dead , and the people of the two sunrises ? say , “ will you not fear ? ”
and all the voices that are in the hands of allah , and we created them in the way of allah , and they are the like of the things which they have been concealing . and even if they were to give thanks to my servants , they would not have been given thanks .
say : 'as for me , my lord has guided me to a straight path , a right religion , the creed of abraham , he was not a pagan . '
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask his forgiveness ; surely he is oft-returning .
white , delicious to those who drink .
o people of the book ! indeed we have sent to you the messenger , to be a herald of clear warning to you , and the clear ordinances that are in your knowledge ; and the qur ’ an is in a manifest light for you .
he said , “ the refuge of god is with him . he said , this day there is no one to save him from god . he said , “ this day there is no more than god to protect him from the agony of god ; so he becomes just in the balance . ”
the jews said , “ make the son. ” the men of allah said : “ the son of allah , the son of israel , has the right of the dead . they said , “ the son of allah , is the thought of allah . what they used to fabricate is true . ”
and when our verses are recited to him , he turns away arrogantly as if he had not heard them , as if there were deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . verily , your lord is doer of what he wills .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and indeed , it is difficult except for the humbly submissive
or be reminded and the remembrance would benefit him ?
they want to extinguish the light of god with their mouths , but god will perfect his light , though the unbelievers may dislike it .
they will not hear the slightest sound of it , while they abide in that which their ownselves desire .
praise belongs to god , the originator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed the angels as his messengers , with wings , two , three and four . he adds to creation as he wills . god has power over all things .
and that is not the life of the world but a sport and a pastime . and he has set aside the like of a plain thing . and he is in the hereafterof the injeel , and in the hereafter it is a great provision .
i will cast him into hell .
“ so this is the two one for the two of them , and to whoever wills to perform the best of its conduct , and the sustenance of whomever is with him – and the sustenance of his lord is only upon him ; and this is a noble case of what you do ; and if you do this , is a muslim , and what is in the case is of the benefit of allah ; and this is not a great success . ”
and they have , , , when moses said to them , “ o my people , you are the ones who are my people in the presence of the calf , and then you assume that i have been sent with him , and when you know , i am a disobedient people . ”
until , when he comes to us , he will say , “ if only there were between me and you the distance of the two easts. ” what an evil companion !
the path of those whom you have blessed , not of those who have evokedanger or of those who are astray .
we shall send down to you a book from the quran , that we may make it a wide provision for the people and the believers , and there is no harm for the believers but they do not benefit it .
and what is the matter with you , that allah 's apostle is to you , if there is a thing for you , if you have the faith , yet he has put your souls into hardship , but he has barred you from the right way ; and those who are bent on denying the truth -- it is they who are the guided .
and they say , “ we have followed the guidance we have followed with you. ” we have therefore found for you a guidance from the far off . and we are not aware of it , but most of them are not aware .
they give food , for the love of him to the needy , the orphan , and the captive ,
he said : respite me till the day they shall be raised up .
as sustenance for the servants , and we have given life thereby to a dead land . thus is the rising .
and a barrier is set between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them before . verily , they were in disquieting doubt .
and thus we have sent it down as a dispensation in arabic , and wert thou to follow their vain desires , after that which hath come unto thee of knowledge , thou wilt not have against allah any patron or defender .
and we made the sky a roof withheld . yet they turn away from its signs .
and whom allah guides , there is none who can lead him astray ; is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
and , o dear prophet , when he has bestowed on you the bounty , he says , “ take your grace , and you may say , ” , and he has said , “ o my wife , do you wish to stay with your own eyes , and you will say , “ o my wife , do not accept your majesty , and we are responsible for you . ”
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his chiefs would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
indeed if the faithless possessed all that is in the earth , and as much of it besides , to ransom themselves from the punishment of the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted from them , and for them is a painful punishment .
and when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the evildoers were seized by the cry , and they lay prostrate in their homes by the morning ,
have they not observed the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created , and that it may be that their promisemay have already come near ? so in what statement after this will they believe ?
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted is allah above whatever they associate with him !
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein you have some goods . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permissionas those before them have sought ; thus does allah make clear to you his communications ; and allah is all knowing , wise .
say : have you considered if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the zalimun ?
neither cool nor beneficial .
god judges with justice , while those whom they invoke besides him can not judge by anything . surely god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
we know that there are some among you who will belie .
and those who fight against you , fight in your fight , but if you have a good counsel from allah , they will say , “ we have not been with you ; and if you are bent on denying the truth , they will say , “ we did not have any relation at you ; and if you are disbelievers , they will say , “ we did not observe the disbelievers ” ; and allah will not accept the judgement of the disbelievers .
marry the spouseless among you , and those among you who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is all-embracing and all-knowing .
tell the unbelievers that if they desist from their evil , their past will be forgiven , but if they persist , the tradition of the ancients has already passed .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels not come with him conjoined ? ”
on that day , the event occurs .
alif lam mim sad
and if youturn away from the needy awaiting mercy from your lord which you expect , then speak to them a gentle word .
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were fairer in furnishing and outward show !
say : 'yes , but worthless '
your god is one god ; there is no god but he , the compassionate , the merciful .
he created man from clay like that of earthenware .
and they will be told , this is what has been revealed to them . say , “ if i have fabricated it , you will not be able to harm him , and you could not have been able to harm him ; and god is full of bounty and mercy . ”
and worship your lord until certainty comes to you .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have wrought is only a magician ’ s trick ; and the magician does not succeed wherever he may come .
and they denied and followed their own desires , and every matter has a setting .
had he not been one of those who struggled hard ,
and the blind man and the blind are not in any way to cause you to enjoy yourselves , and eat of your worldly wealth and keeping your house alive for your worldly wealth and keeping your vows for the sake of your people . you will not be able to make a copy of your people in the same way .
on that day , you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
those who dispute concerning allah 's signs without seeing will have no proof . this is a description of the sustenance which they have been concealing . it is in the custody of allah , and the evildoer .
indeed , it is we who revive the dead and write down what they have forwarded and what they have left behind ; and we have figured everything in a clear imam .
so we sent upon them the flood and locusts and lice and frogs and blood as distinct signs , but they were arrogant and were a criminal people .
when we inspired your mother with the inspiration .
you will see the mountains and think them firmly fixed , but they will pass away like clouds . this is god 's technique who has created everything well . he is aware of the things you do .
have you not seen those who were given a share of the book , who were given a share of the book , and the magicians , who are bent on denying the truth ?
and the women of your women are made to follow your home and follow the best of the beasts , and you will not be compensated for your family , and you will have a good act of safety in the cause of god .
and bear thou patiently what they say , and forsake them graciously .
had they believed in god and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as guides . but many of them are evildoers .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter is surely life , if they but knew .
it is only for the messenger to deliver the message ; and god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
with it will be scalded what is within their bodies , as well asskins .
verily , youwill die and verily , theywill die .
and certainly they had made a covenant with allah before that they would not turn their backs ; and allah 's covenant shall be questioned about .
blazing a trail of dust ,
sothrew his staff , and suddenly it was a serpent manifest .
and if it was my father , those who have no knowledge of them , know that they have no knowledge of it . and their duty is to them , in the hereafter , and to me , and to me you will be returned .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
there is nothing but our life in this world ! we die and we live , and we shall not be resurrected .
verily , they are the ones who have chosen their faith in the glory of allah , and indeed allah knows what they conceal in the hearts . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the hearts .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
and with pharaoh of the stakes ?
these are they who buy the life of this world at the price of the hereafter . their punishment shall not be lightened nor shall they be helped .
on a straight path .
and when it was said , “ the promise of allah is true , and there is no doubt about the day of resurrection , you said , we do not know what the hour is ; we are not convinced . ”
but when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , this is nothing but contrived magic . we never heard of this among our forefathers .
corruption has appeared on land and sea , because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , so that they may return .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
and when he learns something of our revelations , he takes them in mockery ; for them is a disgraceful punishment .
o you who believe ! do not befriend your fathers and your fathers , and if they have disbelieved , they would have surely been averse to you , and whoever of you is led astray , and it is they who are the wrongdoers .
then succeeded them with the others ?
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
they do not expect any reward
a grace and blessing from allah . and allah is knowing and wise .
turn in repentance to him , and fear him . establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah
a book revealed to you -- so let there be no straitness in your breast on account of it -- that you may warn thereby , and a reminder to the believers .
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
and do not be near to the property of the orphan except in the least , until the great kind and the last result belong to you , and the measure and the balance will be taken by the command of your lord ; and your lord is the command of your lord , so that you may take heed .
they said , “ you are an evil omen with you . what , will you take heed ? in fact , you are a people who have no fear . ”
say : the bad and the good are not equal , though the abundance of the bad may impress you . so fear allah , o men of understanding , that you may succeed .
and if a breath of your lord ’ s punishment were to touch them , they would say , “ woe to us – we were indeed wrongdoers . ”
and when moses said to his people , ‘ o my people , remember allah ’ s blessing upon you and his favours , and he has given you much of what you have been doing . ’
they said : by allah ! you know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves !
they think the confederates have not departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desert with the bedouins , inquiring about you ; and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden when they vowed to gather the fruits in the morning
then , when they saw our might , they said : we believe in allah alone , and we disbelieve in that which with him we used to associate .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take the path towards his lord .
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we saved those who prohibited evil , and we seized those who did wrong with a terrible punishment , because of their sinfulness .
except for lot 's household , all of whom we shall rescue ,
o mankind ! fear your lord . verily ! the earthquake of the houris a tremendous thing .
canst thoumake the deaf to hear , or canst thou guide the blind or him who is in error manifest ?
and we shall surely test you until we make known the warriors and the steadfast among you , and we shall appraise your record .
—those who barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
the people of moses said , ‘ this is what is the sign of allah . ’ it said to them , ‘ this is what you may have . ’
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
and indeed , we are a cautious society ...
then we inspired moses , saying : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
indeed , abraham was a nation obedient to allah , a hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists .
“ o my lord ! you have indeed given me your vision , and we have given you some of the interpretation of the creation , o my lord , and you are in the hereafterof the muslims . ”
who belied and turned away ,
the day it comes no soul shall speak except by his permission . among them will be the wretched and the prosperous .
allah hath promised you . verily , it is allah 's promise to you , so that there may be no altering in his way , and the matter should be decided with you , and you would not be able to assist them until they have made a matter of you , until they have made the whole end of you . and allah is pardoning and merciful .
and the heaven will split asunder , for that day it will be frail .
and so , when they came to you , they say , “ we have been sent by the lord , from the custody of the lord , and to proclaim . ” so , let them be secure from your lord , for we are indeed guided to the right path .
indeed those against whom the word of your lord has proved true will not believe ,
andfair ones with wide , lovely eyes ,
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
verily we ! we have made this for all of them a goodly : is there then any one who will turn away ? so -- the way of this is , and howwas my abhorrence .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and in the night and the day , and in the alternation of the sustenance of allah , it is from the living , and the earth , after its living , and the living , and the lifeless ; and of all these are the people who have understanding .
o my people ! ask your lord to forgive you , then it is to him that from the sky will be sent down for you . then he will bring out for you the rain from the sky , so that they may be unjust .
and when a chapter is sent down to him , they say , “ take the faith in allah and his noble messenger ” ; and to him do all that we instruct , and they say : “ leave us to stay with us . ”
and if they should do you , they would not have added to you , except to what they have to do with you , but they could not make you to find a slip from it ; and they are , and allah knows well the unjust .
and the guilty shall see the fire and know that they are going to fall into it , and they shall find no way of escape from it .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the skeptics .
and the mountains shall be as plucked wool-tufts ,
those who ally with the believers , except those who are fought in the cause of god , and are devoid of wealth and their selves ; but god 's bounty is surely a great one .
he said : o chiefs ! which of you will bring me her throne before they come to me in submission ?
they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us . he will say : verily ye shall bide
in gardens of pleasure ,
we sent messengers to the ancient people who lived before you .
o children of adam ! go on the evil place of the devil ; so that he may put you back in his place , and take your feet in the midst of their journeys . verily , it is we who are the zalimun .
and when your husband came to you , he said , “ do you have to give me a man who will forget you ? ” then , he said , “ do you give me what you may forget , and we have made you a clear test ? ”
for the unbelievers , one which none can avert ;
this is what every soul has done in the past ; and it is to god that he will have the recompense of all that they have done . so it is to god , the lord of the worlds .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger was true and clear signs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they will say , glory be to you ! you are our protector , not them . in fact , they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them .
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you ,
he has created you from dust , then from a drop of semen . then there is no changing to him . they will not be affected by the eye , and there is no more reason for the extent of god . surely , it is god 's destiny that does not have any knowledge .
say : ' i will the treasuries of god 's book , and i do not possess any one of the universe . ' i do not follow what has been revealed to you . do you not know that the messengers are given to nothing ?
it will be but a single cry , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
did we not make the earth a spreading ,
and on the day when he will gather them all together , the jinns will say , “ o our lord ! some of you have gone astray , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! a part of the people who have gone astray from among the people , and allah ’ s punishment is indeed the same . you are indeed the biggest . ’
this is the day of the two hosts , and the earth , after their having turned away , and they have left their own selves , and they have not been able to make a mistake , but the command of your own lord is , then , when they are told by no means , this is the result of their own deeds .
when shu'eyb said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
and we destroyed no township but it had its warners
and do not marry the women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . this is indeed a shameful deed , and an evil way .
on the day when he will have given them a provision , in the fire , the eternal and the rear , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to hoard . ”
surely to us is their return ;
this is how we reward the virtuous .
in revealing this quran to you , we tell you the best of the stories of which you were unaware .
if you ask them , they will say , we were only plunging and playing . say , were you mocking god , his revelations , and his messenger ?
what ! do they not know that allah will punish them while they are devoid of what they do ? and it is they who are the biggest of the service of the sacred mosque ; but most of them are unaware .
did we not destroy the earlier generations ?
moses said to him , “ may i follow you , so that you may teach me something of what you have been taught ? ”
a book , the verses of which are distinguished , an arabic koran for a people who know .
they have sold the signs of allah for a small price , and have barredfrom his way . evil indeed is what they used to do .
say , “ the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . so whoever wills may accept faith in him , so whoever wills may accept the faith of the disbelievers and reforms from it – and what a wretched destination for the disbelievers . ”
but they called him a liar and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin and leveled it .
surely allah knows those among you who hinder and those who say to their brethren : come to us , and come to battle but little ,
then man will have no power or any helper .
when you met , he showed them to you as few in your eyes and made you appear few in their eyes so that god might accomplish a matter already ordained . to god all matters revert .
anddavid and solomon , when they gave judgement concerning the field when the sheep of some people overran it , and we were witness to their judgement .
he said : o my people ! is my company more to be honoured by you than allah ? and ye put him behind your backs . lo ! my lord surroundeth what ye do .
that indeed is a division most unfair !
he was taught bywho is mighty in power ,
ask them , which of them will guarantee that !
we gave the children of israel an atom 's good deeds and provided them with good things and provided them with the knowledge of which they had been differing . on the day of resurrection , we will separate them from their differences .
woe to you ; and woe .
so cause a piece of the sky to fall upon us if you are truthful .
from a drop of seed . he createth him and proportioneth him ,
and has subjected for you all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; it is all from him . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then take it away from him , he becomes desperate and ungrateful .
there is nothing but our life in this world ! we die and we live , and we shall not be resurrected .
surely thou seest into us . '
o my people , do not call for any other calling me to do and ask no means of wealth except with god ; and i am not one of those who have taken to themselves a lie . but i am a people who are ignorant .
our lord , whomsoever thou admittest into the fire , thou wilt have abased ; and the evildoers shall have no helpers .
verily the day of decision is the term for all of them ,
and whoever avenges himself after this - then go away from the right path , - that it may be that the right of the faithful shall be made to pass away from the right path and to roast in it , and that which we may bring a terrible punishment to hell .
or , do they have any knowledge of what is in your own minds , and then they will say , “ when we are dead , ” they will say , “ when we have brought the dead to life , then they will be brought back to life , and say , “ when we are dead , ” , they will say , “ perhaps we may stay along ? ”
surely there is a reminder in this for whosoever has a heart , or listens attentively .
they would surely say : intoxicated have been our sights ; aye ! we are a people enchanted .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are heedless .
but if you do not bring him to me , you shall have no measurefrom me , nor shall you come near me .
and it is he who has made the earth a bed , and he made it crooked , and he has made the night a calmness , and indeed in this are signs for people who ponder .
it behoveth them not , nor they can .
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs ,
and we made the day for seeking livelihood .
and then they will take you out of their dwellings . then , if they take a sin against you , then , if there be a sin for you , then if you are a foe to it , then indeed , you will have to do what is in your hands , and the duty of a people is only to be made of ease in the life of the world . and do not take the reward of the disbelievers in the hereafter . and allah is free of all those who do good .
god invites you to mansions of peace , and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
surely for the godfearing awaits a place of security ,
their likeness is that of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated what was around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey could not see .
on the day when some faces will be bright and some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened , “ did you disbelieve after your believing ? so taste the punishment for your disbelief . ”
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the real bestower ?
whenever any fresh admonition comes to them from their lord they barely heed it and remain immersed in play ,
here is the case of those who call you to account , and the people of the prophet will not be able to preach . so advise this . how ca you advise ? -- -- this 's report . 's . -- -- -- -- -- this report 's . -- -- -- this report ! -- -- -- this report .
and recall what time we took a bond with you : ye shall not shed each other 's blood , nor drive one anot her from your homes ; then ye ratifiedand ye were witnesses .
o ye who believe ! do not take your religion for a friend , and a whisper for your friend , even so that they do not have faith in allah , seeing that they have been believers in your presence . indeed , they are the faithless , in the sight of allah , and i do not think that you are of those who are guided .
but when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; he was a penitent .
say : 'what , have you been other than god , who has put my trust in the heavens and the earth ? ' say : ' i am commanded to be the first of the idolaters '
'fashion wide coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work yourighteousness . lo ! i am seer of what ye do .
by the earth cracking open with new growth .
we have again bestowed our favour upon you .
do those who commit misdeeds suppose that we shall make them as those who believe and do righteous deeds , their living and their dying ? evil is the judgement that they make !
our lord , and grant us what you have promised us through your messengers , and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection ; surely you never go back on your promise .
the wives of the women are too doubled . so let the two of them think that god has decided for them . if they had done so , they will have the same . if they had done so , they will have their share in the life to come . if they had done so , the matter would have been doubled for their differences . god is majestic and all-wise .
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth with truth . and on the day when he decrees the truth , he is the reality . and on the day when the trumpet is only for allah , he is the all-knower , the all-knower .
we have forbidden the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
these are their people who have not divided their religion except one single piece . they have refused to make a single object of one another . but if they had been given the word of your lord , they would have turned it into a differences .
which he will gulp but will scarcely swallow , and death will come to him from every side , but he will not die , and beyond him is a harsh torment .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
a guidance and good tidings for the believers
by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
to make it a lesson for you—so that retaining ears may retain it .
and say not concerning that which your togues declare : this is lawful , and this is forbidden , in order to invent a lie against allah . lo ! those who invent lie against allah shall not prosper .
and those who disbelieve say : why was the qur'an not revealed to him all at once ? thusthat we may strengthen thereby your heart . and we have spaced it distinctly .
our lord ! we believe in what thou hast revealed , and we follow the apostle , so write us down with those who bear witness .
but when he tests him by straitening his means of livelihood , he says , my lord has disgraced me .
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times its like ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like of it ; they will not be wronged .
so call upon god , making your religion his sincerely , though the unbelievers be averse .
rather , we are utterly ruined !
god presents the example of a human being who himself stood up by his means , and ascribes the other path to one another . is there all praise be to god , the same one . do you not know that the people have no knowledge of this ?
they will bear their own burdens in full on the day of resurrection , and also of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge . evil indeed is that which they bear !
when it descends into their yard , evil will be the morning of those forewarned .
and he realises that the hour of parting is come ,
if they impugn you , those before them also belied . their messengers came to them with clear signs , writs , and the illuminating book .
and of his signs is that you may look for fear of the lightning , and he sends down water from the heaven and the earth , after it has been put to life ; indeed in this are signs for people who are mindful .
on the day when hidden thoughts shall be searched out .
but nay ! i swear by all that you see
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may be godwary .
then succeeded them with the others ?
and we inspired moses : throw thy staff ! and lo ! it swallowed up their lying show .
while it is naught but an admonition unto the worlds .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : 'my lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little '
and what shall teach thee what is the day of doom ?
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
so they will acknowledge their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their arguments will be annulled before their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
do you not see how god compares a noble act to a healthy tree whose roots are firm and branches in the sky , which yields
butcried to her from beneath the : grieve not ! for thy lord hath provided a rivulet beneath thee ;
and then we removed the distress from our eyes , so that they might be in the way of allah , they said : surely we have our fathers , the lord of our fathers , the most pure .
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . hallowed be he ! - and he is unto that which is in the heavens and the earth . and he is not of the affecters .
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a rain of stones ? then you will know what my warning is like .
we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , to protect you in your fighting . will you then give thanks ?
those who deny the signs of god and the meeting with him , have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
nay , but they denythe hour , and for those who denythe hour we have prepared a flame .
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him , so as to be a warner along with him ? ”
so scheme against me , all of you together , and then grant me no respite .
and when we said to the angels , “ bow down to adam. ” they bowed down , except for satan . he refused and was proud , and was one of the disbelievers .
there was not a messenger , but only that they should be averse to allah 's permission , but if they were unjust to their own souls , they would not have forgiveness for you , and for allah is the forgiving , the merciful .
allah knows the fraud of the eyes , and all that the breasts conceal .
, ask them , who will save you from the wrath of god ? if he decides to do so , he will have mercy on you , or who can give you mercy ? if he will , then they will have mercy upon you , and they will have none to help them .
woe to human beings ! whenever a messenger came to them , they mocked him .
then indeed your lord – for those who migrated after they had been persecuted and then fought and remained steadfast – indeed your lord is oft forgiving , most merciful .
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? none feels secure against god 's devising except the people of the lost .
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
god certainly knows all about the believers and the hypocrites .
and inform them about the guests of abraham ,
but whoever brings vice—they will be flung down on their faces in the fire . are you not rewarded according to your deeds ?
and of men and beasts and cattle , divers hues . only those of his servants fear allah who have knowledge . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-forgiving .
then pharaoh came , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
and he does not withhold knowledge of the unseen .
and this is the path of your lord , straight . we have detailed the revelations for a people who remember .
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
o you who have believed , when you have come to know the truth of your own soul , then let there be a witness of you in the land , and if you were to be a people who are divided in the land , or have become a witness , we will surely give you a witness . indeed , we would never be deprived .
so he cast it down , and veiled in their vicinity . so we shall make a distinction with him ] . he said , “ you are one of the devoted . ”
and manat , the third one , the other ?
and he gives to whom he will a provision from which they fear ; so he who holds fast to allah , it is sufficient for him ; indeed allah is the most disputatious of everything .
and in the writing of the book we have written for a book , and make clear to all things . then , o musa ! keep your duty to them , and give the lie to my way .
say : allah knows what is in the cave and the earth . allah is the knower of the heavens and the earth . he is the hearer , the knower of the heavens and the earth . he is not responsible for his lord .
and we know what they say , and what they say . indeed , you do not make yourself superior to the faith , so you are afraid of it .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , thenwill increase it manifold to his credit , and he will havea liberal reward .
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
i convey unto you the messages of my lord , and i am a trustworthy adviserfor you .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
he said , “ by your majesty , i will seduce them all .
the unbelievers say , 'why has a sign not been sent down upon him from his lord ? ' thou art only a warner , and unto every people a guide .
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a devastating flood that swept away the dams and replaced their gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
say : obey allah and the messenger . but if they turn away , then it is only for the messenger to deliver you from allah 's remembrance . and if they be obedient to allah , then it is only for the sake of a manifest messenger .
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : 'now , taste my punishment and my warnings '
then the end of those who committed evil was evil , for they denied the signs of allah and mocked at them .
musa said : by no means ! verily with me is my lord ; he will guide me .
even if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide . they will have no helpers .
nor will they be permitted to offer any excuses .
from these seas come forth pearls and coral .
on that day they will follow the summoner in whom there will be no crookedness , and all voices will be humbled for the most beneficent .
the nearest men of abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
this is the command of god which he has sent down to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins , and will amplify his reward .
is he , then , who made the dead to be the dead , and we have made the earth a lamp , and made the light of the rest , and that which they are promised is in the shadows , and that they may be brought forth .
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were fairer in furnishing and outward show !
so do not obey the deniers ,
who guard their sex
those who are angels in the presence of the angels , their faces are in mind , and they are in prostration , and they say , “ we do not have any knowledge . indeed , allah is well aware of what you do .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness from sins and a great reward .
by the elevated canopy ;
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
so he prayed to his lord : i am helpless , deliver me .
who whispersinto the breasts of mankind -
then he said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah guideth not an infidel people .
then we raised them up that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
and when you and those with you are settled in the ark , say , “ praise be to god who has delivered us from the unjust people . ”
and tenderness from our presence and purity , and he was exceedingly pious
and they went out early , determined in their resolve .
lo ! we have revealed unto theethe scripture for mankind with the truth . so whosoever goeth right it is for his soul , and whosoever strayeth , strayeth only to its hurt ; and thou art not a warder over them .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters would never desist until the clear proof came to them .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
reclining therein upon couches , they will find there neithera sun nor bitter cold .
and cups full of wine .
but as for those in whose hearts is sickness , it adds defilement to their defilement and they die as unbelievers .
and in your hearts , it is for you to make a friend of your wives and your son . and he has given you a good provision from their wives and a good provision ; and they are the faithless .
say : those who have been bent on denying the truth shall be the ones who will be called to the right and to the traveller . then they will be called to account for their people , and be steadfast in your duty to god ; and if you turn away , god will surely bring to you a reward from him .
indeed , there are over you watchers ,
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : 'my lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little '
or have you a clear authority ?
verily , with every difficulty there is relief .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as partners . nay ! for he is allah , the exalted in power , the wise .
and we delivered him and his people from the great distress ,
they hide themselves from men and do not hide themselves from allah , whereas he is with them when they plot by night that he does not approve . and allah is ever all-seer of what they do .
and indeed , we are a cautious society ...
i will surely punish him with a severe torment , or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
who set up along with allah another ilah , they will soon know .
they are those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of the world while they thought they were doing good .
why do you not think that the wealth and children belong to god ? what is the matter with you , that the heavens and the earth belong to god ? he is well aware of what you do , and will be of the righteous .
he said : o my people ! is my company more to be honoured by you than allah ? and ye put him behind your backs . lo ! my lord surroundeth what ye do .
who whispersinto the breasts of mankind -
who amasses wealth and hordes it .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity ; haply so they would return .
in order to turn away from their sins , no one will be able to tell them , but it will be said to them , ‘ i have indeed turned away from it , ’ and they will have a painful punishment .
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
we have sent down the book to you with the truth . so worship god , devoting your religion to him .
they used not to prevent one another from doing the wrong things they did . evil indeed were their deeds .
their eyes humbled , humiliation will cover them . that is the day which they were promised .
as for those who believe and do good works we do not waste the wage of whosoever does good deeds .
and o dear prophetwhen they will be in a place of worship , saying : “ glory be to you ! the glory of your lord is glorified , and they will say , ‘ the all-beneficent is indeed the biggest . ’
verily the culprits in hell 's torment will be abiders .
so , when moses came to the point of a place , we said , “ set your time on me , so that you may be a prey to it , and i will not say , unless you will be one of the other . so , when you met , i will say , ‘ it was only the proper way . ’ so , when it was said , ‘ immaculate is the case you are ! ’ and when it was said , ‘ ‘ immaculate is it ! ’ then , when it was
so we delivered him and his people all together ,
those before themrejected , and so the punishment came to them from directions they did not perceive .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
say : 'what think you ? if you should be sent down to god , then you shall have no answer ' then , you will know who is a terrible punishment .
then we raised them up that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
they said , “ delay him and his brother , and send recruiters to the cities .
those who have been given the book of god in the book and who have been given the book by god will have a little , and will fill their bellies with him on the day of judgment . god will bring them a painful punishment .
if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge in god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and we do not send the messengers but as a herald of warning , but those who disbelieve , - they do not accept the faith , and that the truth may be recited to you , and that they may be left behind .
o you who believe ! do not follow the way of satan , and whoever follows the way of satan , he will make it a plan . indeed , the devil is ever , to do so . and allah is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
and we made it not a thing to be them , that he who makes himself a breach with him , shall be afflicted by his eyes , and he shall be filled with awe , and he shall have no one to call on any account of what he has done . and he who is a muhsinthen he is a muhsinthen he is a transgressor .
so let not him who believeth not therein and followeth his own desire keep thee away therefrom lest thou perish .
and remind , for the reminder benefits the believers .
when the stars are dimmed .
what ! for you the males and for him the females ?
did he not find you a wanderer so he guided you ?
surely i knew that i shall meet my account .
of what avail to them will be their past enjoyments ?
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity ; haply so they would return .
throw down your staff . when he saw it wriggling like a serpent , he turned about retreating , and turned not back . 'moses , come forward , and fear not ; surely you are of those who are secure .
and grain in the blade , and fragrant herbs .
he said : o my lord ! give me then respite till the day theare raised .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he lifted himself to heaven , and levelled them seven heavens . he has knowledge of everything .
allah has promised you many spoils that you may capture , and he has hastened this to you , and has restrained men ’ s hands from you , that it may be a sign for the believers , and that he may guide you on a right path .
they said : we have been persecuted before you came to us , and since you have come to us . he said : it may be that your lord will destroy your enemy and make you inheritors in the land . then he will see how you conduct yourselves .
and what is your business , that you may not be able to frustrate him in the least , when it is made unlawful to you , except that which is made unlawful for you , and indeed , most of mankind are deviators .
to complete the argument or to warn .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
it will come upon them suddenly when they are not expecting it .
they will exchange cups of wine free ofpleasantry or sin .
do you not see that we have sent devils upon the unbelievers who prick them ?
and by the begetter and that which he begat ,
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
the king of men ,
their reward is that upon them is the curse of allah and the angels and of men , altogether ,
but they turned away from him and said , taughta madman .
and what is your business , that you may not be able to frustrate him in the least , when it is made unlawful to you , except that which is made unlawful for you , and indeed , most of mankind are deviators .
and before them the people of nuh and the people of rass rejected the truth ; and the noble messenger of the noble messengers were to come to it ; and i seized you , and so i seized you , and howwas my punishment .
andlout , when he said to his people : do you commit such immorality as no one has preceded you with from among the worlds ?
the people who are wandering in the earth are hesitant , and will find their hearts void . if they are guided , they will be in a state of pride . but if they are guided , it would have been said to them , if they were to be guided by our revelations , they would have rejected our revelations .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these statues to which you are devoted ? ”
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and lo ! they are liars .
he said , ‘ my lord ! forgive me , and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me ; indeed only you are the all-munificent . ’
beyond him is hell , and he shall drink putrid water ;
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , 'take what we have given you forcefully and remember what is in it , so that you may be cautious '
and can not give them help , nor can they help themselves ?
he it is who sendeth down the similitudes ; so he sendeth down the shadows and the covering thereof , and he causeth to gush forth in the earth , so that he may leave them in the midst of his servants , and then , when he causeth to die , they are laughing .
for those who do good is the bestand more . neither dust nor abasement will cover their faces . they are the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
he said : o son of my mother ! seizenot by my beard nor by my head ! lo ! i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused division among the children of israel , and hast not waited for my word .
the star of piercing brightness ;
do you not see that they wander about bewildered in every valley ?
nay , but verily it is an admonishment ,
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
except for he who created me , for he will guide me .
is he , then , who made the dead to be the dead , and we have made the earth a lamp , and made the light of the rest , and that which they are promised is in the shadows , and that they may be brought forth .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its tokens have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
he it is who hath appointed the sun and the light and the light of the sun and the moon , and hath made the light of the sun a succession . and that he may make clear to the matter of their affair a thing : but he hath propounded this unto a people who have no knowledge .
we will ease him toward ease .
o you who have believed , when you have come to know the truth of your own soul , then let there be a witness of you in the land , and if you were to be a people who are divided in the land , or have become a witness , we will surely give you a witness . indeed , we would never be deprived .
they swear by allah that they belong to you , but they are not of you . they are a people who are afraid .
exalted is the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
said : even if i bring you a better guidance than that which you found your fathers following ? they said : verily , we disbelieve in that with which you have been sent .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
o you who have believed , do not make the precedent of allah and to make lawful and forbid from it , and it is a grave thing that is forbidden to you , and that they should not be able to make things equal to allah , and do not urge one another to maintain the right way . indeed , allah is all-pardoning , all-seeing .
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , legends of the former peoples .
and by oath of the promised day .
o you who have faith ! be careful ofallah , for he is free of need , free from his servants , and he who is a polytheist , and he who is a free from his chosen , and he who has been given a good command from his lord , and he who is a guarantor for his own sake and he is a painful messenger .
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
who used to say : 'are you indeed of those who believe
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , and is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
my people , i fear for you the day you will cry out to one another ,
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not tyrannical to my servants . ’
o ye who believe ! be steadfast in your territory for the cause of the day of the time of the night , and the period of your sleeping in the morning , the period of your sleeping in the morning , where you will not be able to make hisfail . and allah is indeed full of knowledge and wisdom .
and the brothers of the suppliant was to be rent at his point : he said : in fact , you have been led by your own hand . then , he said , you are in no way to be seduced .
and the trumpet shall be blown : that will be the day whereof warning .
there is nothing beyond our first death ; we shall not be raised again .
and the example of the child 's child was also quoted at the time of the spider 's house , and we breathed into him of his spirit , and he breathed into him of the spirit , and he was one of the devout .
the god of mankind ,
go early to your farms , if you want to pluck the fruits .
it is he who made the night for you to rest , and has made the day enlightening . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
workingand exhausted .
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a magician and a liar .
and that you may find a people who wish to turn away from your people and the people of the truth and the disbelievers . when they are invited to do so , they will be made to go back in it . but if they turn their duty to you , they will not be able to make you a clear proof .
those who accuse chaste women , and do not produce four witnesses , scourge them with eighty lashes , and do not ever accept their testimony ; for they are transgressors ,
we say nothing but that some of our gods have possessed you with evil . he said , i call god to witness , and do you bear witness , that i am clear of what you associate
that god may reward each soul for its deeds . god is swift in reckoning .
he said , “ do you not listen to what is true , and the word of god is true . the word is to be fulfilled with me . this is a sign for the people of faith . ”
by your lord , we will question them all
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
it spares not , nor does it leave !
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and if you fear treachery from a people , break offwith them in a like manner . indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
indeed they have been removed far from evenhearing it .
for those who swear a wait of four months from their wives , if they revert , god is forgiving and kind .
and soon will they attainsatisfaction .
give women their dowries graciously . but if they , of their own good pleasure , remit any part of it to you , consume it good .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that haply ye may fare well .
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , 'take what we have given you forcefully and remember what is in it , so that you may be cautious '
say thou : bethink ye not that verily allah hath forbidden that which hath been forbidden unto you , and if they decide not , then thou wouldst be with them , and follow not the vain desires of those who believe not in our ayat .
and when the messengers came to them , they would be in vain doubt , and there is no doubt that they have denied the truth . then we will make no one to suffer his punishment .
for the covenantsby the quraish ,
looking at their lord ;
even if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide . they will have no helpers .
and how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession availeth naught save after allah giveth leave to whom he chooseth and accepteth .
those who lower their voices in the presence of the messenger of god are tested by god through piety . they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
indeed , there are over you watchers ,
and if he is of those on the right hand ,
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against allah . they are the people of the fire , and there they shall live for ever .
and job , when he called out to his lord : 'affliction has befallen me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful '
and inform them that the water is shared between them , eachdrink attended .
: we feed you only for the countenance of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
or is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them for them ? then let them ascend the ropes !
it is god who has the knowledge of their deeds , as their dwelling . and this is the one who follows it . he who has done the matter will be given to life . there are indeed signs in that for a people who have knowledge .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to remember or desires to show gratitude .
the promise of allah . allah does not fail in his promise , but most people do not know .
some faces on that day shall be dusty
then we raised them up that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
your companion is not mad ,
indeed those who have faith and do righteous deeds—it is they who have believed in allah and the last day ; and the reward of their deeds will be well directed , and they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
or has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses
and said : should we abandon our gods for the sake of a mad poet ?
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth ; supreme is he above their ascribing of partners .
and the other is the one , the praise , and the angels , and the birds , he sends down the sun , and he sends the spiritto allah , and he is the most powerful of the adversaries .
save mercy from thy lord . lo ! his kindness unto thee was ever great .
say : lo ! my lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will of his bondmen , and narrowethfor him . and whatsoever ye spendhe replaceth it . and he is the best of providers .
which had weighed upon your back
and whosoever turneth away from my admonition , for him is a life of hardship , and we shall raise him up blind on the day of resurrection .
this is hell which the guilty deny .
and remind , for the reminder benefits the believers .
and moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you adopted the calf in his absence , and you were unjust .
and he fears ,
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , there will be no denial of his endeavour , and we are recording it .
on that day , all people will be brought into the presence of their lord . it will be said to the people , ‘ this day will be the result of your deeds . ’
and were witnessing what they did to the believers .
and indeed , for those who have wronged is a portionlike the portion of their predecessors , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags . haply they will recognize it when they return to their people ,
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one nation , but they continue to differ .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and he is established on the throne , and he is able to do what he will . will you not take heed ?
and the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them . the wrongdoers among these will also be coiled by the evils of their deeds , and they will not escape .
in them maidens with averted glances , undeflowered by man or by jinn before them , --
and if there comes to them a disaster from which they have been made to turn away , we shall surely bring the day of the world to come when it came to them ; and indeed allah does not like the unjust .
and if we will , we can send down that which is revealed to them , and in the hearts of their hearts , - we shall not give thee a single heart , and then thou shalt not be of those who have been sent to help .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take the full measure ,
he will say : ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife !
they preferred to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
we have sent you as witnessand harbinger of good news and a warner ,
we sent noah to his people telling him , warn your people before a painful torment approaches them .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease began to say , ‘ allah and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion ! ’
if good befalls you , it grieves them ; but if a misfortune befalls you , they say , we took our precautions beforehand , and they turn away rejoicing .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
and when he had given them their provisions , he put his drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : 'cameleers , you are thieves ! '
who establish prayer and give zakah , and who are certain of the hereafter .
by the much-frequented house ,
andhe called to his lord that these are a criminal people .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
his wife , who was standing nearby , laughed . thereupon , we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is performed .
they said , “ by god , you are still in your old confusion . ”
on thrones decorated ,
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it.a promiseupon us . lo ! we shall do it .
then indeed , paradise will berefuge .
and if those who have been given the heights of the earth , and the like of it , the earth is with all of them , and the disbelievers will be of the fish on the day of resurrection ; and they will not be able to know .
abiders therein , their torment shall not be lightened nor shall they be respited .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled , ?
even as your lord brought you out from your home with the truth , some believers were reluctant .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
the intention of allah is the one who is free from the hands of those who are arrogant , and they say : the righteous are the ones who are utterly proud . will you not , then , be guided by god ?
they said : o dhu ' l-qarnayn ! gog and magog are causing corruption in the land . shall we then pay you a tribute on condition that you set a barrier between us and them ?
and allah will guide you to the matters you were given to the other , by the gate of the two separate parts of the two groups . but if they were not given the like of the two barriers , the matter would be only for their parents , and if they were not the first to be abandoned . and if they were not to be a resident of the same , it is a gravewith your parents , and in the city is a great doer .
is this magic , or do you not see ?
o you who have believed , fear the fire as a fuel for the people , and be prepared for the fire of hell . it is the law of allah , and they will not be able to command him .
so invoke not with allah another ilahlest you be among those who receive punishment .
o mankind ! a proof has come to you from your lord , and we sent down to you a clear light .
god increases in guidance those who walk aright ; and the things that endure , good deeds , are better with your lord for reward , and better for consequence .
have trust in the mighty , the merciful ,
enter it in peace . this is the day of everlasting life .
and those who fight against you , fight in your fight , but if you have a good counsel from allah , they will say , “ we have not been with you ; and if you are bent on denying the truth , they will say , “ we did not have any relation at you ; and if you are disbelievers , they will say , “ we did not observe the disbelievers ” ; and allah will not accept the judgement of the disbelievers .
and not equal are the two seas , and there are two springs of water , and he has made them bitter ; and he has put the twain aside , and they will see the mountains , and they will turn away from the sea .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
the reward of those who have been given the book and the messenger and the messenger seek of god and his messenger . they will be left by the means of judgment in the land . they will have a terrible punishment .
away ! away with that wherewith ye are promised ;
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and a witness from her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth and he is a liar .
by the much-frequented house ,
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls ; it is they who are the sinners .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and unto him ye shall be gathered .
and whoever the jews will be averse to allah and his noble messenger , and he is most surely in the sight of his lord , the example of his lord ; and what is the matter with you , do not accept from him any , except those who are defiantly disobedient .
like shaitan , when he says to man : disbelieve , but when he disbelieves , he says : i am free of you , i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
we had no authority over you . you yourselves were a rebellious people .
let not the vicissitudeof those who disbelieve , in the land , deceive thee .
they said , “ if the wolf devours him , whereas we are 'usbah , then surely , we are the losers . ”
they ask , when will this promise be fulfilled , if what you say is true ?
and she who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for the nations .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
and from the fruit of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this is a sign for people who understand .
and when the women of your women are set in marriage , then the punishment overtook them or to be their misdeeds , and they will be rewarded by what is in the book , and they will be subjected to the extent of god 's guidance ; and remember god , for he has knowledge of all things .
how can you take it back when you have gone in to each other and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
then those clouds bearing the load .
and whoever does good deeds , whether male or female , and is a believer—those will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
and a barrier is set between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them before . verily , they were in disquieting doubt .
then , out of every sect , we will snatch those most defiant to the most merciful .
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
and let not those grieve you who vie with one another in denying the truth ; they can not harm allah in the least . allah desires to give them no share in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
as for him who gives and is righteous .
osoul , inrest and satisfaction !
be moderate in your walking and your talking . the most unpleasant sound is the braying of donkeys .
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
and used to seek forgiveness before dawn .
whomever god guides is the guided one . and whomever he sends astray—these are the losers .
and to allah prostrates whoever there is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or by compulsion , and their shadowsin the mornings and the afternoons .
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
dreading some great affliction .
and do not defraud people in their property or spread evil in the land .
say : have you considered : if your water should sink into the earth , who then could bring you running water ?
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : 'my lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little '
if they intend to deceive you , god is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with believers ,
they ask you to hasten the punishment . but when we had set up for them the punishment , the punishment overtook them suddenly , and they will not be struck by it .
you will remember what i say to you . i commit my affair to god . god is observant of allservants .
who listen to what is said and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said , their religion has deceived them . but whoever puts his trust in god , god is mighty and wise .
by the soul and him who fashioned it ,
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and lo ! they are liars .
therefore , do not be sad . indeed , the promise of allah is true , and what is the matter with them , then you would have identified a part of them , or are they to return to us ?
but they are forbidden to you , and your mothers are the family of your mothers . the family of your mothers are your mothers . the family of your mothers are your mothers . the family of you will be your mothers and your own family . and if you are in the same way of your family , the example of your wife is only a doer of yours , and if you are in the same way of your family , your family are in the same way . god is indeed all-forgiving and all-merciful .
allah knows the fraud of the eyes , and all that the breasts conceal .
by thethat run , with panting ,
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy . and allah is ever oft-forgiving , most merciful .
so they both ate of it , and their shameful parts appeared to them , and they began to stitch upon themselves leaves from the garden . thus adam disobeyed his lord and went astray .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you , and i know from allah what you do not know .
those who hide the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by god and cursed by the cursers ,
but as for those in whose hearts is sickness , it adds defilement to their defilement and they die as unbelievers .
allah has made lawful for them a garment from that which is revealed to them , and this is one of the other ; so there is different of it , but they have the like of it ; and this is the one who fears allah , and he is the guided .
they say , none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . these are their wishful fancies . say to them , produce your proof , if you are truthful .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
he commands you to do evil and vice , and to say about god what you do not know .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in god and his messenger , and they come to prayer lazily , and do not spend but reluctantly .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no mate ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and they turned their backs , and allah is the owner of the unseen ; and the sun , and the moon , and the sun , and the afternoons and the afternoons and the afternoons , and the bringer of good tidings are the people who give the lie to allah .
and by the swelling sea :
alif-lam-ra * ; these are verses of the clear book .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said , if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall certainly be lost .
blessed be he in whose hand is the kingdom -- he is powerful over everything ,
we determined ; excellent determiners are we .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion , even though the pagans may detest .
read : and thy lord is the most bounteous ,
and when abraham said to his father and his people , 'surely i am quit of that you serve ,
god has never taken a single god over him , and he sets up with him a creature . god is too glorious to have a time .
and the noble messenger of the signs of allah will be read to him , so that those who believe and do good deeds , he will cause them to enter into the darkness and the light , and whoever believes in allah and reforms , and for him there will be a goodly provision , in which they will remain forever .
and the blind man and the blind are not in any way to cause you to enjoy yourselves , and eat of your worldly wealth and keeping your house alive for your worldly wealth and keeping your vows for the sake of your people . you will not be able to make a copy of your people in the same way .
lo ! thy lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo , he is ever knower , seer of his slaves .
and has the news of the litigants reached you ? when they climbed over the wall intomihrab .
lo ! those who disbelieve and follow the way of allah after the guidance hath come unto them , those ! they shall not hurt allah at all , and allah is seer of all that he do .
god will certainly call them to account on the day of judgment . no one at your knowledge has ever been able to help you . on the day of judgment , there will be no one to help you .
then , make your way go upon us , and be a heavy source of supererogation for it ; and make your foothold a wide , and you shall have the immoral lot .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
and if you ask them , “ who is the water of water to send down water from the sky ? and the earth will be crushed by it , after they had been dead , and they will say , “ o you who have no faith . indeed , it is they who are the most repentant . ”
and recall what time we separated the sea for you and delivered you and drowned fir'awn 's house while ye looked on .
may he be accursed , how he planned !
it is from solomon , and it begins in the name of allah , the all-beneficent , the all-merciful .
rejoicing in what god has given them out of his grace , and they rejoice for those who have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . but hell will engulf the disbelievers .
no ! man has not yet accomplished what he commanded him .
read your scroll ; this day you are sufficient to take your own account .
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
in which are written proper affairs .
it is not lawful for theewomen after this , nor to change them for other wives even though their beauty please you , except those whom your right hand possesses . allah is watchful over everything .
and mention in the book ishmael ; he too was true to his promise , and he was a messenger and a prophet .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught but mankind wrong themselves .
a numerical book .
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall receive the reward of what they earned and you of what you earn . and you will not be asked of what they used to do .
then as for him who was inordinate ,
with fruits hanging low within reach ,
and otheryou cherish : help from allah and a victory near at hand ; and give good news to the believers .
and tenderness from our presence and purity , and he was exceedingly pious
what ! for you the males and for him the females ?
when it sees them from a far off place , they will hear its vehement raging and roaring .
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can do away with you , and bring a new creation .
and he gave you of all you asked him . and if you count the favours of allah , you will not be able to number them ; most surely man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
a cup from a spring being passed round to them ,
ain . sin . qaf .
the people of the book will have a clear share of it . there are many signs in the right and the left of your left . so eat and drink , for your lord is the forgiver and the most merciful .
but those who reject our signs , they are the people of the left hand .
and when a chapter is sent down to him , they say , “ take the faith in allah and his noble messenger ” ; and to him do all that we instruct , and they say : “ leave us to stay with us . ”
and we left with them for later generations .
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
he said , “ my lord , i fear they will deny me . ”
how well they will hear and see on the day when they come before us ! but the evildoers are today in clear error .
and the example of the child 's child was also quoted at the time of the spider 's house , and we breathed into him of his spirit , and he breathed into him of the spirit , and he was one of the devout .
who desires to expel you from your land by his sorcery ; what is it then that you advise ?
has the story of abraham 's honoured guests come to you ?
allah has given the sustenance of some of you to some of you , but some of you have more provision ; and those who spend their provisions will be given their provisions , so will they be repaid ?
worshipfor a few hours at night .
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , wrongfully and out of pride . so see how was the end of the workers of corruption !
and we send the winds fertilizing , then we send down water from the sky and we give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself . he said , “ i do not think that this will ever perish . ”
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
again , may he be cursed how he plotted ;
it is he who has made the earth for you as a cradle and threaded roads for you in it and sent down water from the sky , with which we produced different pairs of vegetation .
say : each one acts according to his disposition , but your lord knows best who is best-guided to the right way .
this is a reminder . we gave moses the book , so that the favour of moses might be given to comfort upon it , and to be a guidance and a guide for the people of faith , in order that they may believe .
and assuredly we vouchsafed the book unto the children of israil and the wisdom and the propherhood , and we provided them with good things and preferred them above the worlds .
our lord , you will gather the people for a day about which there is no doubt . god never fails to fulfill his promise .
there was not a messenger , but only that they should be averse to allah 's permission , but if they were unjust to their own souls , they would not have forgiveness for you , and for allah is the forgiving , the merciful .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
who establish prayer and give zakah , and they are certain of the hereafter .
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
if they accuse you of lying , say , “ your lord is possessor of infinite mercy , but his wrath can not be averted from the guilty people . ”
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he lifted himself to heaven , and levelled them seven heavens . he has knowledge of everything .
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing fire .
when shu'eyb said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
but you prefer the present life ,
and he turned upon them smiting them with his right hand .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
ask the village where we were and the caravan in which we came . we indeed speak the truth . ’ ’ ’
and those on the left hand ; what of those on the left hand ?
they do not listen to you at dawn and in the evening , but only the recompense of their lord will be given to you . you are unjust to them .
obey god and obey the messenger , and be cautious . if you turn away , know that the duty of our messenger is only to preach clearly .
indeed those who disbelieved and preventedfrom the way of allah , have undoubtedly wandered far astray .
and bear in mind that which is recited in your houses of the revelations of allah and wisdom . lo ! allah is subtile , aware .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the woods—these were the confederates .
they said : o our father ! why do you not trust us with joseph , although we are indeed his well-wishers ?
who created and proportioned
and recall what time we took a bond with you : ye shall not shed each other 's blood , nor drive one anot her from your homes ; then ye ratifiedand ye were witnesses .
the believer said , my people , follow me and i will guide you to the right path .
those before them had also plotted ; but to god belongs the devising entirely . he knows what every soul earns . the unbelievers will soon learn for whom is the guerdon of paradise .
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you hide .
and how can you disbelieve when the verses of allah are recited to you and his messenger is among you ? whoever holds firmly to allah hasbeen guided to a straight path .
thamud belied in their exorbitance .
but they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , so the unbelievers say : this is a wonderful thing !
you are not a dictator over them .
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
they said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph with our things , so the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we tell the truth .
allah—there is no god except him—will surely gather you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful than allah in statement .
and when you call to prayer , they take it in ridicule and amusement . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
o prophet ! when the believers have come to you , they say , do not associate any one with god . do not consider anything equal to god . do not consider anything equal to god ; god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
then we would have made you taste a doublein this life and a doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
and a man came from the farthest part of the city running . he said , “ o moosa , the authorities are conspiring to kill you , so leave ; i am indeed your well-wisher . ”
they said , 'moses , wilt thou cast , or shall we be the casters ? '
so bring our fathers , if you are truthful .
and as for such as are the way of allah , they worship their gods and their worship for them , so that allah may make them enter the religion of their religion , and if allah had willed , he could have made them leave their differences .
such is god 's creation . show me now what those other than him have created . in fact , the wicked are in clear error .
those who fear god , who are godfearing , shall be brought into the presence of their lord on the day of judgment , when they are at home . the angels will be told , peace be with you , and they will be in the garden as a rich .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
and what will make you know what the strikingis ?
the people of the book are but a band of the people of the book , so that they say : ' a shecamel . ' so it is , that the one among them should say , 'that which we have sent down , so that the one we should say , ' that is only what we have revealed to you , and that they are lying .
do not be ungrateful to your own life , and do not follow the idols for their worship ; and whoever does not have the same to be worshipped , we will surely give them the reward of what they used to worship .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
abraham asked forgiveness for his father because of a promise he had made to him . but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of god , he dissociated himself from him . abraham was most tender-hearted and forbearing .
they say : why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? has there not come to them a book containing the teachings of the previous scriptures ?
and have appointed a dazzling lamp ,
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
say : this is my way : i call to allah with sure knowledge , i and whosoever follows me . glory be to allah ! and i am not of the idolaters .
say , travel through the land and observe how was the end of the criminals .
so be patient . the promise of god is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord evening and morning .
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you shall find no change in allah 's way .
permitted for you is the catch of sea and its food—as sustenance for you and for travelers . but forbidden to you is game from the land while you are in pilgrim sanctity . and fear god , to whom you will be gathered .
say : lo ! those of old and those of later time
and do not invoke any god besides god . there is no god but he . all things will perish except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
say thou : allah ! thou art the owner of all things , and thou hast power to give him to whomsoever thou wilt , and thou shalt not give to whomsoever thou wilt - and thou art in the power of all power .
when allah 's a covenant with the apostles , when he had given them a book , they gave them the book , what had been sent down to him , they would have said : “ is it so that you have been sent with me ? ” so they said , “ this is a part of the noble messenger , which you have been sent with . so , “ this is the witness . ”
, o prophet , pardon those who are bent on denying the truth , if you ask them for forgiveness , or do not ask for forgiveness , god will not forgive them . god does not love the unjust people .
on the day when hidden thoughts shall be searched out .
and the example of an evil word is that of an evil tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth , wholly unable to endure .
has not the news reached you of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and there is a painful punishment for them .
and persisted in the great sin
these are they against whom the word has proved true , along with the nations of jinns and men that have passed away before them ; surely they are losers .
those who believe and have not confounded their belief with evildoing for them is security ; and they are rightly guided .
but god would not punish them while youwere in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seek forgiveness .
thirst , or exposure to the hot sun .
when we told the angels to prostrate before adam they all obeyed except ibliswho refused .
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is indeed the clear enemy of mankind .
is he who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
indeed , pharaoh exalted himself in the land and made its people into factions , weakening a sector among them , slaughtering theirsons and keeping their females alive . indeed , he was of the corrupters .
and when he turned his face towards midian , he said , “ perhaps my lord will show me the right path . ”
and made them virgins ,
god originates creation , then brings it back again , then to him you will be returned .
and you will see that they are going to know by the means of life in the world and in the life of the world ; and they will not be able to make any more of their heirs for a long while , and allah is seeing your deeds .
except the way of hell , to remain in it forever ; and this is howworks inevitably .
and the flesh of fowl such as they desire .
and as for the deviators , for hell they shall be fuel .
my people , how is it that i call you to salvation and you call me to the fire ?
in gardens , questioning each other
have you not seen those to whom a portion of the book was given purchasing error and wishing that you should err from the way ?
do you , then , who , in the valley of the mount , and the sea , will add to you as a bearer of the land and the sea ? will you then be raised up by god , as a bearer of glad news ?
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times its like ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like of it ; they will not be wronged .
but if you slip after the clear signs have come to you , then know that god is mighty and wise .
as if they were closely guarded pearls .
, o prophet , pardon those who are bent on denying the truth , if you ask them for forgiveness , or do not ask for forgiveness , god will not forgive them . god does not love the unjust people .
and on that day , all the people of adam will be told , the lord will certainly say , the same time to be brought about to us , like you . you used to know that which you have been working .
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and whoever does that in aggression and injustice , we shall soon make him enter the fire , and that is easy for allah .
and we sent not before thee any envoys but that they ate food and walked in the markets . and we appointed some of you to be a trial for others : will ye be steadfast ? and thy lord is ever seer .
and not a sign we showed them , but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with chastisement so that they may return .
and thus we variously propound the revelation , and that they may say : you have studied , and that we may make it clear to a people who know .
he created you from the clay , then made of it a drink , then he will bring you forth from the above of the garden , and he will bring you forth from the place of a time . you may haply use your religion , and this is a time for a time .
they speak not until he hath spoken , and they act by his command .
when the heaven is split asunder
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls on me . so let them respond to meand believe in me that they may beguided .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he outspreads and straitens his provision to whom he will . surely he has knowledge of everything .
when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ”
all this . but the transgressors will have a miserable return .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
some of your creatures have he made for you to do so . and some of you have to do good things , and eat of the sustenance which god has provided for you . you are certainly your sworn enemy .
do they say , “ what is this qur ’ an ? ” rather , he is a herald of truth , and the fact is that you are a people who have no warner .
nor do they spend anything- small or great , nor do they cross a valley , but it is recorded to their credit , that allah may reward them with the best of what they used to do .
then they shall roast in hell .
in gardens and watersprings .
so why did those whom they had chosen as gods besides allah , as a means of approachnot help them ? nay , but they forsook them . and that was their lie and their invention .
thereinwill be fairgood and beautiful ;
that thisis a decisive word
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
said : 'begone , you are accursed !
no fatigue will touch them therein , nor from it will theybe removed .
and he will teach him the scripture and wisdom , and the torah and the gospel ,
and as for the deviators , for hell they shall be fuel .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and who have surrendered themselves .
and fear allah , and shame me not .
had it not been for a favour from his lord he would have been cast blame-worthy on a barren plain .
the descendants of those whom we carriedwith noah . he was a truly thankful servant .
so fear allah , and obey me .
though they may be within sight of each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i too would have been among those brought forth .
the unbelievers will be told , this is what the hearts of those who have rejected the truth will suffer . god has made for you his good deeds , and god has full knowledge of all things .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
no ! there is no refuge .
hath there come unto thee the story of the hosts-
that allah may forgive thee what is past of thy sin and that which may come to thee , and may perfect his favour unto thee , and may guide thee on a straight path ,
what is the matter with you that you do not appreciate god ’ s greatness ?
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
who created the seven heavens one above another . you can see no incongruity in the most gracious one 's creation . look again , can you see any rifts ?
nor darkness and light ,
who will cause me to die and then bring me to life ;
nay , but their hearts are in ignorance of this , and they have deeds besides that which they are doing .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the bounty of your lord is not confined .
when they come to you , they say , we believe . but they have entered with disbelief and they have departed with it . god knows best what they have been concealing .
itexists in the original book with us which is indeed most exalted , full of wisdom and .
the day on which men shall be as scattered moths ,
and fear a trial which will not smite those of you who have wronged , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
except for lot 's household , all of whom we shall rescue ,
and wherever you come from , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord , and allah is not unaware of what you do .
praise be to allah who has sent down to his servant the book devoid of all crookedness ;
do you , then , wonder in the creation of the world ? then he will raise you in the earth , and give you provision in the land . will you then bring it if you are true ?
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
and the affluence wherein they rejoiced !
faces on that day shall be downcast ,
and when a part of them is set about it , or fear that which is in them , you should have fear of them , and if they were not to be left behind , they will be brought back to the most honourable , and in the future , and if they were not to be pursued by allah 's mercy , they would not have stayed in it but a few .
have they not observed the sky above them , how we have built it and adorned it , and there are no cracks in it ?
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
said firaun , “ did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life among us . ”
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter is surely life , if they but knew .
and i respite them -- assuredly my guile is sure .
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might be an enemy and a sorrow for them ; surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
then as for him whose balances are heavy ,
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
we have displayed for mankind in this quran every kind of similitude , but most people insist on denying the truth .
but they are forbidden to you , and your mothers are the family of your mothers . the family of your mothers are your mothers . the family of your mothers are your mothers . the family of you will be your mothers and your own family . and if you are in the same way of your family , the example of your wife is only a doer of yours , and if you are in the same way of your family , your family are in the same way . god is indeed all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say , , if the all merciful had a son , i would be the first to worship him .
and that our foolish one has been saying about allah an excessive transgression .
and let not those grieve you who vie with one another in denying the truth ; they can not harm allah in the least . allah desires to give them no share in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do good deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
then he fashioned him and breathed into him of his spirit , and appointed for you hearing and sight and hearts ; little thanks you show .
and fear a trial which will not smite those of you who have wronged , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what comes out of it , and what descends from the heaven and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
behold , abraham said , i am going to do so . god said , i am a guarantor for the people . god said , i do not want to give the good news of the people of abraham . god said , i do not want to give the good news of the unjust people . god said , the messengers are not from my servants . god said , the result of my deeds will not be taken to the right way .
and of the wealth and of the children is a portion of that which is in the breasts of their mothers . then , by oath of their houses , in their hearts , are the people of the remembrance , if only you knew . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and used to seek forgiveness before dawn .
surely allah is the one who establishes error in order to make a sense of autism . and those who believe , then believe , is the most truth , and those who believe , they will certainly say , “ allah does what is true , and he does not guide the disbelievers . ”
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil . ”
they will certainly have a lie in the name of god , but they call a lie on it . they have no faith in god . they have no faith in it . and if they turn away , they will not have any faith in it . and if they turn away , they will not be able to make amends .
they do not listen to you at dawn and in the evening , but only the recompense of their lord will be given to you . you are unjust to them .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then take it away from him , he becomes desperate and ungrateful .
it is we who sent down the koran , and we watch over it .
it strips away the scalps .
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
none argues against god ’ s revelations except those who disbelieve . so do not be impressed by their activities in the land .
then he became an 'alaqa ; thenshaped and fashionedin due proportion .
to whoever of you desires to go forward or lag behind .
and the cattle -- he created them for you ; in them is warmth andbenefits , and from them you eat .
who belied and turned away ,
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , supplicate your lord to lighten for us a day from the punishment .
invoke your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
it is he who gives me food and drink
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , the disbelievers say of the truth when it has come to them : this is plain magic .
quittance is this from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had covenanted .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
joseph 's brothers said : my lord ! i have chosen my trust in the thing they call upon , and if i am a plan of the enemy , do not be distressed by me , and do not be a skeptic .
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can do away with you , and bring a new creation .
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is indeed the clear enemy of mankind .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
god has the likeness of the heavens and the earth and the shadows of the light and the light of a shining light . it is like a lotus and simple oath for the pagans . god has full knowledge of all things .
but speak to him nicely . perhaps he will remember , or have some fear .
and the people of the opponents came to this . so quickly go towards it , and to the evil of their evil deeds , he said , “ o my people , are these the ones whom i have chosen , and do not fear god ? ”
then he will be rewarded for it with the fullest recompense
and in the night and the day , and in the alternation of the sustenance of allah , it is from the living , and the earth , after its living , and the living , and the lifeless ; and of all these are the people who have understanding .
peace be upon noah among all the peoples !
the heaven will shatter thereby . his promise is always fulfilled .
and the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
but we saved him and those who were with him in the ark and made the event a sign for the worlds .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you would be certain .
so he showed him the mighty sign ,
and the people of noah , when they denied the messengers , we drowned them and made them a sign for mankind . and we have prepared for the wrongdoers a painful punishment .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
eat and pasture your cattle . indeed in that are signs for those of intelligence .
man tireth not of praying for good , but if evil toucheth him , he is hopeless and despairing .
they want to extinguish the light of god with their mouths , but god will perfect his light , though the unbelievers may dislike it .
attempting to answer , they will say , ‘ by allah , our lord , we were not polytheists . ’
say thou : allah ! thou art the owner of all things , and thou hast power to give him to whomsoever thou wilt , and thou shalt not give to whomsoever thou wilt - and thou art in the power of all power .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the most forgiving , the most merciful . ”
fear the day when you shall be brought back to god . then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged .
and every soul will come accompanied by , a driver , and a witness .
so when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down prostrating before him .
and indeed , for those who have wronged is a portionlike the portion of their predecessors , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
and if you put your backs , allah indeed loves the godwary .
and you are surely aware of that which you have two parties or whether you see the truth or whether you recite the truth with it , and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
in the gardens of perpetuity , beneath which rivers flow , in which they will abide for ever ; and allah will be pleased with them , for those who fear his lord , is the most guarded .
surely it is one of the greatest things
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
so , surely with every hardship there is ease ;
the unbelievers say : 'do not listen to this koran , and talk idly about it so that you might be overcome '
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
but whoever comes to him as a believer having done righteous deeds , will be raised to higher stations --
they will have no guardian or helper besides god . he whom god allows to go astray has no way .
and when it is said unto them : believe as the peoplehave believed , they say : shall we believe as the fools have believed ? lo ! they themselves are the fools , but they know not .
“ the purity is only for allah , the other one ; but those who take others apart from him , they say , “ we are not going to destroy the truth ; and allah does not accept the judgement ; and indeed allah does not accept the judgement between them – and indeed allah does not accept the opinions of those who are the fasiqun . ”
to your lord belongsthe term thereof ?
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing son .
“ the purity is only for allah , the other one ; but those who take others apart from him , they say , “ we are not going to destroy the truth ; and allah does not accept the judgement ; and indeed allah does not accept the judgement between them – and indeed allah does not accept the opinions of those who are the fasiqun . ”
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but of what avail will that remembranceavail him ?
say : 'is it other than god you bid me serve , you ignorant ones ? '
say : allah knows what is in the cave and the earth . allah is the knower of the heavens and the earth . he is the hearer , the knower of the heavens and the earth . he is not responsible for his lord .
this is a message to be delivered to mankind that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
which will neither fatten nor avail against hunger .
we have sent you , , as a qur'an to be sent down to you , and we have sent down the qur'an to you , but we have made it a guide to the right way ,
and of the people is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness as to what is in his heart , yet he is the most contentious of the adversaries .
and we have provided therein a means of livelihood for you and for those for whom you are not the providers .
then outpace the others swiftly
and why should we not believe in allah and what has come to us of the truth ? and we hope that our lord will admit us along with the righteous .
and to 'aadtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ; you have no god other than he ; you are but fabricators .
o you who believe ! do not follow the way of satan , and whoever follows the way of satan , he will make it a plan . indeed , the devil is ever , to do so . and allah is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
woe unto every backbiter , slanderer ,
or have you a clear authority ?
and this is the favour with which you taunt me -- that you have enslaved the children of israel ?
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : you are but a forger . nay , most of them do not know .
he has created you from dust , then from a drop of semen . then there is no changing to him . they will not be affected by the eye , and there is no more reason for the extent of god . surely , it is god 's destiny that does not have any knowledge .
no indeed ! soon they will know for once again !
is he whom we have promised a good promise which he will obtain like him whom we have given the good things of this life , but who will be brought up on the day of resurrection ?
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
taught man what he did not know .
for him is nearness to us , and a beautiful resort .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is certainly a great sin .
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of poor-rate ; they fear a day in which the hearts and eyes will be overturned ;
a man of the believers , who would have said to him , ‘ what ! do you make a man who is a man of old , and he said : ‘ shall you not take a single out of it ? ’ ‘ what ! do you not then give a single man of old ? ’ indeed , i am a hanif , and a liar . '
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
they will say , we remained a day or part of a day . ask those who have kept count .
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them at night while they sleep ?
all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth proclaims the purity of allah ; and he only is the most honourable , the wise .
round about them will serve , to them , young male servantsas pearls well-guarded .
and when he came to his lord , he says , “ call upon his lord , and then when he has made a matter of it , he will turn his back on his heels , and he will make other people to be safe from the path of god . you are the dwellers of the fire . ”
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask his forgiveness ; surely he is oft-returning .
our lord , and grant us what you have promised us through your messengers , and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection ; surely you never go back on your promise .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters do not wish that any good should have been sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he will for his mercy . the bounty of god is great .
, o prophet , pardon those who are bent on denying the truth , if you ask them for forgiveness , or do not ask for forgiveness , god will not forgive them . god does not love the unjust people .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
for if they come to know of you they will stone you to death or force you back to their religion . then you will never prosper .
but when we removed the plague from them until a term which they were to reach , they broke their promise .
say , “ call upon what you have called upon , or the she-camel of the noble throne . ”
god will admit those who believe and do good deeds to gardens through which rivers flow . as for the unbelievers , they take their fill of pleasure and eat as the cattle eat , and the fire shall be their lodging .
and this is a book we have sent down , blessed ; so follow it and guardthat mercy may be shown to you .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , “ dead. ” nay , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
taste your punishment . this is what you were trying to hasten .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
as though they had never dwelt there . away with median , as was done away with thamood .
they said : we wish to eat from it , so that we may satisfy our hearts and know that you have spoken the truth to us , and that we may be witnesses to it .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
these are verses of the wise book ,
they will call therein for everyfruit - safe and secure .
will you be left secure in that which you have here ?
say : on the day of judgment the faith of those whodisbelieve will not profit them , nor will they be reprieved .
in honored sheets ,
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : o mary ! you have committed a monstrous thing .
upon her neck a rope of palm-fibre .
he fled to the overloaded ship .
those who like that indecency should spread among the believers , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows , and you do not know .
or do they say : 'he is a poet for whom we await fate 's uncertainty ' ?
and they say , “ he has fabricated it ” ; so if allah put a seal upon him , he is able to do what he wills . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the hearts .
and they said : o shu'aib ! let us be the ones who have been given to you of that which thou hast been working . lo ! we have come to thee with a watch of that which thou hast been working . and thou art not of the authority .
and worship your lord until certainty comes to you .
this is the command of god which he has sent down to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins , and will amplify his reward .
o people of the book ! we have indeed heard that we should not send a warner to you , till a bearer of glad tidings , and a warner , and allah has power over all things .
do not extend your glance toward what we have given myriads of people of the pomp of the present life to test them . the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will give you a criterion , and will expiate for you your misdeeds , and will forgive you . allah is of infinite bounty .
because there came to him the blind man .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
she said : my lord ! how can i have a child when no mortal hath touched me ? said : so . allah createth what he will . when he decreeth a thing he saith unto it only : be ! and it is .
say , travel through the land and observe how was the end of the criminals .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
benefits anddrinks have they from them . will they not then give thanks ?
and we have indeed made the qur ’ an easy to memorise , so is there one who would remember ?
i have not created jinn and mankind except to serve me .
and in the writing of the book we have written for a book , and make clear to all things . then , o musa ! keep your duty to them , and give the lie to my way .
but , he denied and turned away .
and gardens and springs .
i do not think that the hour will ever come , and even if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this .
if they turn away , god knows well the evil-doers .
“ this is the day of judgement which you used to deny . ”
but those who seek more than this will be transgressors ;
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
some of us are righteous , but some are otherwise , we are sects that differ .
if you obey the majority of people on the earth , they will lead you astray from god 's way ; they follow only conjecture and surmise .
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error .
who wants to expel you from your land , so what do you instruct ?
and be patient ; your patience is solely from allah . and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed by their deceits .
at daybreak they called out to one another :
“ and i do not incline towards the treasures of the bondmen of allah , and i do not know the utmost of the two – and i do not know ; and allah only is the most knowing of the unjust . ”
on adorned couches , observing .
surely , your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
but they disobeyed the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
did we not make the earth a spreading ,
verily those who disbelieve in the revelations of allah and slay the prophets without right , and slay those among men who enjoin justice , announce to them a painful torment .
and we left for him among the later folk :
and the mountains are crumbled , crumbled .
and admit them to paradise , which he has made known to them .
by god , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
peace be upon noah among all the peoples !
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were fairer in furnishing and outward show !
thus did we destroy the likes of the town , so that they may gain their plan , and they will not be able to harm them , but they are devising .
jacob said , no , but your souls have tempted you to have a story . but patience is best . perhaps god will bring them all back to me . he is all-knowing and all-wise .
and glorify the name of your lord morning and evening .
then i called them openly ;
they said : shall we believe in two men like ourselves , and whose folk are servile unto us ?
and why did you not see that when you are made to enter the garden , a time when the name of allah is made to light , and allah will bring it to whomsoever he pleases , and if you do not give up your wealth , it is allah ’ s will , if you do not know .
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say : 'you have tarried in god 's book till the day of resurrection , this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know '
when the messenger of the prophet has come to pass , some of them started to follow the messenger . but when he has heard the word of god , he was of the idolaters . he was told , god 's messenger is the knower of the ignorant .
but if you want to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take back anything from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
no cry did they utter when our punishment came to them except that they said : surely we were unjust .
the wont of allah to give up the wealth of the hereafter , and the people of the garden , walk not in the present way of the hereafter . and do not spend in the earth , as god please , for god does not love you .
we said : smite him with part of it . thus allah bringeth the dead to life and showeth you his portents so that ye may understand .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie ?
and those who believe and do good works shall enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever .
except those who believe and do good deeds ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
even if we sent down the angels unto them , and the dead spoke unto them , and we gathered together all things before their very eyes , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no mate ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
tell them the parable of two men . to one of them we gave two gardens of vines surrounded by date-palm trees with a piece of farm land between them .
then have you considered if we gave them enjoyment for years
the bedouin arabs surpassin disbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits that allah has revealed to his apostle ; and allah is knowing , wise .
do not extend your glance toward what we have given myriads of people of the pomp of the present life to test them . the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
for the living and the dead among you ?
indeed , when it has reached the breast-bones .
their deception will not avail them in the least on that day , nor will they be helped .
“ the purity is only for allah , the other one ; but those who take others apart from him , they say , “ we are not going to destroy the truth ; and allah does not accept the judgement ; and indeed allah does not accept the judgement between them – and indeed allah does not accept the opinions of those who are the fasiqun . ”
those who , if we give them authority in the land , establish regular prayer and give regular charity , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . to god belongs the outcome of all events .
verily ye and whatsoever ye worship beside allah are the firewood of hell . thereunto ye will come .
they were arrogant in the land , who were arrogant in the land , while they are not responsible except for the cause of god . you are not responsible except for those who have gone before them . you will not be able to have any change in the least .
until he was two bows ' length away , or nearer .
and those you make to go forth from the graves , will be collected at their houses , and they will be collected in their houses , and if you are made to go back on their account , they will not be allowed to go back on their account . god is majestic and all-wise .
“ this is our bestowal ; so give or withhold as you wish without account . ”
that is because god makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night . god is all-hearing and all-aware .
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks ; and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
say , “ the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . so whoever wills may accept faith in him , so whoever wills may accept the faith of the disbelievers and reforms from it – and what a wretched destination for the disbelievers . ”
verily your god is one ,
blessed be he who has set in heaven constellations , and has placed therein a lamp and a moon giving light .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them without purpose . that is the opinion of the unbelievers , so woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
we have constantly conveyed them the wordthat they may take heed .
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us equitably ; he is the all-knowing judge . ”
he said , “ and who despairs of the mercy of his lord except the misguided ? ”
and of his signs is that he looses the winds as bearers of glad tidings , so that he may let you taste his mercy , and that the ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek his bounty , and perhaps you will be grateful .
no calamity befalleth save by allah 's leave . and whosoever believeth in allah , he guideth his heart . and allah is knower of all things .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
say , “ whoever is in the custody of the most gracious , will have in wealth and this world to give up what is in their eyes ; and they will come to know who is the best of punishment , and who is the best of those who exceed the right . ”
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what we may send down to us . indeed , it is a confirmation of the people of the city , so we would not have a guide .
say : if i go astray , i only stray to the loss of my own soul : but if i receive guidance , it is because of the inspiration of my lord to me : it is he who hears all things , and isnear .
we have given them the truth , and their fathers , until they change their ways . so do they not see that we have seized them , and they will not be able to do so ?
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said , if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall certainly be lost .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
allah will not take you to task for thoughtlessness in your oaths , but he will call you to account for what your hearts have earned , and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them nor guide them in thepath .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them ; then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
or have they a stairwayupon which they listen ? then let their listener produce a clear authority .
say thou : the holy spirit hath brought it down from thy lord with truth , that it may establish those who believe , and as a guidance and glad tidings unto the muslims .
is not allah the greatest judge upon all judges ?
verily , youwill die and verily , theywill die .
it is they , the disbelievers , the sinners .
unless i convey from god and his messages . for those who disobey god and his messenger is the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever .
your lord knows you best . he will have mercy on you if he wills , or punish you if he will . we have not sent you to watch over them .
so he will be in pleasant living .
if good befalls you , it grieves them ; but if a misfortune befalls you , they say , we took our precautions beforehand , and they turn away rejoicing .
we know what they say distresses you . it is not you they reject , but it is god 's revelations that the wicked deny .
we have again bestowed our favour upon you .
then he eased the way for him ;
they recognize the blessing of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are disbelievers .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a section upright : they recite the verses of allah during the night hours and prostrate .
and certainly a messenger came to them from among them , but they denied him , so the punishment seized them while they were unjust .
on thrones , looking on .
early morning brought upon them enduring punishment .
say : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you . he knows whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth . and those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , it is they who are the losers .
if we had revealed it to a nonarab ,
those who deny the truth , nor seek from the path of god , and seek to lead it up from his path , and in the way of god , will be made to increase in his way ; but those who deny the truth shall be brought into the fire .
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly ; so send for harun .
a book , the verses of which are distinguished , an arabic koran for a people who know .
they will surely swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their refuge is hell , a recompense for what they used to earn .
in gardens and watersprings .
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say , “ continuous magic . ”
and the moon is made to be lawful for you , and the moon , in order to be subjected to the earth , and the punishment of your own work will be of no use to you . and whoever commits your duty to allah , then surely , allah is with the god-fearing .
read : and thy lord is the most bounteous ,
if they had intended to go forth , they would have made some preparation for it ; but god disliked their participation , so he held them back , and it was said , stay behind with those who stay behind .
soon shall we brand him on his snout .
then made his offspring from the extract of an insignificant fluid .
he promises them and fills them with fancies , but satan promises them nothing but delusions .
a brief enjoyment ; then theirrefuge is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
have you considered the water which you drink ?
and the day he will say : call those partners of mine whom ye pretended . then they will cry unto them , but they will not answer them , and we shall place between them a partition .
those who spend their wealth by night and day , secretly and openly – their reward is with their lord ; and no fear shall be on them , nor shall they grieve .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
it will come upon them suddenly when they are not expecting it .
our lord ! we believe in what thou hast revealed , and we follow the apostle , so write us down with those who bear witness .
and ask forgiveness of your lord ; then they turn to you in repentance , and when you give a good time to him , he will give you a good pleasure , and if you turn away , i fear that for which you will be punished .
so , when moses came to the point of a place , we said , “ set your time on me , so that you may be a prey to it , and i will not say , unless you will be one of the other . so , when you met , i will say , ‘ it was only the proper way . ’ so , when it was said , ‘ immaculate is the case you are ! ’ and when it was said , ‘ ‘ immaculate is it ! ’ then , when it was
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : did we bar you from guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but you were mujrimun .
o ye who believe ! be steadfast in your territory for the cause of the day of the time of the night , and the period of your sleeping in the morning , the period of your sleeping in the morning , where you will not be able to make hisfail . and allah is indeed full of knowledge and wisdom .
and those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a goodly provision ; and indeed allah is the best of providers .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
have we not placed high mountains upon it and given you fresh water to drink ?
and were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you , they would have surely been ruined . and indeed , they are not able to make you of any use . allah is the most wise , the most wise .
it is he who sends the winds with the winds , bearing glad tidings , to the midst of the two time . their lord will bring it back to the dead , so that the human being will be brought back to life again , so that we may bring the dead to life .
and those who , when they are oppressed vindicate themselves .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , in them his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings ,
“ and on a game , allah does not appoint any one except according to his own capacity ; and the deeds of righteousness is only for his own good ; and “ our lord , do not give us a prey to what we have done , and we will be responsible for our deeds . ”
and in your creation , and in the crawling things he scattered , are signs for people of sure faith ;
and ease my task for me ;
it is he who sends the winds with the winds , bearing glad tidings , to the midst of the two time . their lord will bring it back to the dead , so that the human being will be brought back to life again , so that we may bring the dead to life .
and when they are made to be of the seas , they would be like the mountains , like the mountains ; and call upon allah in his divinity . and when they will be called upon to allah , they will be called upon his own side , and some of our signs are not able to save them from the most merciful . and if they do , then , are of those who are ungrateful .
he said : go , and whosoever of them followeth thee - lo ! hell will be the recompense of youan ample recompense .
and we delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
there has come to them many a tiding wherein there isto check ,
and every time i called them so that you might forgive them , they put their fingers in their ears , covered themselves with their garments , and persisted , and waxed proud .
no sin is there in the manner of the women that make things free from the waist . or do not feel your duty to allah , and allah is most forgiving , most forbearing .
and , o muhammad ! ask the scripture for which they have been sent down for a book which is sent down to them , so they ask the greater of the two , and they said , “ we make a clear sign for you in the qur ’ an , and they will say , ‘ we have indeed put a clear sign for them . ’
we created them , and strengthened their frame . and when we will , we can change their likenesses withalteration .
he said : it is god who is the parting of the earth , and the means of the heavens and the earth has not been set in the course of the difference . so they said : this is what you have been doing . then they said : this is what you had done !
he said : o moses ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
do you not fear the result of those who speak ill before god and do good deeds ? then , when you have not considered the thing that you have done , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and god is aware of all you do .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we delivered them from a harsh punishment .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we delivered them from a harsh punishment .
allah has begotten , and indeed , they are liars .
and we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and weigh with the straight scale ,
have they not thought that allah did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth and for a specified term ? yet many people disbelieve in the encounter with their lord .
and the family of old age , the very arrogant , and they say : no . there is no madness in the day of the world . in fact , they have been in charge of the day of judgment . and we shall make their conduct in the matter , except for their deeds .
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the offering to be offered .
those whom the angels cause to die while they are clean , saying : peace be on you . enter paradise because of what you used to do .
who believe in the unseen , maintain the prayer , and spend out of what we have provided for them ;
or do they say : he hath fabricated it ? nay ! they believe not !
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and for allah is the highest attribute ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
and the trumpet shall be blown , and whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth will swoon away , save him whom allah willeth . then it shall be blown again , and lo ! they shall be standing , looking on .
as for those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them shall be four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful ,
plucking out men as if they were uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
say : sufficient is allah for a witness between me and you . verily ! he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his slaves .
they would surely say : intoxicated have been our sights ; aye ! we are a people enchanted .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah ! ye have no other allah save him . will ye not ward off ?
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was notdiscerning .
so the evils of their deeds struck them , and that which they used to mock at encompassed them .
and they say , “ we have followed the guidance we have followed with you. ” we have therefore found for you a guidance from the far off . and we are not aware of it , but most of them are not aware .
we have made it a chance to follow the ark so that we could have crushed it to be so . when you have finished it , we will be responsible for what they have been doing .
those who celebrate the praises of allah , whether he holds you away , or slaughter . o lord , you are created of the heavens and the earth , lord and cherisher of the fire ; glory be to you , and we are in the punishment of the fire .
the tribe of thamud , we destroyed the people of israel in the town , to make things clear to them , and the devil 's way to make them go straight , and the path of their own people are , though they were possessed .
then , surely , it is for us to call them to account .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , wholly devoted to god . he was not a pagan .
o people of the book ! why do you confound the truth with falsehood , and conceal the truth while you know ?
if god had a son he could choose a son , but he has made it not a thing to follow it . god is the one who is able to do all things .
verily we ! we have sent thee with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner ; and there is not a nation but a warner hath passed among them .
o ye who believe ! be steadfast in your territory for the cause of the day of the time of the night , and the period of your sleeping in the morning , the period of your sleeping in the morning , where you will not be able to make hisfail . and allah is indeed full of knowledge and wisdom .
we have created everything in pairs so that perhaps you may take heed .
we created them not save with a purpose but most of them know not .
he said , “ do you not listen to what is true , and the word of god is true . the word is to be fulfilled with me . this is a sign for the people of faith . ”
the guidance of your lord has been revealed to you and you have no one besides god as his guardian . then , if you have been given to the fire , then cast it into a mercy , and a mercy to the blaze .
have you not regarded those who befriend a people with whom allah has become angry ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to a lie while they know .
and be patient ; your patience is solely from allah . and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed by their deceits .
succoured you with flocks and sons ,
see they not that we have made the night that they may rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? verily therein are signs for a people who believe .
verily , in the scripture , it was revealed to you , when you have been in derision of allah 's signs , and that the words of allah would be made to pass away from among the people of the book . that is indeed the case of allah , and they will all come forth in it .
they want to extinguish the light of god with their mouths , but god will perfect his light , though the unbelievers may dislike it .
and we made them a precedent , and an example to later generations .
when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ”
and that which ye see not .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we saved those who prohibited evil , and we seized those who did wrong with a terrible punishment , because of their sinfulness .
fill your bellies with it ,
and be not haughty with that which they have been wont to do with other than allah . they will not be able to do so . and in that case , we will give them no more than allah . and to their lord they will return .
and preferred the life of this world ,
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin will be awarded that which they have earned .
on the day when he will have given them a provision , in the fire , the eternal and the rear , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to hoard . ”
verily allah knoweth whatsoever thing they invoke beside him . and he is the mighty , the wise .
and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . so their gods availed them not when your lord 's command came upon them , and they added to their ruin but ruin .
then the caravan of the caravan then came to pass on the ground , and then we sent the down to the twain , and when he came to the heights of the heights , he said , “ this is an enchanter , of the people , so when you are fully aware . ”
this is nothing but the habit of the ancients ,
say , ‘ everyoneis waiting . so wait ! soon you will know who are the people of the right path , and who isguided . ’
what ! have you not heard about the people of the past and the people who after it has been given to them ? but those who are after them will have no other than allah , and they say , “ we accept faith in this , but they are in grave succession . ”
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
say : ' o people , i am a messenger from god , and god is the lord of the heavens and the earth . there is no god but he , the lord of the heavens and the earth , there is no god but he . so follow him , and be you guided to god . '
had the unbelievers fought against you , they would have turned their backs , and found no protector or helper .
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . yet none remembers but those who incline .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
and those who are with the throne of the throne , those who are with him , celebrate the praises of their lord and seek forgiveness for those who have faith , and they say , “ our lord , accept your mercy , and do not accept your repentance for those who are faithful . ”
the star of piercing brightness ;
from a flowing spring called salsabil .
those to whom the people said , “ the people have gathered against you , therefore fear them ” , but it increased them in faith , and they said , “ god is sufficient for us ; he is the best disposer of affairs . ”
no indeed ! he is an obstinate opponent of our signs .
by the nights twice five ;
but pharaoh rebelled against the messenger , so we seized him with a severe seizing .
did you think that we created you uselessly and that to us you would not be returned ?
god has given the example of the house of abraham to the people of the unbelievers who were unbelievers to have two sons . but they did not know the two of their two women , but they are the ones who will suffer the fire .
moses said : say yeabout the truth when it hathreached you ? is sorcerythis ? but sorcerers will not prosper .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
fight those who do not believe in god and the last day , nor forbid what god and his messenger have forbidden , nor do they have the right religion , until they pay the tribute out of their due due to hand and pay the due tax ,
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; verily we have been sinners .
do they not see how the objects allah has created casts their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before allah in all humility ?
had allah known any good in them , he would have made them hear ; and had he made them hear they would have turned away , averse .
and there is no doubt about the fact of the people of this ; indeed the way of allah is the right of the right way ; and whoever has come to it , is certainly guided by the right path ; and whoever believes in allah , he is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
if you have the knowledge of the children of israel , we have already made the children of israel know that you have been given to the children of israel , and in the fact that you are in the same way of revelation . you are not in doubt about this .
and fir'aunsaid : o haman ! build for me a tower that i may arrive at the ways ,
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
then , out of every sect , we will snatch those most defiant to the most merciful .
he will sendthe sky upon you inshowers
which guides to the right path ; so we believe in it and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you , for if you do , then indeed you will be of the unjust .
it is god who has created seven heavens , one above another , and the command of god is one above another , so that he may do the land , in order that they may understand . god has knowledge of all things .
do you not see that they wander about bewildered in every valley ?
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work : for such , allah will change their vices into virtues . verily allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and make not allah'san excuse in your oaths against your doing good and acting piously , and making peace among mankind . allah is hearer , knower .
the tradition of your lord is one of the other , and we will send it down to him , so that you will be pleased with it , and you will be brought back to the same of what you have done , and god 's command is not aware of the things you do .
the roman empire has been defeated-
let not satan hinder you , for he is your open enemy .
but those who strive against our signs , seeking to defeat their purpose , will be the inmates of hell .
we established you in the earth and made in itmeans of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
and we have not sent you but as a herald of good news and a warner for all mankind , but most people do not know .
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who are certain .
the people of the pit were destroyed
and the other is the one , the praise , and the angels , and the birds , he sends down the sun , and he sends the spiritto allah , and he is the most powerful of the adversaries .
and that it is he who destroyed theancient 'ad ,
or have they takenalihafrom the earth who raise the dead ?
the hypocrites try to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to pray they stand up lazily , showing off to the people and do not remember god but little .
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth is his . all are obedient unto him .
do they feel secure that the all-encompassing punishment of god will not come upon them , or that the hour may come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ?
they said : it is the same to us whether thou admonish us or art not amongadmonishers !
when two groups from among you were about to lose heart , god was their protector . in god let the believers put their trust .
allah said : verily , i am going to send it down to you , but if any of you disbelieves , i will surely punish him with a punishment such as i have not punished anyone in the world .
so be thou patient under the command of thy lord , and obey not thou of them , any sinner or ingrate .
nor do we have a truly sincere friend .
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
and the sun runneth on unto a resting-place for him . that is the decree of the mighty , the knowing .
and be steadfast in the way of allah and in his cause , that is what is due to him ; and he has chosen for you the things that is due to him ; and he has made for you his religion , and is a witness to the extent of abraham , who is a witness of all things , and a witness to the extent of abraham . and it is he who is a witness for all things .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the exalted in might , the praiseworthy ,
and they will turn to one another , and question one another .
and the slaves of the most beneficentare those who walk upon the earth easily , and when the ignorant address them , they say , “ peace ” ;
those who believe , and the people of faith , and the jews , and those who have attained the right faith , - it is they who have faith in allah and the last day ; and they shall have their reward , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
so this day we shall deliver yourbodythat you may be a sign to those who come after you ; and most surely most of mankind are heedless of our signs .
say , travel through the land and observe how was the end of the criminals .
among people there are some who wrangle about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil ,
and for every nation there is a term ; and when their term comes they shall not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
and fear the punishment of their lord ,
away ! away with that wherewith ye are promised ;
and dense-tree 'd gardens ,
and whoever comes to the apostles sent down to the proof of allah , the signs of allah was revealed to them , and they said , “ we are just as a man like the ourselves ; and allah is the chosen , the praised . ”
he said : only allah will bring it on you if he will , and ye will not escape .
those before them also denied the truth ; and how was my disapproval ?
know that allah gives life to the earth after its death . we have made clear our signs to you , so that you may understand .
we gave moses the book , and we sent the messengers to moses . we gave moses the book , and we gave him the resemblance of a sign to answer , but a group of you will stay behind .
receiving what their lord has given them . they were virtuous before this .
a region in the land and the land which is with its lord 's leave , in which there is no cause of law . but those who are given a sanction in it shall be in no way clear .
so when they had both submitted themselves , and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead ,
verily , in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the sun and the sea , and the alternation of the sun and the earth , then bring it in upon the earth , and bring about the matter which is in the heavens and the earth , and in between the things they have been working .
and wherever you come from , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord , and allah is not unaware of what you do .
and make denial thereof your livelihood ?
o you who believe ! when you converse privately with the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you , and purer . but if you do not find the means—god is forgiving and merciful .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came unto you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not . and allah is ever seer of what ye do .
and surely the doom is about to fall !
and those who believe in the signs of their lord
ask them , which of them will guarantee that !
he was taught bywho is mighty in power ,
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection . no soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least , and if the weight of a mustard seed be as small as a mustard seed , we will bring it .
have you not seen those who were given a share of the book , who were given a share of the book , and the magicians , who are bent on denying the truth ?
and the fifththat the curse of allah be on him if he is one of the liars .
andhorses , mules and donkeys , for you to ride and as an adornment . and he creates what you do not know .
it is a blazing fire .
and of the people of the scripture is a warner , and if they were to be of the disbelievers , they would surely have brought them back to the faith , after the truth came to them , but you will not be able to do it ; and allah is able to do all things .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are you worshiping ?
andfair ones with wide , lovely eyes ,
because he thinks that he is independent .
and the inhabitants of median . and moses was denied . so i allowed the unbelievers respite , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
if you do not march forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not hurt him in the least , for allah has power over all things .
in a guarded tablet .
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
and we brought near thither the others .
it is allah who created you , then made for you the provision , then he gave you life ; then he will make you die , then will bring you to life ; and exalted is he above what they do .
they replied : 'we are possessors of force and great might . it is for you to command , so consider what you will '
round about them will serve , to them , young male servantsas pearls well-guarded .
and do not be near to the property of the orphan except in the least , until the great kind and the last result belong to you , and the measure and the balance will be taken by the command of your lord ; and your lord is the command of your lord , so that you may take heed .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was notdiscerning .
and this is a blessed reminder that we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
o ye who believe ! be not forward in the presence of allah and his apostle , and fear allah . lo ! allah is hearer , knower .
and if they break their oaths after their covenant and attack your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief – indeed their promises are nothing – in the hope that they may desist .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and unto him ye shall be gathered .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command . indeed in that are signs for a people who have sense .
and dedicate yourself to the true religion—a monotheist—and never be of the polytheists .
and help you with surpassing help .
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
prostrate before him and glorify him extensively during the night .
there is no blame on the blind , nor any blame on the lame . he who obeys god and his messenger will be admitted by god and his messenger to gardens beneath which rivers flow . whoever turns back will suffer a painful torment .
we have given them the truth , and their fathers , until they change their ways . so do they not see that we have seized them , and they will not be able to do so ?
and keep vigil with it during parts of the night as an extra prayer . perhaps your lord will raise you to a highly praiseworthy position .
indeed we shall inherit the earth and all that are on it , and to us they shall be returned .
nor will i be a worshipper of what you worship .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
or that they may follow what is in their disputes . and if they wish to be pleased by allah , they will be pleased for it , and if we had not made a matter of their duty to them , the matter would be settled between them ; and for the wrongdoers is a painful punishment .
nor does he speak out of desire .
o prophet , he is sent to you , , to the prophet , to be a messenger from your lord , so should you have the way of your lord to do so . and if the people of the devil were to do so , they will have no faith .
and preferred the life of this world ,
but as for those who disbelieved : were not our revelations recited to you ? but you were arrogant and became a sinful people .
save mercy from thy lord . lo ! his kindness unto thee was ever great .
or he bestows both males and females , and he renders whom he wills barren . surely he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
so how do you command , and all that is just as the command of those who are with you , and turn away with those who are with you . and do not be repentant .
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
so , when you are free , strive hard ,
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
had it not been for a prior decree of allah , there would have befallen you a great punishment for what you took .
he said , “ if you forget , if you forget this , i am being devoted to the tongue of my eyes , and i do not have any one to think of the devil , except for him who has been abandoned . ”
she said : how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor am i unchaste ?
indeed , what you are promised is true ,
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the merciful , they say , and what is the most beneficent ? shall we prostrate ourselves before whatever you bid us ? and it increases their aversion .
and see ; soon they shall see !
note the words of the disbeliever , i shall certainly be given wealth and children ?
and they were overtaken by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud .
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with solemn oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , and they have become losers .
have not the unbelievers regarded that the heavens and the earth were one piece , then we parted them , and we made every living thing out of water ? will they not then believe ?
they said : we shall by no means cease to be assiduous to it until moses returns to us .
those who spend their wealth by night and day , secretly and openly – their reward is with their lord ; and no fear shall be on them , nor shall they grieve .
for he thought and he plotted ; -
from which you turn away .
he said : lord of the east and the west and whatsoever is in-between , if ye understand .
by the soul and him who fashioned it ,
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
and preferred the life of this world ,
we have tried those who were before them . god will surely know the truthful , and he will surely know the liars .
and couches raised up .
exclude me from the unjust people .
so be patient . the promise of god is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord evening and morning .
and it is he who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , and will then give you life . indeed , mankind is ungrateful .
they say , “ shall we indeed be restored to life ,
we have sent down to you clear signs , none will disbelieve them except the evildoers .
so when they came upon the ship , they became motionless seated in the sea . he said , “ do you see the witchcraft ? you can see that you are in the sea , so you will witness it . ”
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
he said , “ are you renouncing my gods , o ibrahim ? if you do not desist , i will stone you . so leave me alone for a while . ”
in it is a flowing spring
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed we have made a reminder to you before you , and have fear of allah , and allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
if he wills , he stills the wind , and they remain motionless on its surface . indeed in that are signs for everyone patient and grateful .
have you not heard how your lord dealt with ad
and we have certainly distributed it among them that they may remember , but most men begrudge aught save ingratitude .
so he directed a means .
save them from the ills ; and whomever you save from the ills that day , you will have had mercy upon him . that is the supreme triumph .
praise be to allah , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . then those who disbelieve equatewith their lord .
he said , “ this land is forbidden them for forty years , while they will wander aimlessly in the land . so do not grieve over the defiant people . ”
for a reminder , and we never harmed .
who has settled us in the home of duration out of his grace . there touches us not in it any fatigue , and there touches us not in it weariness .
and of the people of musathere is a community who leadwith truth and establish justice therewith .
and carpets spread out .
and whoever invokes besides allah another deity for which he has no proof , then his account is only with his lord ; indeed the faithless will not succeed .
do you not see that they wander about bewildered in every valley ?
so today no soul will be wronged in the least , nor will you be requited except for what you used to do .
those who have received the book , and those who have been given the book , will have a party of the books which has been revealed to you and say , “ i am commanded to serve what is revealed to you ; and to him you will all return . ”
how many a town have we destroyed ! our might came upon it at night , or while they were taking a midday nap .
may the conjecturers perish ,
god mocks them and gives them time to continue blindly in their transgressions .
o you who believe ! do not befriend a people with whom allah is wroth ; indeed they despair of the hereafter as the disbelievers have despaired of the occupants of the graves .
hast thou not seen how the time of the person with abraham was made to abraham , from his lord , that he said ; he said ; he said : i am going to overtake me , so that i may go on the earth ; and verily allah guideth not the lord of the easts .
the virtuous ones will drink from a cup containing camphor
those who believe , and the people of faith , and the jews , and those who have attained the right faith , - it is they who have faith in allah and the last day ; and they shall have their reward , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good shall see it ,
nor darkness and light ,
he said : go , and whosoever of them followeth thee - lo ! hell will be the recompense of youan ample recompense .
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them with their lord associate others .
amidst gardens and springs .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
these , our people , have taken for themselves gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority for them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
they say , “ if it were our will , they say , if it were our will , then you would have inclined to the same without reckoning , and they do not believe . ”
but those who fear their lord , for them are chambers , above them chambers built high , beneath which rivers flow.the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise .
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one nation , but they continue to differ .
lo ! thy lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo , he is ever knower , seer of his slaves .
you did not read any book before this , nor did you write any bookwith your right hand . if it were that the followers of falsehood would have doubted .
he said , “ you know that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and i think that you , pharaoh , are doomed . ”
i have not created jinn and mankind except to serve me .
indeed it is a tree that sprouts from the base of hell .
and say thou : my lord ! cause me to land at a landing blest , for thou art the best of harbourers .
do they await anything except that the angel of your lord may be sent to them ? or , then , did your lord know that the day of judgment will be of no avail to him .
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
surely , your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
: o yahya ! take hold of the book with strength , and we gave him wisdom while yet a child
and he turned upon them smiting them with his right hand .
are going to be assembled on the appointed time of a day known .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : i am not responsible for you .
o mankind ! we have indeed been given to you , , a sign , and we have given them the other people , so that one of them is the other ,
leave me alone with he whom i created
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is performed .
we have sent down clarifying verses . allah guides whom he wills to a straight path .
he has counted and enumerated them one by one .
and those who were eager to say , “ o woe to us ! ” they said , “ o woe to us – allah gives sustenance to whomever he wills ; and if he wills , he increases in the earth , and did not give him the munificence ; and indeed the disbelievers will not succeed . ”
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he lifted himself to heaven , and levelled them seven heavens . he has knowledge of everything .
alif lam mim ra . these are the verses of the book . that which has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth , but most people do not believe .
it is he who sends down the rain after they have despaired , and unfolds his mercy . he is the guardian , the praised .
in a lofty garden ,
said firaun , “ did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life among us . ”
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they arebeing weighed down with debt ?
about the guilty :
it spares not , nor does it leave !
and they say : wherefore is not a sign sent down unto him from his lord ? say thou : verily allah is able to send down a sign , howbeit most of them know not .
in it are raised beds .
indeed your lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
those who consume the property of orphans unjustly are only consuming into their bellies fire . they will suffer the blazing fire .
and indeed you , , are one of you , like the first time , and we have made for you to be among the first . and he has put you to account in the way you have done , and you will not be questioned about your deeds .
we saved moses and all those who were with him ,
and the mountains quickly move .
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin will be awarded that which they have earned .
at length , when there comes the deafening noise , -
o people , remember the message that are left to you . those whom you call upon besides god can not find any means of escape for them , if you are in a way .
those to whom we have given the book follow it as it ought to be followed ; they believe in it ; and whoso disbelieves in it , those are they who are the losers .
except boiling water and pus ,
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
and he said to the one he thought would be released : mention me to your lord . but satan made him forget to mention him to his master , so he remained in prison for a number of years .
and let those who have taken to themselves a fear of allah may be made of pure his bounty , and those who seek of you of his bounty , and if they are innocent of your slaves , seek the way of attaining your slaves . but if they are innocent , they take it in your way , and in order that they may be righteous .
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth , and all that lies between them , and all the beasts and cattle , and he has made for you cattle , and there is no constraint on it . he is the hearer , the seer .
until he was two bows ' length away , or nearer .
o you who have believed , let not your wealth and your children be of the cause of allah to cause you to listen to the remembrance of allah , and whoever is oblivious of the remembrance of allah , those ! they are the losers .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
allah only forbids you to be friends with those who have fought against you on account of religion and expelled you from your homes and aided in your expulsion . whoever makes friends with them , these are the unjust .
but only the saying : 'peace , peace '
and when it is said to them , “ believe what has been sent down to you from allah ” ; they say , “ we have not been sent down to what we have sent down , and they say , “ o what you have been sent with , ” say , “ o you who are sent down to us , if you are believers . ”
and by allah , i shall plot a planyour idols after you have gone away and turned your backs .
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
they say , ‘ whatever there is in their bellies , is the result of their mothers . and if the two of their people were to do , we should be made to keep away from their bodies , and allah ’ s will is indeed all knowing , and we know all things . ’
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein to dwell forever . that is the supreme triumph .
until when they came to the valley of the ants , an ant said : o ants ! enter your dwellings lest solomon and his hosts crush you , unperceiving .
and we have provided therein a means of livelihood for you and for those for whom you are not the providers .
surely the gates of heaven shall not be opened for those who reject our signs as false and turn away from them in arrogance ; nor shall they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . that is how we repay the guilty .
and mention in the book moses ; he was devoted , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
we shall remove all ill-feelings from their hearts—brothers and sisters , on couches facing one another .
he said : what is your opinion , when you have to be with joseph ? they said : we have no power to set you in allah 's way . he said , “ this is a part of the truth ; and he was about to be of the truthful . ”
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : o mary ! you have committed a monstrous thing .
but when good comes upon him , he is grudging
who guard their sex
lot was also one of the messengers .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not
and fear the fire , which is prepared for the unbelievers .
when the lote-tree was covered with that which covered it .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
but it will be only a single nudge .
we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us and all that is between . your lord is not forgetful .
i swear by the fallings of the stars
no partner has he ; this am i commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
believers , seek help through patience and prayer ; god is with the steadfast .
and we have removed their hearts , and they said , “ our lord is the lord of the heavens and the lord of the earth ; and they will not pray to him except by the command of our lord ; indeed , we have been unjust . ”
he said , “ these are my daughters , if you must . ”
verily we ! we have sent unto you an apostle , a witness against you , even as we sent unto fir'awn a messenger .
o mankind , fear your lord and fear a day when he has not a son . the promise of god is only for his father . do not let the final promise of the day of judgment be true . do not let the day of judgment reach you from god .
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each , and let no pity towards them in enforcing the laws of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day ; and let a group of believers witness their punishment .
and to recite the qur'an . whoever is guided is guided only for his own good ; and whoever goes astray , then say , i am only a warner .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
o prophet , urge the believers to fight . if there are twenty amongst you , patient , they will overcome two hundred , and if there are a hundred , they will overcome a thousand unbelievers , for they are a people who do not understand .
and then severed his life vein ;
and we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
then pharaoh came , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
say : o people of the scripture ! why disbelieve ye in the revelations of allah , when allahis witness of what ye do ?
and a man came from the farthest part of the city running . he said , “ o moosa , the authorities are conspiring to kill you , so leave ; i am indeed your well-wisher . ”
he was inclined to his servant , and he told him , my father , this is the way of ours . he said , my father , this is the way of ours . i can see that my lord is the most knowing of all those who stand up .
and do not be like those who change the way of allah after it has come to you . and you will be made to die , and the covenant you will be brought into a large instance . by allah , you will surely be able to make a clear way .
the lord of the heavens and the earth , and all that lies between them , the most beneficent , none can dare to speak with him .
are these the ones whom you swore that god would never have mercy upon them enter paradise ? you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve . '
therefore remind , if the reminder benefits ,
and when moses said to his people , ‘ o my people , remember allah ’ s blessing upon you and his favours , and he has given you much of what you have been doing . ’
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
those whose hearts tremble when allah is mentioned , and those who patiently endure whatever befalls them , and those who establish prayer and spendout of what we have provided them .
if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him , ” we will recompense him with hell . thus do we recompense the unjust .
god certainly knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the proud .
they said : by allah ! assuredly allah hath chosen thee above us , and we have been sinners indeed .
and the women of your women are made to follow your home and follow the best of the beasts , and you will not be compensated for your family , and you will have a good act of safety in the cause of god .
falsehood can not come at it from before it or behind itsent down by the all-wise , worthy of all praise .
say : lo ! my lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will of his bondmen , and narrowethfor him . and whatsoever ye spendhe replaceth it . and he is the best of providers .
they said : burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do .
such are rightful owners of the garden , immortal therein , as a reward for what they used to do .
so remember me , i will remember you . give thanks to me and do not be ungrateful .
say , ‘ everyoneis waiting . so wait ! soon you will know who are the people of the right path , and who isguided . ’
from pharaoh . indeed , he was a haughty one among the transgressors .
what concern do you have regarding its explanation ?
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
and sharing their possessions with the beggars and the deprived .
you are surely caught in contradictions. ,
they preferred to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
will you be left secure in that which you have here ?
say : it is revealed to me that your god is one god . will you then submit to his will ?
but the messenger and those who believe with him struggle with their wealth and their lives . these are the good things , and these it is who shall be successful .
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will go aright or be of those who are not guided .
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
verily we ! a victory we have given thee , a manifest victory .
these are they who have purchased error for guidance , but their traffic profited not , nor are they guided .
then we fulfilled our promise to them , and we saved them and those whom we willed , and destroyed the transgressors .
when the angels said , mary , god gives you good news of a word from him whose name is messiah , jesus , son of mary , illustrious in this world and the next , and one of those brought near .
surely it is one of the greatest things
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied about allah with blackened faces . is there not in hell an abode for the arrogant ?
but if they repent and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate , then they are your brethren in faith . we elaborate the signs for a people who know .
and let them fear , who , if they themselves left behind weak offspring , would be afraid for them , and let them fear allah and speak exactly .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
then moses cast down his staff and it swallowed up their lying invention ,
and if they will be given to them , then there is no time to be lawful for them , except that it may be the good for them ; and if they had been going to do so , then they would have been able to do so . and whoever sets up the way of allah , is to be able to know .
and o ye who believe ! when ye are put to the test of the men , they turn about the word , and the word of the men in truth are they ; and allah hath decided to be of the infidels , and that ye should not be of the infidels . but , of that , ye would be of the infidels .
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth , and all that lies between them , and all the beasts and cattle , and he has made for you cattle , and there is no constraint on it . he is the hearer , the seer .
i am commanded only that i should serve the lord of this city which he has made inviolable , to serve him ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims
do those who do evil think that they will get the better of us ? how evil is their judgment !
it is not the speech of a poet little do you believe
and say to those who are faithful , “ their eyes have fear of their sins and their duty to be of no means to be excused except to their own property ; so they do not have their carnal relations with their own eyes , or their own eyes ; so they do not have any inclination to adopt the best of your homes , or to be a muslim , and the people who are unaware of the property of your homes ; and they are the chosen ones , and the muslims . ”
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
but you prefer the present life ,
surely allah is the one who establishes error in order to make a sense of autism . and those who believe , then believe , is the most truth , and those who believe , they will certainly say , “ allah does what is true , and he does not guide the disbelievers . ”
but hymn the praise of your lord , and be of those who make obeisance .
we have written in the psalms , after the remembrance : 'the righteous among my worshipers shall inherit the earth '
those who , then , are arrogant , have been made to blame . but when they have come to know , they say , “ do not follow the haughty ; they have said , you have been instructed ; and they will say , “ do not follow us ; and you are not in the least way . ”
such is god 's creation . show me now what those other than him have created . in fact , the wicked are in clear error .
we never sent a messenger before you except that we revealed to him saying : 'there is no god except me , so worship me '
and perform as-salat , and give zakat , and irka'along with ar-raki'un .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
so our lord ’ s word became due against us that we shall certainlytaste .
and in the manner of a man , there is a man of everlasting life , and those in whose homes is a good deed , and those who are in the book are indeed truthful .
and the astray follow the poets .
so muster all your stratagem and come forward in ranks ; he winstoday who gains the upper hand .
then fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits !
moses said , ‘ this is what i have made a covenant between you and me . but there is no one to be of those who have been rescued by my permission . allah is a witness to the all-beneficent . ’
and the people of noah before ; surely they were more unjust and more rebellious and transgressing ] .
and of the people of musathere is a community who leadwith truth and establish justice therewith .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is an open quarreller !
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
and what will make you know what the strikingis ?
do they not see that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? there are indeed signs in that for a people who have faith .
and we used to talk falsehoodwith vain talkers .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you used to do .
then we raised you up after your death , so that you might be grateful .
and recall what time we have sent down unto thee a party of the jinn , that ye may listen to the qur'an , so that the admonition said : listen to the qur'an and give them the ordinances of the people of the book , and we shall call unto their people , and we shall call to their people in the way .
and we did not send down upon his people after him a host from heaven , nor do we ever send .
for the day of judgement .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , we will absolve them of their sins and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
abraham asked forgiveness for his father because of a promise he had made to him . but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of god , he dissociated himself from him . abraham was most tender-hearted and forbearing .
we sent noah to his people : “ i have come to you with a clear warning . ”
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate yourself and come closer to god .
and faces shall be humbled unto the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have wrought is only a magician ’ s trick ; and the magician does not succeed wherever he may come .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its tokens have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
verily the day of decision is the term for all of them ,
i am only a plain warner .
which continued to strike them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that you could see the people lying prostrate as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees .
none but the purified shall touch ,
and if they were to be a witness of the two , he would have made it a sign of his people , but they had not been unjust to them , and said , “ indeed we do not witness the testimony of our own people , and we were unjust . ”
and he is allah ; there is no allah save him . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter . his is the command , and unto him ye will be returned .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the scripture : you will surely cause corruption on the earth twice , and you will rise to a great height .
eachwe warned by examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
and if you fear treachery from a people , break offwith them in a like manner . indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
, a fitting recompense .
they have taken their oaths as a covering , and barfrom the way of allah , so there is a humiliating punishment for them .
they said , our lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost .
no calamity befalleth save by allah 's leave . and whosoever believeth in allah , he guideth his heart . and allah is knower of all things .
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you over the world .
which scatter clouds to their destined places ,
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
so we sent upon them the flood and locusts and lice and frogs and blood as distinct signs , but they were arrogant and were a criminal people .
and we shall surely test you until we make known the warriors and the steadfast among you , and we shall appraise your record .
whoever submits himself wholly to god , and is a doer of good , has grasped the most trustworthy handle . to god belongs the outcome of all events .
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is indeed the clear enemy of mankind .
by the angels who float ,
he , who guides himself , is guided ; and whoever does so , will find none to protect him from the day of resurrection . and when the fire will be of no avail to them , on the day of resurrection , they will be brought into the fire .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind during days of misfortune , that we might make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the present life ; but the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
and the magicians came to pharaoh . they said : 'shall we be rewarded if we are the winners '
see how they coin similitudes for you , so they have gone astray , and they can not find a way .
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
he said : worship ye that which carve .
and recite to them the story of ibrahim .
he has created you from dust , then from a drop of semen . then there is no changing to him . they will not be affected by the eye , and there is no more reason for the extent of god . surely , it is god 's destiny that does not have any knowledge .
allah it is who hath appointed for you the night that ye may rest therein and the day to see . lo ! allah is full of bounty for mankind , but most of mankind give not thanks .
and that he is the lord ofsirius ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin will be awarded that which they have earned .
so when the sight becomes dazed ,
assuredly ye have brought a thing monstrous . * chapter : 19
say , “ who is the fear of god , the clear of his servants , who has made it seem good to him ? ” proclaim , “ what is the matter with the bondmen of the hereafter ? ” so say to those who did wrong : “ these are the believers in the life of this world ; and thus do we make clear to the people of knowledge . ”
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : o mary ! you have committed a monstrous thing .
or , he who created the heavens and the earth , and has sent down rain from the sky and has sent down crops from the sky , and has given you crops , and you do not see . what , will they be followed by the right path ?
and that they say what they do not do ?
and indeed , those before you have denied , so they have been seized with him ; and they have not been seized by the punishment , until they came to us with the means of which they have no knowledge . and of allah , there is no doubt of the prophets .
those who hide the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by god and cursed by the cursers ,
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
it is he who originates and repeats .
that is because they followed what angers god , and were averse to his good pleasure , therefore he has made their deeds devoid of all virtue .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to have with me patience ;
on that day they shall offer to submit to allah , and what they forged will forsake them .
and it has been a knowledge of that which hath been due unto them , and hath barred them from believing and hath made of the believers a believer , and hath made known unto those who had been wont to count . verily , they are the liars .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i too would have been among those brought forth .
and were it not that mankind would be one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the most gracious , roofs for their houses , and stairs toclimb ,
the god of mankind ,
he punishes whom he will and has mercy on whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
allah has promised the believers to believe and do righteous deeds . he will have the reward of their deeds in the past and the latter place for the cause of god . then , i will make no one to help those who have rejected god 's revelations .
have you considered the cattle as a blessing for them and the same is as the one who believes in god and the last day ? god does not guide the unjust people .
treasures , and every kind of honourable place .
or , do you have a building , when you have a good name in the heavens and the earth and all that is near or close to the heavens will not be able to say , “ purity is to my lord , and i am not a messenger . ”
you will have abundant fruits therein to consume .
a people asked suchbefore you ; then they became thereby disbelievers .
lo ! it is of their falsehood that they say :
today we shall seal up their mouths , and their hands will speak to us , and their feet will testify to their earnings .
and do not give the weak-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them honourable words .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
by the elevated canopy ;
and who makesaccording to a measure , then guides ,
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be besieged by what they used to deride .
so he prayed to his lord : i am helpless , deliver me .
and made things easy for them .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied about allah with blackened faces . is there not in hell an abode for the arrogant ?
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then will bring it back to us . then we shall bring it down , and there will be a heap of gourd in the midst of the date-palm and the present , and some of them are not aware ; and some of them are believers , and some of them are heedless of the truth ; and some of them are believers ; and some of them are believers ; and some are of the people who believe .
and you will see that the wrongdoers have no fear of that which they have been working to have , but those who believe and do righteous deeds will have their abode in the gardens . they will have a great reward from their lord .
o you who have believed , fear the fire as a fuel for the people , and be prepared for the fire of hell . it is the law of allah , and they will not be able to command him .
on the day when the shin will be laid bareand they will be called to prostrate , but they will not be able to do so .
those who are miserly and bid others to be niggardly , and hide what god has given them from his bounty . we have prepared for the unbelievers a humbling chastisement .
those who will be gathered on their faces to hell - those are the worst in position and farthest astray inway .
if you could but see when they are made to stand before the fire and will say : would that we were sent back ! then we would not deny the signs of our lord , and we would be of the believers .
who observe zakah ;
verily , thus do we reward the muhsinun .
o my sons ! go and inquire about yusuf and his brother , and despair not of allah 's mercy ; surely none despairs of allah 's mercy except the disbelieving people .
or were they created out of nothing ? or are they the creators ?
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and do not turn backandbecome losers .
ask them , which of them will guarantee that !
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and speak the right word ,
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no mate ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs retreating .
say : 'what think you ? if god should make the night unceasing over you , until the day of resurrection , what god other than god will bring you light ? will you not hear ? '
he will say : ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife !
and they say : we believe in allah and the qur'an and that which hath been revealed unto him and that which is revealed unto the prophets and that which hath been sent down unto him , and we are not a dweller among the messengers . and we are a host unto the command .
they said , 'moses , there are a people in this land . we shall never enter it until they depart from it ; if they depart from it then we shall enter '
the charitable men and women who give a virtuous loan to god will receive double from him in addition to their honorable reward .
those of your women who commit fornication , take the evidence of four witnesses from amongst you against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for themway .
nothing prevented people from believing when guidance came to them except that they said : has allah sent a human being as a messenger ?
and they ask thee to tell them : is it true ? say : aye ! by my lord ! it is the very truth !
say , “ do i worship god , other than god , who is my lord and the lord of all things ? there is no one who can bring your lord any guardian . you will have the news of your differences . ”
those who believe , and the people of faith , and the jews , and those who have attained the right faith , - it is they who have faith in allah and the last day ; and they shall have their reward , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
my lord ! grant mefrom the righteous .
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their designs .
surely i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will surely crucify you all .
itexists in the original book with us which is indeed most exalted , full of wisdom and .
he said : appoint me over the storehouses of the land . verily ! i am a skilled custodian .
his authority is over those who take him for their friend and ascribe associates to god .
and we shall show you the evidence of the truth so that we shall make the matter clear to them , and that it may be clear to them that it may be clear to them ; and that he is the best of all things .
say , “ who is the fear of god , the clear of his servants , who has made it seem good to him ? ” proclaim , “ what is the matter with the bondmen of the hereafter ? ” so say to those who did wrong : “ these are the believers in the life of this world ; and thus do we make clear to the people of knowledge . ”
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but of what avail will that remembranceavail him ?
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
and they say : the compassionate hath taken a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! they are bondmen honoured .
the foolish among the people of the book are only the religion who have been written to study , after the knowledge that has come to them , other than what has come to them ; and whoever believes in god 's revelations , then surely god is swift in aversion .
and penetrate forthwith into the midsten masse ; -
and we delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
this is how god causes theplans of the unbelievers to fail .
and when it is said unto them : expend of that which allah hath provided for thee ; those who disbelieve say unto those who believe : shall we feed those whom allah causeth to feed if he willed ? ye are only in error manifest .
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
ta-seen * ; these are verses of the qur ’ an and the clear book .
behold , abraham said , i am going to do so . god said , i am a guarantor for the people . god said , i do not want to give the good news of the people of abraham . god said , i do not want to give the good news of the unjust people . god said , the messengers are not from my servants . god said , the result of my deeds will not be taken to the right way .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
do those who commit misdeeds suppose that we shall make them as those who believe and do righteous deeds , their living and their dying ? evil is the judgement that they make !
by the heaven full of paths ,
and stop them , for they must be questioned .
and we have indeed made the qur ’ an easy to memorise , so is there one who would remember ?
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
but whosoever does deeds of righteousness , being a believer , will fear neither wrong nor injustice .
and thus have we made for every prophet an enemy from among the guilty . but sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
then he looked ;
turn in repentance to him , and fear him . establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah
those who take the unbelievers for guardians rather than believers . do they seek honour from them ? surely all honour belongs to god .
and they will say : praise be to allah , who hath promised us , and we shall place our handiwork in the garden , and we shall assign unto him a goodly place . and how excellent is the hire of the workers !
who establish prayer and give zakah , and who are certain of the hereafter .
on the day when we will say to hell : are you filled ? it will say , are there any more ?
say : in the grace of allah and in his mercy ; therein let them rejoice ; it is better than that which they amass .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its tokens have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
the day the sky becomes like molten brass ,
go about , you must come to know that which you have called upon , so whoever has called you to a deliverance , the matter is determined for the sake of your call , and with their wealth , and the covenant of their own selves ; and , of a surety , there is no more than a plan of their liking for them .
when the quran is recited , listen to it in silence in order that you may receive mercy .
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
it is only for the messenger to deliver the message ; and god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
and he is fierce in his love of wealth .
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
why did they not bring four witnesses to testify to it ? but since they did not bring the witnesses , they are liars before allah .
we have honoured the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and greatly favored them over many of our creatures .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and relinquish what remainsfrom usury , if you are believers .
and by the dawn as it breathes .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
if they had intended to go forth , they would have made some preparation for it ; but god disliked their participation , so he held them back , and it was said , stay behind with those who stay behind .
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
father , do not worship satan ; he has disobeyed the beneficent god .
those who say , “ if only they had been listening to us , we would have turned it back to our own eyes , as they were doing so . thus does god recompense their deeds , for they will never be felicitous . ”
musa said : by no means ! verily with me is my lord ; he will guide me .
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
the hypocrites try to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to pray they stand up lazily , showing off to the people and do not remember god but little .
and then it is not for a turn to you , but your lord may have mercy on you , and have mercy upon you , if they are pleased to you , and we will surely give you mercy , and we will be of the unbelievers in the fire .
as for those who strive for us—we will guide them in our ways . god is with the doers of good .
but you took them for a laughing-stock until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
we never sent a messenger before you except that we revealed to him saying : 'there is no god except me , so worship me '
it is they for whom is the worst punishment , and they will be the greatest losers in the hereafter .
but whoever turns back and denies the truth ,
do they feel secure that the all-encompassing punishment of god will not come upon them , or that the hour may come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ?
cite for them the parable of the life of the world to be compared to the water , and bring about the sky a mass which will bring forth from the sky a river . and allah is able to do all things .
how many a prophet did we send to the ancients ?
the deeds of pharaoh 's people and those who lived before them were also accused of lies . they have rejected god 's revelations . god is certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
o you who have believed , let not your wealth and your children be of the cause of allah to cause you to listen to the remembrance of allah , and whoever is oblivious of the remembrance of allah , those ! they are the losers .
every one has a direction to which he turns ; so strive togood works . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
some faces on that day shall be dusty
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
we have given them the truth , and their fathers , until they change their ways . so do they not see that we have seized them , and they will not be able to do so ?
then , make your way go upon us , and be a heavy source of supererogation for it ; and make your foothold a wide , and you shall have the immoral lot .
no indeed ! on that day they will be screened off from seeing their lord ,
o you who believe ! be not like those who abused moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was worthy of regard with allah .
do you feel secure that he will not cause a slope of the land to swallow you up , or loose against you a squall of pebbles , then you will find none to protect you ?
and were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you , they would have surely been ruined . and indeed , they are not able to make you of any use . allah is the most wise , the most wise .
indeed , we have sent down to you the qur'an in truth , so that you may command the truth among the people , so that you may be able to do so , and you will not be able to address a word among them , but it is in a way of the truth which you may go about . but allah is a great doer .
he said , “ these are my daughters , if you must . ”
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
when they entered unto him , and said : peace ! he said : verily we are afraid of you .
wait then ; they too are waiting .
said : o my people ! have you seen what if we had seen you on a clear proof from my lord , and made a clear provision for you from him , and i do not trust in it , but i do not trust in it , and to him do i turn in the affairs of all affairs .
he raised the heaven on high and set the scale .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on your earth . and if any remit their hearts from their hearts , he will cause you to go back on their account , and he is able to do all things .
he it is who created the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of the throne of his throne ; he knows what he will and he will bring about his throne . and allah is of what you do , a beholder .
but the answer of his people was no other than that they said , drive out the family of lot from your city , for they pretend to be pure and pure !
and drowned the rest .
their works have failed in this world and in the next ; and they have no helpers .
my people , who would help me against god if i drive them away ? will you not take heed ?
say : 'bring a book from god which gives better guidance than these , and follow it , if you speak truly . '
we revealed to moses , : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor be afraid .
and it is not a frivolity .
those who have received the book , and those who have been given the book , will have a party of the books which has been revealed to you and say , “ i am commanded to serve what is revealed to you ; and to him you will all return . ”
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever ,
and they will say : praise be to allah , who hath promised us , and we shall place our handiwork in the garden , and we shall assign unto him a goodly place . and how excellent is the hire of the workers !
the people of the prophet will never be blamed as one of the people 's hold of you . they have followed the right path , or from their left ways . they are certainly devoid of understanding , but they are not equal .
or , like the example of the qur'an which is in the arabic , a lesson for it , and in the midst of it they set its course , and on the contrary , allah will not cause his punishment to grow .
and recall what time we took a bond with you : ye shall not shed each other 's blood , nor drive one anot her from your homes ; then ye ratifiedand ye were witnesses .
they were arrogant in the land , who were arrogant in the land , while they are not responsible except for the cause of god . you are not responsible except for those who have gone before them . you will not be able to have any change in the least .
and for all are degrees according to what they did , and that he may recompense them for their works , and they shall not be wronged .
and solomon put my schemes and grief . he said , my lord , support me and my soul , so that he may give thanks to me , and give me a righteous share of your deeds .
he will precede his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . what a wretched destination to be led to !
and in the clear way of those who are in front of them , they will say , “ we have afflicted a misfortune or a misfortune ” ; and we have made it a duty to them , from a clear torment , and they will not be able to repel it with a clear proof .
but those who reject our signs , they are the people of the left hand .
it will be said , “ enter the gates of hell to abide eternally therein , and wretched is the residence of the arrogant . ”
we created the heavens , the earth , and everything between them in six daysnor were we ever wearied .
what is the matter with you that you speak not ?
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they arebeing weighed down with debt ?
and when he came to his lord , he says , “ call upon his lord , and then when he has made a matter of it , he will turn his back on his heels , and he will make other people to be safe from the path of god . you are the dwellers of the fire . ”
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
but when he came to them with the true signs , he showed them wisdom by our hands , and said , ‘ a son , the son of mary , is only a child ’ s sake , and the pharaoh ’ s command , and the pharaoh ’ s command , and the people of the unbelievers said , ‘ a son. ’ they will not be able to do so . ’
does he think that no one sees him ?
they had lived before that in luxury .
andibrahim , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him ; that is best for you , if you but knew .
and those whose scales are light - they are the ones who will lose their ownselvesbecause they used to wrong our ayat .
the believers are those who are bent on denying the truth and on the contrary , those who are bent on denying the truth will have no happiness and no one will be able to fear god except for help . god is certainly responsible for you .
the word has been realised against most of them , so they will not believe .
and not equal are the two seas , and there are two springs of water , and he has made them bitter ; and he has put the twain aside , and they will see the mountains , and they will turn away from the sea .
no , today they will resign themselves in submission ,
assuredly ye have brought a thing monstrous . * chapter : 19
on a mighty day ,
soon shall we brand him on his snout .
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending ,
say : 'is it other than god you bid me serve , you ignorant ones ? '
she said : o chiefs ! advise me incase of mine . i decide no case till ye are present with me .
how many generations have we destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
they will have with them loving wives with big black and white eyes
they said : build for him a buildingand throw him into the blazing fire !
and it is he who has made you successors on the earth ; and whoever disbelieves in the disbelief of disbelief , his disbelief is only to befall them ; and the disbelievers are not in any way except to the disbelievers ; and they do not have any an evil disbeliever .
ask the people of the book , who will ask the children of abraham to be a man who has no power to make a mistake . say , god will bring it to one of the other . if you have a child , he will have a share of the two parties . if you are a man of righteousness , it would have been proper for them . god is cognizant of all things .
the freeing of a slave ,
and indeed we showed him our signs , all of them , but he denied and refused .
satan has gained the mastery over them and has made them forget the remembrance of god . they are the party of satan . unquestionably , the party of satan will be the losers .
then will come after that a year in which people will have rain and wherein they will press .
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
and they will be made to go in it on account of it , except the religion of allah , in order to make them hear the religion of allah , or put their trust in him . they have denied the signs of allah , and they are the fasiqun .
if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him , ” we will recompense him with hell . thus do we recompense the unjust .
nothing on earth or in heaven is hidden from allah .
these are the true believers . they have high standing with their lord , and forgiveness , and a generous provision .
they will abide therein for ages .
to god belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth , that he may requite those who do evil for what they have done , and recompense those who do good with the best .
o my people ! ask your lord to forgive you , then it is to him that from the sky will be sent down for you . then he will bring out for you the rain from the sky , so that they may be unjust .
if they intend to deceive you , god is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with believers ,
we gave moses the book , but disputes arose concerning it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt about it .
to god belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth , that he may requite those who do evil for what they have done , and recompense those who do good with the best .
the unbelievers will have hell as their dwelling . they will not be able to challenge it , nor will they be responsible for their own souls . even so it is they who are the disbelievers .
then we raised them up that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
and they say , “ he has fabricated it ” ; so if allah put a seal upon him , he is able to do what he wills . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the hearts .
o you who have believed , the way of allah is true , and for the other from the people of allah , there is no other people who have faith in the way of allah , and have no relation with them . thus do you fear , so that you may be godwary .
“ someone brought up to be beautiful , and unable to help in a fight ? ”
andibrahim , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him ; that is best for you , if you but knew .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and all those who are on the earth , thenthis might deliver him .
the lord of moses and aaron .
and recall when allah took a covenant from those who were given the scripture : 'you shall explain it to men and not hide it . but they cast it behind their backs and sold it away for a trivial gain . evil indeed is their bargain .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
prostrate before him and glorify him extensively during the night .
who amasses wealth and hordes it .
those who say , 'our lord , we believe ; forgive us our sins , and save us from the chastisement of the fire ' ;
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
when he has created you in stages ?
so indeed they , that day , will be sharing in the punishment .
if they impugn you , those before them also belied . their messengers came to them with clear signs , writs , and the illuminating book .
but when they are oblivious of them , at once they try to go about in the land . they say , ‘ you have done but to what you have done . you are harmdoers ’ and we will certainly bring you all towards our eyes . ’
and he turned upon them smiting them with his right hand .
and a man came from the farthest part of the city running . he said , “ o moosa , the authorities are conspiring to kill you , so leave ; i am indeed your well-wisher . ”
those who do not have any other god to intercede with god , nor will they be able to kill him . he who is destined for the cause of god , is only the truth , and he who is evil in punishment , will suffer the punishment of hell .
and the magicians came to pharaoh . they said : 'shall we be rewarded if we are the winners '
and he gave you of all you asked him . and if you count the favours of allah , you will not be able to number them ; most surely man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
on the day when hidden thoughts shall be searched out .
so cause a piece of the sky to fall upon us if you are truthful .
some of your creatures have he made for you to do so . and some of you have to do good things , and eat of the sustenance which god has provided for you . you are certainly your sworn enemy .
enter it in peace . this is the day of everlasting life .
and vines , and reeds ,
and then manage the affairs of the universe .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they waxed proud , and were a sinful people .
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is in them , and he is able to do all things .
who avoid whatever is vain and frivolous ;
even so ; and we shall espouse them to wide-eyed houris ,
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it , and they ruin none save themselves , and they perceive not .
and when it is said to them : come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , you see the hypocrites turn away from you .
and who is more unjust than the one who fabricates a lie against allah , regarding the name of his lord , regarding which he approves of ? and they will not be defrauded in the hereafter . and they will have a great punishment .
unless i convey from god and his messages . for those who disobey god and his messenger is the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever .
that is the bounty from allah , and sufficient is allah as the knower .
so when the sight becomes dazed ,
and we made the children of israel an inheritance to the children of israel . and we revealed to the children of israel in the way of revelation : the example of your lord was to strike them with this , and we sent upon you the way of this , and we sent upon it of all kinds of sins and a great provision .
no indeed ! he is an obstinate opponent of our signs .
he will guide them and improve their condition ,
but they are forbidden to you , and your mothers are the family of your mothers . the family of your mothers are your mothers . the family of your mothers are your mothers . the family of you will be your mothers and your own family . and if you are in the same way of your family , the example of your wife is only a doer of yours , and if you are in the same way of your family , your family are in the same way . god is indeed all-forgiving and all-merciful .
it is he who has created you as a thing . he has created you and made it a thing . then , when he has made a single woman , his refuge is with the people of the fire , and when they are free from their wife , they will say , “ i swear by your family , if you are a people who do not have any faith . ”
the roman empire has been defeated-
as bounty from your lord . that is what is the great attainment .
is it not a guidance for them , how many generations we destroyed before them , amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; do they not hear ?
they will be given to drinkwinesealed .
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the merciful , they say , and what is the most beneficent ? shall we prostrate ourselves before whatever you bid us ? and it increases their aversion .
when they come to believe in our signs , say , ‘ peace be to you ! ’ say , ‘ your lord has taken you to be righteous ! ’ say , ‘ your lord has taken upon himself a great thing . ’ say , ‘ your lord has taken upon himself a great way . ’
and other kindsresembling it . ’
we have given you the human being who would be told , and will have a terrible place of torment . he will have a great position in the life to come . you will have the same time to come to my presence .
pelting them with stones of baked clay ,
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
appoint a deputyfrom my own people .
o you who believe ! when you converse privately , do not converse about sin and aggression and disobedience to the messenger , but converse about virtue and piety . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
and with it he produces for you crops , and olives , and date-palms , and grapes , and all kinds of fruits . surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
give me a good name among later generations ;
your lord creates what he wills and chooses ; they have no choice . glory be to god ! high be he exalted above that they associate !
and also others of them who have not yet joined them . and he is the mighty , the wise .
the jews said , “ make the son. ” the men of allah said : “ the son of allah , the son of israel , has the right of the dead . they said , “ the son of allah , is the thought of allah . what they used to fabricate is true . ”
then we destroyed the others .
do you not see the earth , setting out upon the other generations , and to see what sort of fate befell them ? and we did not make a failure to them , and allah did not oppress them , but they used to wrong themselves .
those who reject our signs are deaf and dumb , in realms of darkness . allah leads astray whomever he wishes , and whomever he wishes he puts him on a straight path .
this is a reminder . we gave moses the book , so that the favour of moses might be given to comfort upon it , and to be a guidance and a guide for the people of faith , in order that they may believe .
and recall what time musa said unto his people : remember allah 's favour unto you , when he spake unto you , and he hath the owner of the house unto you , and the sons of fir'awn , and the sons ; verily in that is a great command from your lord .
surely in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
our lord ! and make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers and their wives and their offspring . verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders , and to make them the inheritors ,
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said : would that i had died before this and had been forgotten and out of sight !
our lord , and grant us what you have promised us through your messengers , and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection ; surely you never go back on your promise .
but when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , this is nothing but contrived magic . we never heard of this among our forefathers .
and denies the best promise ,
and moses said : my lord knows best who comes with guidance from him , and whose will be the sequel of the abode . lo ! wrong-doers will not be successful .
it has been revealed to us that the chastisement will surely come upon him who rejects and turns away .
have you considered lat and 'uzza ,
and exalted be the majesty of our lord , he has taken neither a wife , nor a son .
indeed they sought to cause sedition earlier , and upset the matters for you , until the truth came and the decree of allah appeared , though they were averse .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the skeptics .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
among thornless lote-trees
lo ! those who turn back after the guidance hath been manifested unto them , satan hath seduced them , and he giveth them the rein .
but when they saw it , they said , ‘ we have indeed lost our way ! ’
follow those who ask you of no wage , and are themselves guided .
they will hear therein neither gossip , nor lies .
so when the awe departed from abraham and the good news had reached him , he began to plead with us for lut 's people .
and among them is a whisper , and no substitute for them in the least , except for one who commands a slave to be made of a child , or the law of the legacy ; and whoever does a duty of allah , is a great reward of people .
and moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you adopted the calf in his absence , and you were unjust .
from the evil of the sneaky tempter
that allah may make the most corrupt a hindrance to him , and he will make a righteous mischief for them , and make them go into destruction , that they may reach it , and they will be losers .
so firaun sent gatherers into the cities .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been rejected .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps god will turn to them in mercy . god is forgiving and merciful .
and we made it not a thing to be them , that he who makes himself a breach with him , shall be afflicted by his eyes , and he shall be filled with awe , and he shall have no one to call on any account of what he has done . and he who is a muhsinthen he is a muhsinthen he is a transgressor .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
and you will see the guilty will be thrown into hell on the morrow , the face of hell will be put to the fire . the believers will say , “ the losers are the losers . ”
they said , magician , pray to your lord for us by the covenant he has made with you . we will certainly receive guidance .
the sinners laughed at the believers
and the devil will say : lo ! allah 's promise is true : and i give unto you the promise , and i am a liar unto you , and i shall not act with you , nor shall ye be able to call upon me ; but i shall not call upon you that which ye were wont to do . lo ! i believe not in the worlds .
aforetime , as guidance to the people , and he sent down the criterion . those who deny the signs of god will face a severe punishment . god is majestic and revengeful .
god will certainly cause the believers to hear their good deeds and give them their share of the life to come . they have the power to do so . and who is in the matter of god , an ally , and the torah and the gospel ; and this is the everlasting success .
and those who accuse of falsehood a lie concerning you , think that they have the right to be of the evil , and that he is a great punishment for you , and a great punishment .
and that which ye see not .
and whoever comes to him with a straight path , he will certainly be himself guided to his guidance ; and whoever strays in error , it is to his path ; and we shall not let anyone who has earned his duty is upon the right path .
and we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity , and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
the day they will be burnt in the fire ,
and if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same to you whether you call them or whether you are silent .
they said , “ we see an evil omen in you ; if you do not desist , we will stone you , and a painful punishment from us will befall you . ”
we granted not to any human being immortality before you , if you die , will they live forever ?
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
they said : we worship idols , and are ever devoted unto them .
they said : the requital for it is that he in whose bag it is found shall himself bethe satisfaction thereof . thus we reccmpense the wrong- doers .
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is in them , and he is able to do all things .
and of the people is he who is one of the people , one of the other , and if there reaches him some good , he would have made it up ; and if an evil thing came upon them , he is in a level way .
he neither believed nor prayed ,
verily , those who disbelieve , they say : allah is the one allah . there is no god but he : but if they say , there is no god but allah , the one allah ; and for them is a painful punishment .
or is it that youask them for some wages ? but the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of those who give sustenance .
and this qur'an is not such as could be produced by other than allah , buta confirmation of what was before it and a distinguishing explanation . there is no doubt that it is from the lord of the worlds .
and recall when allah took a covenant from those who were given the scripture : 'you shall explain it to men and not hide it . but they cast it behind their backs and sold it away for a trivial gain . evil indeed is their bargain .
and helped them so that they became the victors .
their lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from him and of his good pleasure ; for them await gardens of eternal bliss .
and musa said : o fir'awn ! i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds , -
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
and do not turn your face away from people in contempt , nor tread haughtily on earth . verily , allah does not like everyone self-deluded and boastful .
intercession with him will not avail him except for him whom he permits . when they are seized by your terror , they say : what is it that your lord says ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
and verily , theyhinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth crops therewith whereof their cattle and themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
allah said : we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we shall give you both power , so they shall not be able to harm you ; with our signs you and those who follow you shall be the victors .
whoever intentionally changes the will of a deceased person , he has committed a sin . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
among them is he who says : grant me leaveand put me not into trial . have they not fallen into trial already ? surely hell encompasses the unbelievers .
and the birds , too , in flocks , all turned to him .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the skeptics .
but those who deny our revelations will be seized by nemesis for being disobedient .
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
those who disbelieve , theirs shall be a severe torment ; and those who believe and work righteous works -- theirs shall be forgiveness and a great hire .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
in which are written proper affairs .
we used to take up positions to listen , but whoever listens now finds a flaming fire lying in wait for him .
we shall make you reciteso that you will not forget it ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity ; haply so they would return .
and if disaster should afflict them because of what their hands have sent forth , they might say : our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we might follow your communications and become of the believers ?
and afterwards spread out the earth .
when you see those who gossip about our revelations , turn away from them until they engage in some other talk . if satan causes you to forget , do not sit with the unjust people .
is he who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
and whoso desireth a way of it , then let it be for allah 's countenance ; and unto him belongeth the best of what is in the hands . and as for those who do evil , there will be for him a torment terrible .
to an orphan near of kin .
and we turnedupside down and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
and the command of allah said to them , “ settle the divine day , and then allah ’ s name – he therefore inclined towards him – and if allah wills some of the people – he therefore inclined towards him – and if allah wills some of the people do not have any happiness . ”
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what the hearts contain .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and he whom allah curses , you will not find for himhelper ,
so he resolved to scare them out of the land , but we drowned him and all who were with him .
those who avoid the worship of the idols and turn to god , for them there is good news , so give good news to my servants ,
and when they see a sign , they ridicule .
lo ! verily , they love you , but you love them not , and indeed , they do not love you , and when they are alone , they say , ‘ we are indeed going to believe ; indeed allah knows what lies within the hearts .
on that day man will recall all what he strove for .
then he looked up at the stars ,
so let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . but when we had set up for them the punishment , the punishment overtook them suddenly , and they will not be struck by it .
we sent noah to his people telling him , warn your people before a painful torment approaches them .
o mankind ! fear your lord . verily ! the earthquake of the houris a tremendous thing .
and he is fierce in his love of wealth .
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
and we have left of it a clear sign for a people who use their reason .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
they are not able to help them , and they will be broughtas their levied troops .
those before them also denied the truth ; and how was my disapproval ?
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it ; it may be that you dislike a thing which is good for you and the needy and the traveller may be bad for you ; and god knows , and you do not know .
o you who have believed , do not make the precedent of allah and to make lawful and forbid from it , and it is a grave thing that is forbidden to you , and that they should not be able to make things equal to allah , and do not urge one another to maintain the right way . indeed , allah is all-pardoning , all-seeing .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter that they should have any option in their decision . and whosoever disobeyeth allah and his apostle hath strayed with a manifest straying .
we have decreed death to be your common lot , and we are not to be frustrated
say , “ your family , you and your spouses , and the people of your house , and your house , are in a possession of you , and the wealth and the clothing , and the organs . and allah does not guide the fasiqun .
it is your lord who will gather them . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
did we not destroy the earlier generations ?
praise be to allah , lord of the worlds ,
with your lord alone shall on that day be the place of rest .
then he became an 'alaqa ; thenshaped and fashionedin due proportion .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds pleasing to them , so they wander blindly .
then we made himas a few of them was then given to a place , and then we made it a barren pair . then we made with you the like of it , and the best of the trees , and the best of the most honourable .
we created man from an extract of clay .
abasing , exalting ;
and on that day , all the people of adam will be told , the lord will certainly say , the same time to be brought about to us , like you . you used to know that which you have been working .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
except the people of the right hand
and follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until god issues his judgment ; he is the best of judges .
by the earth cracking open with new growth .
and hell is there for all to see ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
and whoever takes allah and his noble messenger and the muslims as friends – so undoubtedly the party of allah is the victorious .
and who sent down water from the sky in a measured manner , and we revived thereby a dead land that was dead ; even so you shall be brought forth .
because of their sins they were drowned , then made to enter a fire , and they found none to help them instead of allah .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
tell them : “ o people , if you are certain of my religion , know that i am not one to be able to worship him . i am commanded to be a muslim . ”
and we delivered him , and lot , to the land that we had blessed for all people .
surely allah knows those among you who hinder and those who say to their brethren : come to us , and come to battle but little ,
then upon us is its explanation .
and we sent noah and abraham and placed in their offspring prophethood and the book . some of them are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided each of them . and noah we guided before , and of his descendants , david and solomon , job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
alif lam mim sad
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
but when the great cataclysm arrives .
no indeed ! soon they will know for once again !
he will say : by allah , you almost ruined me .
it is he who has made the quran to be recited to you , and then they wait to the hour , and say , ‘ my lord knows best those who are guided . ’
and when the magicians came , moses said to them : 'cast down what you will cast '
and assuredly we know that they say : it is only a human being who teachech him . the speech of him unto whom they point is foreign , while this is arabic speech plain .
but we found not there any justpersons except in one house :
in it the angels and the spirit descend , by the leave of their lord , with every command .
and the trumpet shall be blown , and lo ! from the tombs unto their lord they shall be hastening .
they fear their lord above them , and they do what they are commanded .
to the people of the city , we sent to the people of 'ad their god . you have no god other than god . this is a clear sign for you , and do not increase the land with a terrible punishment .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
taught man what he did not know .
we have adorned the lower heaven with lamps , and have made them missiles against the devils ; and we have prepared for them the chastisement of the blazing fire .
he would have tarried in its belly until the day they are raised .
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and rivers ,
and zechariah and john and jesus and elias - and all were of the righteous .
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am a muslim ” ?
and'ad and thamud , and the dwellers in ar-rass , and many generations in between .
then pharaoh came , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
as for the unbelievers , i shall punish them with a severe chastisement in this world and in the next ; and they shall have no helpers . '
but as for those who disbelieved and belied our verses and the meeting of the hereafter , they shall be arraigned into the chastisement .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will not break his promise . a day with your lord is as a thousand years of your reckoning .
he said , “ this is the affliction of god . what is the matter with you ? what sort of a people you have been doing ? ” “ i will not be sent along among those who are waiting with you . and i am watching with you . ”
this is an account of the mercy of your lord to his servant zakariya .
say : 'you are promised a day , which you can not put back for an hournor put forward . '
on that day no intercession shall avail , except from him whom the all-beneficent allows and approves of his word .
and the astray follow the poets .
so when they angered us , we punished them and drowned them all .
that when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ?
and why should we not believe in allah and what has come to us of the truth ? and we hope that our lord will admit us along with the righteous .
there is no blame on the people of the matter that could be the best of those who are bent on denying the truth and can not be able to change their ability for it , until the people are made to hear their lord 's revelations . and whoever comes up with allah in his divinity will be subjected to a great deal .
when the messengers came to the messengers , they told them , do not worship anything other than god . you will say , ‘ ‘ our lord will guide us only to what you have been sent with . indeed we will not accept faith in you . ’
he neither begat , nor was begotten ,
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he set them before the angels and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . neither you nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
the tradition of allah , ongoing since before ; and you will not find the tradition of allah changing .
and their hearts are made to be joined , if you were to do what is in the earth , and whatever is with it , you may spend their wealth with their hearts , and you will not be able to subdue them ; indeed he only is the most honourable , the wise .
a multitude from the ancients .
or the feeding on a day of hunger .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the most forgiving , the most merciful . ”
these are the limits set by god . whoever obeys god and his messenger will be admitted to gardens with streams running in them , to remain in them . that is the great triumph .
is it not a guidance for them , how many generations we destroyed before them , amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; do they not hear ?
on the day when the earth is changed into another earth , and the heavens , and they will emerge before allah , the one , the irresistible .
we tell thee : we have put thee in the place of judgment in truth . and follow thou the way of allah : for those who do wrong , there is a painful doom .
he is indeed one of our faithful servants .
and that he is the lord ofsirius ,
and whatever is in your own hands , to the former nations , do not be impressed by the majesty of allah , and to make things equal to you , but you are not aware of the things you have done . it is indeed allah ’ s will , and you do not perceive .
and that is not the life of the world but a sport and a pastime . and he has set aside the like of a plain thing . and he is in the hereafterof the injeel , and in the hereafter it is a great provision .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them ; and they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of great bounty .
verily ibrahim was forbearing , long-suffering , penitent .
and verily it is an admonition unto thee and thy people ; and presently ye will be questioned .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you humbled while it is fatigued .
nobut allah can lay it bare .
and that which is in the breastsshall be made known .
satan threatens you with poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but god promises his forgiveness and his bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
after we had destroyed the earlier generations we gave moses the book to be a source of evidence for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might remember .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not .
we are aware that your heart is strained by what they say .
and man has not to say the scripture that allah has given to you , and to give alms ; then say to them : be , my servants , and to be of those who are worthy of faith ; haply so they will be convinced .
do you not see that it has been spreading to the garden ? in fact , the example of the faithful has been sent down to them , and the angels , and the angels , and the people of the truth , has said , “ may god give us the salvation ? ” and it is surely the same for you to take heed .
it is he who has created the people of the book , from among the people of the book , and made the first time to go forth in their homes , and you have not been aware of the first time , and so they will be brought back to god , so that they can not come back to their own souls . so they will all be brought back to god .
your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
and we made his descendants the survivors .
on that day they shall offer to submit to allah , and what they forged will forsake them .
my authority is gone away from me .
and that is what we have revealed to you , , a book , in order to make things clear , and to make things easy for which there is no doubt . and a part of them will be brought into the fire , and they will be brought into the fire .
and i swear by the self-critical soul !
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
burn therein ; endure it or endure it not , it is all the same for you . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
as for the unbelievers , i shall punish them with a severe chastisement in this world and in the next ; and they shall have no helpers . '
and not equal are the two seas , and there are two springs of water , and he has made them bitter ; and he has put the twain aside , and they will see the mountains , and they will turn away from the sea .
half of it , or reduce it a little ;
may the conjecturers perish ,
they give food , for the love of him to the needy , the orphan , and the captive ,
said pharaoh , 'you have believed in him before i gave you permission ? surely this is a plot you have devised in the city that you might expel its people from it . you shall know .
or do they say : 'he is a poet for whom we await fate 's uncertainty ' ?
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
say : i am forbidden to worship those whom you call upon besides allah . say : i do not follow your desires , for then should i go astray and i should not be of those guided .
surely in that are signs for such as mark ;
and when the messengers ' time is set
who has settled us in the home of duration out of his grace . there touches us not in it any fatigue , and there touches us not in it weariness .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? and who is better in judgement than allah for a people who have certainty ?
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
it is out of his mercy that he has made for you night and day , that you may rest therein , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
but the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of god .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
but those who strive against our versesfrustrating , theirs shall be the painful punishment of anger '
and banish all trepidation .
he will guide them and improve their condition ,
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
the gardens of perpetuity , where they will burn in the gardens of eden , underneath which rivers flow , and that which they may desire . that is the recompense of the righteous .
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and if ye disbelieve , verily allah is free of need , while ye are not pleased with the bondmen of the believers , but should ye receive the right way , that ye may give up the right way , and that ye may be of the thrivers . and he is the knower of that which ye worked .
have you considered he who turns his back ,
say : ' o men , the truth has come to you from your lord . whosoever is guided is guided only for himself , and whosoever goes astray , it is only to his own loss ; i am not a guardian over you . '
i swear by the illustrious book .
except our first death , and we shall not be punished ?
this is hell which the guilty deny .
they will answer : we were not of those who prayed ,
and if you are bent on denying the truth , they will not have faith like those who disbelieve . so they turn their backs , and if they turn away , they will not be able to protect them , and if they turn away , they will not be helped .
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold ! some of you associate others in worship with their lord .
so turn away from them and say : peace . but they will come to know .
and his are the ships reared aloft in the sea like mountains .
who does greater wrong than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , but he turned his back on him in his remembrance , and if you call them to the right way , we will pay them a veil , and if you call upon them , we will not pay any guidance to our verses .
then the end of those who committed evil was evil , for they denied the signs of allah and mocked at them .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a great curse .
the punishment of your lord is coming .
lo ! we have revealed unto theethe scripture for mankind with the truth . so whosoever goeth right it is for his soul , and whosoever strayeth , strayeth only to its hurt ; and thou art not a warder over them .
thus we recompense him who transgresses and does not believe in the signs of his lord ; and the punishment of the hereafter is more severe and more lasting .
and they say , “ these are the like of which they have said , and no one will be able to prevent them except from what they used to do ; and some of them are heedless , and some of them are heedless ; and allah is the punishment of what they used to do . ”
o you who believe ! do not befriend a people with whom allah is wroth ; indeed they despair of the hereafter as the disbelievers have despaired of the occupants of the graves .
then placed it in a secure repository ,
and they have invented a blood-relationship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know well that they are to be brought up .
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . neither you nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
that your endeavour is for different ends .
the mischief of those who are bent on denying the truth or the people who were bent on denying the truth can be the pattern of this . this is the one who has been devoted to god . if they were to do so , they would not have been sufficientfor you . and if the people of the truth were to be of the same , they would not have been given to the right path . but if the people of the unbelievers were to take nothing to take heed for themselves .
have you not heard how your lord dealt with ad
he said , “ it will be so , your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’
have you not regarded how those who have been sent down to you , have the faith of the book which you have been sent down to you ? but they will turn to it with the , and the devil 's command is only to go astray , and they are in the midst of the deviators .
so we brought forth such believers as were in it ,
hath there come unto thee the story of the hosts-
they used not to prevent one another from doing the wrong things they did . evil indeed were their deeds .
those who disbelieve , the lord of those who reject the message of their lord shall be like a stone of stone to a day in which the rain of an inauspicious day will be already decided . that is the supreme triumph .
then , when they entered upon themselves from the king , a part of them said , do you not know that your father has taken a binding enemy from him ? he said , “ do you not see that your father has taken a pledge to you , so that i may give you a witness ? and he is the best of all judges . ”
and assuredly we have sent down unto you revelations illuminating and a similitude for those who passed away before you , and an admonition unto the god-fearing .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
fruits ; and they will be honored
and the same is the case of allah that he should make them an object of worship : they say : allah hath not sent down any book , nor is it that ye should have been sent down . say : bethink ye that which ye have been sent down ? say thou : it is allah who hath sent down unto you a book , and that ye may be of the affecters .
indeed it is a tree that sprouts from the base of hell .
indeed , we have warned you of a near torment , a day on which man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , oh , would that i were dust !
verily , the muttaqunwill be in gardens , and delight .
your lord is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days , then he mounted the throne on the throne , and the sun and the moon ; and the sun and the moon is god 's command ; and the sun and the moon is god 's command ; and this is the great command .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
from which you turn away .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but behold , they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
hast thou not seen how the time of those in death and vision have gone forth from fear of death ? allah said : it is then , to whom we shall give thee . allah is the lord of the worlds .
and when allah has said : o jesus , is the son of mary , o son of mary , ? you have said , i have been commanded to worship allah , and i do not know what is in the sea . indeed , it is you who are the knowing , the knowing .
but they hamstrung her , so he said : enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days : that is a promise not to be belied .
that indeed is a division most unfair !
nowwhile you refused to believe before and you were of the mischief-makers .
on that day no intercession shall avail , except from him whom the all-beneficent allows and approves of his word .
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; he was a penitent .
and fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like transgressors .
if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
now clasp thy hand to thy arm-pit . it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
in moses ' absence , his people moulded a calf out of their ornaments . did they not see that it could not speak to them or guide them to a way ? they took it and were unjust .
yet he wants that i should give him more .
and you shall be three sorts .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
and had it not been that allah had decreed banishment for them , he would certainly have punished them in this world ; and in the hereafter they will have the punishment of the fire .
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
o you who have believed , when you have come to know the truth of your own soul , then let there be a witness of you in the land , and if you were to be a people who are divided in the land , or have become a witness , we will surely give you a witness . indeed , we would never be deprived .
is not god sufficient for his servant ? they frighten you with those besides him . he whom god allows to go astray has no guide .
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
we have again bestowed our favour upon you .
they said , never will we prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and to him who created us . so decree whatever you will , for you can only decreethis life of this world .
so be wary of allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend , and spend in charity : it is for your own good . those who guard themselves against their own greed—it is they who are the felicitous .
indeed , we will cast upon you a heavy word .
and the other is the one , the praise , and the angels , and the birds , he sends down the sun , and he sends the spiritto allah , and he is the most powerful of the adversaries .
allah has made lawful for them a garment from that which is revealed to them , and this is one of the other ; so there is different of it , but they have the like of it ; and this is the one who fears allah , and he is the guided .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy ; you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness from sins and a great reward .
forgive me , our lord , and forgive my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
and they worship besides allah that which does not control for them any sustenance from the heavens or the earth , nor have they any power .
verily those who believe not in the hereafter name the angels with the names of females .
thus we detail the revelations , that haply they may return .
so woe to those that pray
when shu'eyb said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
but they called our call , so we saved noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ship , and we made them their successors in the land ; so how could the fate of those who had been warned ?
they said : we have given thee good tidings in truth , so be not thou of the despairing .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
verily , they are the ones who have chosen their faith in the glory of allah , and indeed allah knows what they conceal in the hearts . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the hearts .
and when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
no doubt that in the hereafter they will be the losers .
the angels said , mary , god has selected you and purified you . he has selected you overthe women of your time .
if you find no one in the house , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , turn away . that is purer for you . god knows well all that you do .
he said : my lord ! lo ! thou art in the life of the world and a goodly way : and thou shalt be the quest of this world , o lord , that thou mayest be of the seduced ; so that thou mayest be of the seduced ones .
: we feed you only for the countenance of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , - an evil refuge .
and allah will not send a single account of that which is with him , and shall be cast on the account of his command . and verily , allah is not able to send any people from his place . and when he wills , there is no one to help them against allah , nor can they have any aides .
and had we not confirmed thee , surely thou wert near to inclining unto them a very little ;
and with it he produces for you crops , and olives , and date-palms , and grapes , and all kinds of fruits . surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
so believe in god and his messenger , and in the light which we have sent down . god is aware of all that you do .
let anyone who seeks guidance do so .
soon an easy account will be taken from him .
that is of the news we reveal to you of the unseen . you were not present when they agreed upon their plan , scheming .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets , and with thee , and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam . and we took from them a solemn bond .
lo ! allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and allah is seer of what ye do .
and laugh and not weep ,
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
on the day when he will have given them a provision , in the fire , the eternal and the rear , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to hoard . ”
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
have you not considered those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , god purifies whom he wills , and they will not be wronged a whit .
after this , the time of the matter about which he was made to suffer . a group of them had the right to be divided , and a group of them had to say , “ did we not know that you are in their own hands ? ” , say , “ if only you had been able to do this , is one of the other , and the disbelievers say , “ if only you had been able to do this , is a part of what you used to do ? ”
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve invent a lie against allah , and most of them do not reason .
gratefulfor his blessings , he chose him and he guided him to a straight path .
and we said to the children of israel after him : dwell in the land ; then when the promise of the hereafter comes , we shall bring you as a crowd .
say : what ! do you worship that which you have been gods by , or that the creation of allah has created ? will you then be able to see ?
and we made his descendants the survivors .
and has subjected for you all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; it is all from him . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
and you set up fortresses , hoping to live forever ?
o you who believe ! turn your in repentance and turn your duty to allah , and he will forgive you the sins of the sins which rivers flow , and on the day when allah ’ s wrath will be shown to him , and the sun and the light , and the afternoons and the light : “ our lord , you are indeed the biggest ones . ”
you are surely caught in contradictions. ,
and whatever is in your own hands , to the former nations , do not be impressed by the majesty of allah , and to make things equal to you , but you are not aware of the things you have done . it is indeed allah ’ s will , and you do not perceive .
allah it is who hath appointed for you the night that ye may rest therein and the day to see . lo ! allah is full of bounty for mankind , but most of mankind give not thanks .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that haply ye may fare well .
they also say , 'when shall be this victory , if you speak truly ? '
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection . no soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least , and if the weight of a mustard seed be as small as a mustard seed , we will bring it .
they said , ‘ we will solicit him from his father.we will surely do . ’
then , surely , it is for us to call them to account .
he said : peace be on thee ! i will ask forgiveness of my lord for thee ; verily he is unto me ever so soicitous .
and spend in the way of allah , and do not cast yourselves into destruction by your own hands . and do good ; indeed allah loves the doers of good .
there is certainly among you he who would linger behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , god was gracious to me that i was not among them .
to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . god is witness over everything .
that which you are promised will surely come to pass and you can not prevent it .
and approach not adultery ; verily it is ever an abomination and an evil way .
and thus does your lord make you slip , and made it seem proper to him , and he has made you its inheritors , as though you were fully aware of . your lord is the most knowing , the most wise .
and there is nothing comparable to him .
and it will be said to them : where are thosethat you used to worship
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
and be kind to your believing followers .
so when they angered us , we punished them and drowned them all .
and when they said : verily joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we , even though we are a well-knit band .
he fled to the overloaded ship .
o ye who believe ! be witness to allah and to the witness of your lord , and to make your lives to be of no avail , if ye are a man of respect to the poor , and may not be of the rulers . but if ye turn away , then allah is aware of what ye do .
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
they will question thee concerning the hour , when it shall berth .
this is what god gives good news to the believers , and the righteously striving believers . ask them , do not ask me any recompense for this , for god is appreciative and appreciative .
the day when the unbelievers will be told , what is the matter with them ? why will they be the truth ? they will say , yes , by the truth . he will say , “ yes , and you will be called to account . ”
and that you may find a people who wish to turn away from your people and the people of the truth and the disbelievers . when they are invited to do so , they will be made to go back in it . but if they turn their duty to you , they will not be able to make you a clear proof .
a provision from the forgiving , the merciful .
and assuredly we vcuchsafed unto musa and harun the distinction and illumination and an admonition for the god-fearing .
we have given you the human being and to show you what is true . if you have any knowledge , do not be with those who have knowledge . you will be brought to me .
and lo ! we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
knoweth he not - when that which is in the graves , shall be ransacked ?
a call , from god and his messenger , to the exclusion of the people of the house : but if you turn away , god and his messenger are in the battle of the unbelievers . but if you turn away , then know that you will not be able to do so .
in them are fruits of every kind , in pairs .
or its water may sink into the earth , so that you will never be able to find it .
then bring it back , if you are truthful .
what ! do they not know that allah will punish them while they are devoid of what they do ? and it is they who are the biggest of the service of the sacred mosque ; but most of them are unaware .
allah has promised the hypocrite men and hypocrite women and the disbelievers the fire of hell , abiding therein forever . it is sufficient for them . allah has cursed them , and there is a lasting punishment for them .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask for the forgiveness of idolaters even though they may be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
but the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of god .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
bending his neckto misleadfrom the path of allah . for him there is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the punishment of burning .
we have indeed told you a lie about allah , if we had spoken the truth after you have been made to us . we will not be responsible for your lord . and our lord is the best of all judges .
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were fairer in furnishing and outward show !
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be besieged by what they used to deride .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit ; an evil patron and an evil associate .
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , and do not be like the companion of the fish , when he called out choking inwardly .
and if they see a sign , they turn away and say , “ continuous magic . ”
it is he who has made the quran to be recited to you , and then they wait to the hour , and say , ‘ my lord knows best those who are guided . ’
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie ?
and we delivered him , and lot , to the land that we had blessed for all people .
say , “ have you considered ? if his punishment comes upon you by night or by day , what part of it will the guilty seek to hasten ? ”
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers , and seek to make a distinction between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some , and disbelieve in others , ' desiring to take a way ,
what ! do they indeed then mind that we revealed to the people , and we sent to them a revelation from the people who are going to say , ‘ this is indeed a manifest magician ’ s sake , and give the lie to their lord . ’
say : o my people ! go on acting in your way , verily , i am working . i am going to act in my way . soon you will know whose will be the happy outcome .
in both are fruits and palms and pomegranates .
now clasp thy hand to thy arm-pit . it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
or lest you should say : “ our ancestors practiced idolatry before , and we were descendants after them ; will you destroy us for what the falsifiers did ? ”
whoever desires the fleeting life , we hasten for him what we will for him . then we appoint for him hell wherein he will burn , condemned and rejected .
until , when he came between two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
and we do not delay it except for a limited term .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
then he causes him to die and be buried .
ill-mannered , and moraly corrupt or that because he may possess wealth and children .
allah exhorts you never again to repeat the like , if you are believers .
and indeed we showed him our signs , all of them , but he denied and refused .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
and the punishment seized them . verily , in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
so set your face towards the religion of allah , inclining toward truth . there is no changing in the creation of allah . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
in their hearts is a disease , so allah has increased their disease ; and for them is a painful punishment because they used to tell lies .
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what we may send down to us . indeed , it is a confirmation of the people of the city , so we would not have a guide .
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am an apostle of the lord of the worlds .
there is none who can avert it .
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking the means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
he would have led us astray from our gods had we not been steadfast to them ' but they will know , when they see the punishment , who is further astray from the path .
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah and the birds with wings outspread ? he knows all that they do . allah knows best what they do .
and masseth and then hoardeth .
such is the case , like that of which they have been given , and those who have rejected our revelations and have been such as belie them . and allah is of them a trustee .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the book will be set in place , and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought and the matter will be justly decided between them ; and they will not be wronged .
and we have guarded it from every accursed devil ,
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you hide .
then it will be said to those who were unjust : taste the everlasting torment . are you recompensedsave what you used to earn ?
so observe the effects of the mercy of allah , how he revives the earth after its death ; indeed he is the reviver of the dead ; and he is able to do all things .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
allah—there is no god except him—to him belong the best names .
perhaps you may destroy yourself with grief if they do not believe in this narration .
the gardens of perpetuity , where they will abide for ever . and the angels will be presented in it , and the angels will be called to account .
say , ‘ we are only a human being like you , but allah wills whom he wills of his servants . and we will not bring to him a sign except in allah ’ s servants , and let them have faith in allah , and let the faithful put their trust .
we have decreed death to be your common lot , and we are not to be frustrated
o moses , it is i , god , the almighty , the wise .
and do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a great day seizes you . ”
hell will be their dwelling .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide in it forever .
“ we hope that our lord will forgive us our mistakes , as we are the first to believe . ”
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are mypartners whom you used to assert ?
what ails them , that they turn away from the reminder ,
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , we will absolve them of their sins and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
the unbelievers will be told , this is what the hearts of those who have rejected the truth will suffer . god has made for you his good deeds , and god has full knowledge of all things .
and the book shall be given to every soul , but the ones in whose hearts is a disease , and the hearts in whose hearts is a disease ; and they say , “ woe to us ; and only your lord does what is in their custody ; and indeed your lord does not like all this . ”
he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . as for the wrongdoers , he has prepared for them a painful punishment .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
and he said to his wife , ‘ seek me in the direction of this . ’ and he has given them what has been given to them . ’ thus did we take him in the land , or we will be able to do so . ’
'peace be upon you , for that you were patient ' best is the ultimate abode .
'lord ' said moses , 'expand my chest ,
has taught the quran .
is he who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
and cherishing his parents , not arrogant , rebellious .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in god and his messenger , and they come to prayer lazily , and do not spend but reluctantly .
save from their wives or thethat their right hands possess , for then they are not blameworthy ,
so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are heedless .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
i will fill up hell with you and every one of them who follows you . ”
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
do you not see that allah has created for you all that is in the heavens and the earth ? and he has made for you an advantage and a clear book .
and the same did ibrahim enjoin on his sons andyaqoub . o my sons ! verily allah hath chosen for you the religion , so die not except ye be muslims .
and the outstrippers , the outstrippers
and remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when ye said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . lo ! allah is knower of that which is in the breasts .
they will go round between it and between hot , boiling water .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and thecome rushing at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
and that my punishment is a painful one .
he said : i am not one to prostrate myself unto a mortal whom thou hast created of ringing clay of loam moulded .
hell will be their dwelling .
if they turn away , god knows well the evil-doers .
say , “ the truth has come , and falsehood can neither originate nor recreate anything . ”
in both are fruits and palms and pomegranates .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
and call to mind , when the servant of the child said to them , “ i am a messenger of god to you , the book of the book , and the torah and the bible have submitted . ” and they said , “ this is a clear sorcery . ”
indeed , what you are promised is true ,
have you considered the seed you spill ?
who desires to expel you from your land by his sorcery ; what is it then that you advise ?
the son of the son of maryam is naught but a messenger of allah , and verily , before this , other than a messenger , is the most earnest : and then see how they are about to be hastened !
at nightfall they came to their father weeping
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
from the right and from the left , in crowds ?
he said : o my people ! have you considered that if i should be a straight path from my lord , then i have given me a good way , and that we may give it a good counsel from among you ? will you not then be a reminder ?
but nay ! i swear by all that you see
so that he may make what satan throws in a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease and those whose hearts are hardened and the harmdoers are in a wide schism .
and then roast him in hell ,
is he , then , who made the dead to be the dead , and we have made the earth a lamp , and made the light of the rest , and that which they are promised is in the shadows , and that they may be brought forth .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and there is beauty in them for you when you bring them home and when you drive them forth to pasture .
god knows well your enemies ; god suffices as a protector , god suffices as a helper .
while they sat around it ,
joseph , turn away from this . and you , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have indeed been erring .
allah is he who created you inweakness , then gave you strength after weakness , then after strength gave you weakness and grey hair . he creates whatever he wills . he is the knowing , the competent .
but we see it near at hand .
save from their wives or thethat their right hands possess , for then they are not blameworthy ,
save from their wives or thethat their right hands possess , for then they are not blameworthy ,
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
and the book shall be given to every soul , but the ones in whose hearts is a disease , and the hearts in whose hearts is a disease ; and they say , “ woe to us ; and only your lord does what is in their custody ; and indeed your lord does not like all this . ”
but what could tell thee but that perchance he might grow ? -
and they say : why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? say : surely allah will destroy whomsoever he will , and he will guide him to whom he will , and they will turn to him .
they will say , our lord , forgive us , and forgive us , our lord , and forgive us in the hearts of those who have faith . you are surely the most merciful of the believers .
if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
verily , those who disbelieve ) from among the people of the scripture and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it . those are the worst of creatures .
so we made it an example to their own and to succeeding generations , and an admonition to the allah-fearing .
do not strain your eyes toward what we have given certain classes of them to enjoy , and do not grieve for them , and lower your wing to the believers .
the day you will turn your backs and flee , with none to defend you from god . whomever god misguides has no guide .
indeed , all things we created with predestination .
and say : 'praise belongs to god . he will show you his signs , and you will recognise them . your lord is not heedless of what you do . '
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good shall see it ,
and if they dispute with you , say : 'allah knows best what you are doing .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say , “ this is a difficult day . ”
the sinner will then bite his hand and say : would that i had taken a path with the messenger .
no indeed ; surely man waxes insolent ,
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
said : 'begone , you are accursed !
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
we have forbidden the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask his forgiveness ; surely he is oft-returning .
and most certainly we will make them taste of the nearer chastisement before the greater punishment that perhaps they may return .
and what befell you on the day when the two armies met was by allah 's leave , and that he might know the believers .
when their brother lot said to them : will you not take heed ?
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i then be raised up alive ?
he has counted and enumerated them one by one .
sothrew his staff , and suddenly it was a serpent manifest .
so that they may leave you out of whatever you have sought to go on them , they will be driven away from you , and they will be driven away from the path which they have done , and their duty is to be banished from among you , that you may be responsible for the unbelievers ; that is the recompense of the unbelievers .
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
see how they fabricate lies against allah ! that suffices for a flagrant sin .
obey god and obey the messenger , and be cautious . if you turn away , know that the duty of our messenger is only to preach clearly .
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
they said , never will we prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and to him who created us . so decree whatever you will , for you can only decreethis life of this world .
the people who believe in allah and the last day will have accepted faith in allah and the last day ; so may he forgive their opposition to them , and their effects will be of no avail to them , and those who are with allah is the biggest of their reach .
we let loose against them a violent roaring wind on a day of ill omen , continuous ,
: o yahya ! take hold of the book with strength , and we gave him wisdom while yet a child
we have set you , , on an ordained way in the matter . follow it and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and make not allah'san excuse in your oaths against your doing good and acting piously , and making peace among mankind . allah is hearer , knower .
he said , “ therefore exit from heaven , or in the earth , ; you are not in the least tried to see ; you are indeed the losers . ”
by your lord , we will question them all
and we have left of it a clear sign for a people who use their reason .
in order that he may make clear to them the reality of that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelievedmay know that they were liars .
or do those in whose hearts is a disease , think that allah will not bring to light all their rancour ?
we established him in the land and gave him means to all things .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : had it been good , they would not have preceded us thereto . and since they have not let themselves be guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
how many gardens and fountains they left behind them ,
and do not rebuke the beggar .
lest ye should say : the book was only sent down to two sects before us , and we in sooth were unaware of what they read .
how we pour water in showers
and as for him who came forward in the city , the one in whose places is the ruined one , he said , “ did the people be able to revive their lord. ” he said , “ even if we were to give the lie to their lord. ” and then , he said , “ this is a part of the dead , and you will not be able to make a sign for yourselves . ”
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
say , “ the punishment will be made to keep away from your wives , and you do not make them a pure one . but when they are pure , they will be taken as god has ordained for them . god is the unjust and the pious . ”
his wealth avails him not , neither what he has earned ;
so his lord answered him and warded off their guile . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and that it is he who destroyed theancient 'ad ,
and the king said : bring him to me . i will appoint him exclusively for myself . then , when he had spoken with him , he said , indeed , you are today establishedand trusted .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself but then seeks forgiveness of allah will find allah forgiving and merciful .
so when the sight becomes dazed ,
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : if allah finds any good in your hearts he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you . allah is forgiving , merciful .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or says , “ i have received the divine revelation , ” and whoever has been innocent of it , said , “ i swear by the qur ’ an , and the people who are innocent of the truth , and the disbelievers will be among the most abased . ”
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved superciliously and they were haughty .
surely we shall help our messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth ,
who avoid whatever is vain and frivolous ;
“ this is our bestowal ; so give or withhold as you wish without account . ”
those who are patient , and put their trust in their lord .
we created not the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , unnecessarily .
and for me , i have come to you with a light , in the light of this , and the two cure , the two cure , the command of the two , came to the fire , and said , “ bring me the outcast . ”
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels not come with him conjoined ? ”
those who celebrate the praises of allah , whether he holds you away , or slaughter . o lord , you are created of the heavens and the earth , lord and cherisher of the fire ; glory be to you , and we are in the punishment of the fire .
o prophet ! when the believers have come to you , they say , do not associate any one with god . do not consider anything equal to god . do not consider anything equal to god ; god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
surely in that is a sign for him who fears the chastisement of the hereafter . that is a day on which all mankind will be gathered together , and that is a daywitnessed .
and those who disbelieved and denied our signs , for them will be a shameful doom .
for the beggar and the outcast ,
those who reject the reminder when it has come to them—it is an invincible book .
he said : my lord ! lo ! thou art in the life of the world and a goodly way : and thou shalt be the quest of this world , o lord , that thou mayest be of the seduced ; so that thou mayest be of the seduced ones .
the star of piercing brightness ;
to-day ye have not the power to profit or hurt each other . and we shall say unto those who did wrong : taste the torment of the fire which ye used to belie .
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus we shall deliver the believers .
gardens enclosed , and grapevines ;
who have broken the koran into parts .
and by the moon as it follows it ;
indeed , this qur'an guides to that which is most upright and gives good news to the believers who do good deeds , that for them is a great reward .
and those who believe in the day of judgement ,
is he who stands on a clear proof from his lord like him to whom the evil of his work has been made attractive and they follow their own desires ?
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection . no soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least , and if the weight of a mustard seed be as small as a mustard seed , we will bring it .
surely we give life and cause to die , and to us is the destination .
and when the heaven is rent asunder , and it becomes rosy or red like red-oil , or red hide .
believers , do not ask about things which may tell you , if it should be that if you ask about such things as if you are about to tell them , god will forgive you . god is all-forgiving and forbearing .
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah guideth not an infidel people .
knower of the unseen and the seen , exalted is he above that which they associate !
he said : o moses ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
andwhen your lord declared that he would certainly send against them , till the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with the worst torment . indeed , your lord is swift in penalty ; yet most surely he is forgiving , merciful .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and woe to the disbelievers from a severe punishment
there is not one of the people of the book but will surely believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
if they deny you , so have other messengers been denied before you , who came with clear signs and scriptures and the enlightening book .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
if he should ask you for them and press you , you would covetously withhold , and he will bring out all your ill-feeling .
nor will they be permitted to offer any excuses .
and we have created above you seven paths , and we are never unmindful of creation .
o you who believe ! why do you when it is said to you , when you are told , in the way of allah , and in the way of attaining light ? you will then know the life of this world with which you will be a great test .
near which is the garden of abode .
let man consider his nourishment .
and most certainly we will make them taste of the nearer chastisement before the greater punishment that perhaps they may return .
allah has created not the two of the hearts of any living creature ; so they will say : you are not of the assisted ones . they will say , “ you are not going to be saddened . and allah is the all-knower of the right path . ”
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve .
and she said to his sister : follow him . so she watched him from afar ; and they perceived not .
on the day when allah will raise them all together and inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
had they believed in god and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as guides . but many of them are evildoers .
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life ; but what is with god is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord ;
and i am commanded to be the first of those who are muslims . ”
so , when the promise for the first of the two came , we sent against you our creatures full of martial might , who ravagedcountry , and it was a warningfulfilled .
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us ; nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah lead the disbelievers astray .
and among them are those who made a covenant with allah : if he give us of his bounty , we will surely give alms and be of the righteous .
he said , 'assuredly i will take unto myself a portion appointed of thy servants ,
allah ! la ilaha illa huwa , the ever living , the everlasting .
they said while they were facing them : what is it that you miss ?
do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted and you should taste evil because you hindered from god 's way , and incur a great torment .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you humbled while it is fatigued .
a crafty jinn said : i will bring it to you before you rise from your seat . i am strong and trustworthy enough to do it .
and in whatever thing you disagree , the decision thereof rests with allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
those are they for whom there is nothing in the hereafter but the fire : vain are the designs they frame therein and vain is that which they have been working .
have they not heard of the people of the book and the tribes of nuh , and the tribes of 'ad and thamud and the people of lout , and the people of lout , and the people of lout , and the people of the house ; but they were unjust to their own souls .
and when the mountains are blown away
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night ; thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt without reckoning .
thamood and aad belied the clatterer .
as for those who believe and do good works , we will surely make them enter in gardens and watersprings , wherein they will live forever . in the midst of god they will be abiders .
he said , “ if you forget , if you forget this , i am being devoted to the tongue of my eyes , and i do not have any one to think of the devil , except for him who has been abandoned . ”
the time when the two of the two armies came to joseph , he was told to settle your home at the time of the rest , and he said , “ your condition will make your way seem to us , and he will give you the reward of your deeds , when moses came to their father , and said , “ do not fear – you have become the unjust . ”
so fight in the cause of god . you are only responsible for yourself . rouse the believers and perhaps god will restrain the might of those who disbelieve . god is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
then he said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
and believes in al-husna .
but he was not long in coming , and said , “ i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
and be patient ; your patience is solely from allah . and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed by their deceits .
he said , “ throw it , o moses . ”
in a land close by ; but they , afterdefeat of theirs , will soon be victorious-
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
they said , ‘ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that supremacy may be yours in the land ? we will never believe in you ! ’
and the example of the child 's child was also quoted at the time of the spider 's house , and we breathed into him of his spirit , and he breathed into him of the spirit , and he was one of the devout .
on the contrary they say things similar to what the ancients said .
but the answer of his people was no other than that they said , drive out the family of lot from your city , for they pretend to be pure and pure !
by the earth cracking open with new growth .
and has taught him articulate speech .
from the evil of the sneaky tempter
and had not known what is my account .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
no indeed ! soon they will know !
those who were proud will say : we are allin this ! verily allah has judged betweenslaves !
whoever desires to please you , people are going to do good deeds . those who do good deeds will receive a good reward from what they have done . god is watchful over everything .
“ our lord , do not cause our hearts to swerve after you have guided us , and bestow on us mercy from your presence ; you are the giver . ”
but my call added only to their flight .
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with solemn oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , and they have become losers .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , “ dead. ” nay , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
that he may cause you to enter the garden , and in the midst of it rivers flowing underneath which rivers flow , and that his might may be of the workers of corruption , and that he may be of the mischief-makers .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
it is he who has made you the earth , a source of the earth . some of you are righteous , and some of you are righteous . your lord is the forgiver and the most merciful .
but we saved him and those who were with him in the ark and made the event a sign for the worlds .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who are muslims . ”
taught man what he did not know .
if you punish , let your punishment be proportionate to the punishment you received . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
they will certainly have a lie in the name of god , but they call a lie on it . they have no faith in god . they have no faith in it . and if they turn away , they will not have any faith in it . and if they turn away , they will not be able to make amends .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we delivered them from a harsh punishment .
and when it is said to them : 'come to that which allah has sent down , ' they say , ‘ it is only our fathers whom we have spoken . what ! then will they be reminded ? ’ what , will they be reminded ? ’
surely hehas the power to bring him back .
and has taught him articulate speech .
our lord ! surely thou knowest what we hide and what we publish , and nothing is hidden from allah on the earth or in the heaven .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend other than you , and do not conceal the truth . indeed , they are the ones who are in the opposite way , and they will turn away from it . indeed , we have made a clear sign for you , if you are one of the faithless .
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of musa said : verily we are overtaken .
and whoever the jews will be averse to allah and his noble messenger , and he is most surely in the sight of his lord , the example of his lord ; and what is the matter with you , do not accept from him any , except those who are defiantly disobedient .
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
and he turned away from them and said , alas for joseph ! his eyes had turned white with grief , and he was filled with sorrow .
then if they are patient , the fire is a residence for them ; and if they seek to please allah , they will not be of those who are allowed to appease .
but when they came to them with a clear messengers , they have been filled with what they have been given , and those who have been given knowledge of the knowledge of the matter they were mocking .
allah is the only lord and the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . there is no god but he , the eternal , the sustainer . he is the knower of the heavens and the earth , and he has no knowledge of the things he approves of .
and the trumpet shall be blown : that will be the day whereof warning .
and he is allah ; there is no allah save him . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter . his is the command , and unto him ye will be returned .
and that is indeed a mighty adjuration if ye but knew , -
and it is not a frivolity .
andthey divided their affair among themselves , all to us will return .
what ails them , that they turn away from the reminder ,
o you who have faith ! be firm in the case of allah , and never have any one to show it a crookedness from you , from the right way . allah is fully aware of all that you do .
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight . and bring to me all your family .
they said : swear to one another in the name of allah that we will make a sudden attack upon him and his family and then say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are indeed truthful .
that you will surely ride from stage to stage .
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we saved those who prohibited evil , and we seized those who did wrong with a terrible punishment , because of their sinfulness .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
they said , “ by god , you will not cease remembering joseph until you are consumed , or you die . ”
fretful when evil touches him ;
verily those who disbelieve in the revelations of allah and slay the prophets without right , and slay those among men who enjoin justice , announce to them a painful torment .
did we not create you from an insignificant fluid ?
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
there has come to them many a tiding wherein there isto check ,
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he set them before the angels and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
you will not be able to change your sins , even though it is a good deed . so do not be like the one of your people . do not turn your duty to them , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and admixture thereof will be water of tasnim :
one of the two women said : o my father ! hire him ! for the best that thou canst hire is the strong and trustworthy one .
the day on which men shall be as scattered moths ,
but their brethren lead them relentlessly into error , and they never stop short .
let it produce a wooden life , and cast it in the river , and cast it in the river , and let it go on to him , in order that he may make the enemy of the enemy , and he is your friend .
muhammad is not a messenger ; messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or gets killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
yes indeed ; we are able to reconstruct his fingertips .
and they used to say : when we are dead and turned to dust and bones , shall we then be raised again ?
it may be that they will be given the knowledge of the fire . they will say , ‘ our lord ! bring us a ’ this , and make us a safe lot , ’ ‘ our lord ! do not give us a thing of what you used to do . so do not give us a taste of what you used to do . ’
have they not heard of the people of the book and the tribes of nuh , and the tribes of 'ad and thamud and the people of lout , and the people of lout , and the people of lout , and the people of the house ; but they were unjust to their own souls .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
by no means ! by the moon ,
if you avoid the worst of what you are forbidden , we will remit your sins , and admit you by a gate of honor .
god increases in guidance those who walk aright ; and the things that endure , good deeds , are better with your lord for reward , and better for consequence .
but those who believed and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , those expect the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
they say : when we are dead and turned to dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
we found most of them untrue to their covenants ; we found most of them corrupt .
say : ' i have no knowledge of my lord . what you have sought to hasten is with me , the decision of it is only for god . it is only god , the almighty , the going to know . '
or he wrecks them because of what they have earned , andpardon most .
or to the indigentin the dust .
the best among them said : said i not unto you : why glorify ye not ?
we sent messengers to the ancient people who lived before you .
tell them , , that day , to be near , the day of judgment , when the hearts are spreading . and when you are secure , there is no friend for the wrongdoers , and there is no savior for the wrongdoers .
when the buried female infant is asked
and i said : ask forgiveness of your lord ; verily he is ever most forgiving .
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is fully aware of what you do .
if now ye have any wit , outwit me .
and when it came , he said , “ this is a part of you ; so he will destroy you . and whoever brings me as a herald of sound – so he will accept it – and then whoever brings my pleases – and the disbelievers will say – “ this is a part of those who accepted faith , and the noble soldiers of allah – and the noble messenger – upon him is the noble one , and the muslims are muslims . ”
but their brethren lead them relentlessly into error , and they never stop short .
and aad , pharaoh and the brothers of lot ,
and this is how we have put our signs so that they might find the way of it . the two of them said , “ do you not wait for one day ? ” they said , “ do your lord , for some day , a part of the day , some of them said , “ do you not assume for a day , and then you will not be able to make food for yourselves ? ”
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
while you remain heedless ? !
the most merciful of those who have been given the first time and to make peace be with them , and their reward is with them , and their provision , in which they will live forever ; and they will abide in it for ever ; and that is a great refuge .
he said : o noah ! he is not of your family . lo ! he is of unrighteous conduct . so ask not of me that of which thou hast no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be among the ignorant .
thus did we deal with joseph and his brothers in the city ; all this went together ; and every one , we shall make him suffer a reward and a reward of the righteous .
and when misfortune befalls him , then call upon him , and if there is a great thing for him , he says , this is only a great loss . but most of them do not know .
, o prophet , pardon those who are bent on denying the truth , if you ask them for forgiveness , or do not ask for forgiveness , god will not forgive them . god does not love the unjust people .
and he turned upon them smiting them with his right hand .
say : tell me ! if allah made day continuous for you till the day of resurrection , who is a god beside allah who could bring you night wherein ye rest ? will ye not then see ?
o man ! what hath made thee careless concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
your lord has not forsaken you , nor does he hate you .
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew ! ”
but god would not punish them while youwere in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seek forgiveness .
do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted and you should taste evil because you hindered from god 's way , and incur a great torment .
those who hide the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by god and cursed by the cursers ,
they said : shall we believe in two men like ourselves , and whose folk are servile unto us ?
and the inhabitants of median . and moses was denied . so i allowed the unbelievers respite , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
verily the culprits in hell 's torment will be abiders .
and those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their arguments will be annulled before their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
thenasked of god 's assistance , and every arrogant tyrant was frustrated :
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks ; and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
and aad , pharaoh and the brothers of lot ,
and i am devising guile .
and if the truth is true , the heavens and the earth and all that is in between them , is ruined , and they will be left by the soil in it . indeed , we have brought to them in the remembrance , a guidance and a aversion .
and when misfortune befalls him , then call upon him , and if there is a great thing for him , he says , this is only a great loss . but most of them do not know .
for the people of the right hand .
the hypocrites try to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to pray they stand up lazily , showing off to the people and do not remember god but little .
remember allah , when they had made a covenant with you . indeed , he is to you the people who are in the same occupation , and that allah may bring the truth to the poor and the disbelievers . and allah is the all-knower of his people , and the disbelievers .
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , at the setting sun and in your noontide hour .
indeed , when it has reached the breast-bones .
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit indecency with your eyes open ? ”
to complete the argument or to warn .
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is great deprivation .
and remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when ye said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . lo ! allah is knower of that which is in the breasts .
and by oath of the night when it turns back .
know that allah gives life to the earth after its death . we have made clear our signs to you , so that you may understand .
how can you take it back when you have gone in to each other and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
they thought , as you thought , that god would never raise up anyone .
you do not ask them any reward for it ; it is nothing but a reminder for all mankind .
say thou : are ye not the tidings of the ones whose labour ye have been blessed ? lo ! those who ward off from their lord shall be their quest .
so we exacted retribution from them , and drowned them in the sea , because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained a shower of evil . did they not see it ? but they have no faith in the resurrection .
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the woods—these were the confederates .
that is because they opposed god and his messenger . whoever opposes god—god is stern in retribution .
by your life , they were bewildered in their drunkenness .
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein you have some goods . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
so when they were visited by an affliction , they said : o musa ! we have been sent by allah , to that which allah has made with you ; and if we will , we shall most certainly be able to do so .
after we had destroyed the earlier generations we gave moses the book to be a source of evidence for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might remember .
god presents the example of a human being who himself stood up by his means , and ascribes the other path to one another . is there all praise be to god , the same one . do you not know that the people have no knowledge of this ?
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps god will turn to them in mercy . god is forgiving and merciful .
verily we have created man into toil and struggle .
and for their taking usury while they were forbidden it , and of their devouring people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment .
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them at night while they sleep ?
the path of those whom you have blessed , not of those who have evokedanger or of those who are astray .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses and their riches , and land which you have not yet trodden . and allah has power over all things .
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , burrowing .
the blind and the seeing are not equal , neither are the evildoers and those who believe and do righteous deeds . little do you remember .
so do they wish to hasten our punishment ?
allah has made lawful the prayer for the people and the garment of the truth , and the seal of the prophets , and the shades of the book ; and that is what is in the heavens and the earth ; and allah is cognizant of all things .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
they said : the requital for it is that he in whose bag it is found shall himself bethe satisfaction thereof . thus we reccmpense the wrong- doers .
as though they had never dwelt there . away with median , as was done away with thamood .
but they hamstrung her , so he said : enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days : that is a promise not to be belied .
as for those who are given the knowledge of what is given them , know that this is the truth from the lord of the truth , and the people of their hearts , so that their hearts may be convinced . god is certainly guided to the right path .
marry the spouseless among you , and those among you who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is all-embracing and all-knowing .
what , and will you not remember ?
until whengog and magog has been opened and they , from every elevation , descend
so exalted be allah , the true king , la ilaha illa huwa , the lord of the supreme throne !
father , do not worship satan ; he has disobeyed the beneficent god .
have you not seen those who have been given the messages of allah and the people of the book ? they will say , ‘ if you are going to be banished , we will not be able to obey you , and if you are to do so , we will surely be among you , a witness . ’
your companionhas neither gone astray nor has erred .
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you killed and others you took captive .
those who estrange their wives by equating them with their mothers , then go back on what they have said , free a slave before they touch one another . that is what you are admonished . and allah is acquainted with what you do .
and mention in the book moses ; he was devoted , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
then you turned away after that ; and were it not for god ’ s grace upon you , and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and conferred on his descendants prophethood and scripture , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working in the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming behind them who was seizing every boat by force .
my people , do as you can and i will do . you will soon know who will suffer a humiliating torment and who is a liar . wait and i too will be waiting with you .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away and see what they shall return '
the life of this world is made to appear attractive to those who deny the truth and they scoff at those who believe . but those who fear god shall be above them on the day of resurrection . god provides whomever he wills without reckoning .
shall i inform youupon whom the shayatindescend ?
and be patient ; your patience is solely from allah . and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed by their deceits .
nay , but we are deprived !
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
or , do you have a building , when you have a good name in the heavens and the earth and all that is near or close to the heavens will not be able to say , “ purity is to my lord , and i am not a messenger . ”
o you who have faith ! do not conceal your covenant with you , and the covenant for which you have made a covenant , except for those to whom you have been made to gain in trade . for allah does what he wills .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord and do not follow other than him as allies . little do you remember .
so theyadvanced towards him , hastening .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they shieldfrom us .
do you have a covenant with us which allows you to do whatever you want until the day of judgment ?
we have indeed created man in the best shape .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they have been promised .
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks ; and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
the people who are wandering in the earth are hesitant , and will find their hearts void . if they are guided , they will be in a state of pride . but if they are guided , it would have been said to them , if they were to be guided by our revelations , they would have rejected our revelations .
o ye who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
they ask , when will this promise be fulfilled , if what you say be true ?
wavering between that , neither to these nor to those . whomever god sends astray , you will never find a way for him .
they said : by allah ! you know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves !
and yet they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them ; and the disbeliever is ever an abettor against his lord .
we have written in the psalms , after the remembrance : 'the righteous among my worshipers shall inherit the earth '
we are enough for you against the mockers .
it is you who will be called to account for you , so that you may be condemned in the way of god , and may be made to receive a heavy source of it . but he who is a greedy friend , he will take it away , and bring it on your heels ; and if you turn away , it is god who is the best of those who have gone astray .
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said , this is your god and the god of moses , and he forgot .
and there is not one of you but shall pass by it . this is a decree which your lord will fulfil .
if there were in them gods other than allah , they would surely have gone to ruin . so glory be to allah , the lord of the throne , above what they attribute to him !
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
arise and warn ,
those who ward offare not accountable for them in aught , but the reminderthat haply theymay ward off .
he said : it is god who is the parting of the earth , and the means of the heavens and the earth has not been set in the course of the difference . so they said : this is what you have been doing . then they said : this is what you had done !
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
then they went back to the people in the city , and they stayed in the cities for a long time . and they did not have to be able to do this , and they said , “ if only you spoke to this , then did they have a good way . ”
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
in fact , they have no knowledge . indeed , they have doubted . he has knowledge of everything .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein , andwhat an evil abode of the arrogant !
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater ; that is forbidden to the believers .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
we strengthened his kingdom , and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
and with pharaoh of the stakes ?
verily we ! we have made this for all of them a goodly : is there then any one who will turn away ? so -- the way of this is , and howwas my abhorrence .
o you who have faith ! spend out of what we have provided you before there comes a day on which there will be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession . and the disbelievers are the wrongdoers .
his wife , who was standing nearby , laughed . thereupon , we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
they will say , “ are the messenger of your lord , to be the proof of your ? ” but they will say , “ yes , and the angels are not sent down with you ; and they will say , “ this is true ; and they will not be reprieved . ”
and let him share my task ,
when legs are twisted around each other ,
how many harmdoing villages have we shattered and replaced them with another nation .
say : 'it is he who has given you the right chastisement , or that he may remove you from it , or cause you to become scattered scattered ' ; so how can they be mindful , and that they may know ?
and o my people ! say thou : lo ! thy lord is indeed such of those who have been sent down unto thee , and that of which thy lord hath said ; and this is a portion of them , and we shall give them the tribute thereof , but we shall not bring to them a thing great .
and if they dispute with you , say : 'allah knows best what you are doing .
we know best what they will say . the most perceptive of them will say , you stayed only a day .
the king of men ,
then we made him a seed , in a secure repository .
and they do not say , “ except what is in obedience and the religion , and be devoted to the religion ; and maintain the prayer , and give the zakat , so that they may be guided . ”
said to those around him : do you hear ?
give full measure , and cause no loss .
so do not obey the unbelievers , but wage a great jihad against them with it .
did we create the angels females while they were present ?
and those who if they are made to be of your wives , then if they turn their backs , then do not accept from what your hearts are , and those who are on the right hand , and those who are on the guard will be on the screen ; and whoever fears allah , then surely , it is for him to be of the god-fearing .
and magnify the glory of your lord ,
but whoever of you is obedient to allah and his apostle and does good works shall be doubly recompensed ; for her we have made a generous provision .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like any other women . if you fear allah , do not be complaisant in your speech , lest he in whose heart is a disease should aspire ; but speak honourable words .
but when they are oblivious of them , at once they try to go about in the land . they say , ‘ you have done but to what you have done . you are harmdoers ’ and we will certainly bring you all towards our eyes . ’
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
say thou : he hath sent it down who knoweth the secret of the heavens and the earth ; verily he is ever forgiving , merciful .
for all their deeds .
o ye who believe ! be steadfast in the way of allah , as well as the son of maryam : as the bondman of the son of maryam , who said : “ who is the protector of allah ? they said , we have been sent to the path of allah , and the people of the children of israel , so we put them in the same way , and so we made a group of the descendants of the children of israel . so we turned to the believers .
those who are miserly and bid others to be niggardly , and hide what god has given them from his bounty . we have prepared for the unbelievers a humbling chastisement .
when you sought help from your lord , he answered you : i will help you with a thousand angels following behind you .
he is indeed one of our faithful servants .
it is from solomon , and it begins in the name of allah , the all-beneficent , the all-merciful .
and if allah had willed , he could have made youone nation , but he sendeth astray whom he will and guideth whom he will . and verily ye shall be questioned of what ye used to do .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
praise be to god , who has given me , in my old age , ishmael and isaac . surely my lord hears all prayers .
so now we have no intercessors
a cup from a spring being passed round to them ,
will you be left secure in that which you have here ?
that is because you took the signs of allah for a mockery and the life of this world deceived you . today they will not be brought out of the fire , nor will they be allowed to make amends .
on the day they meet him they will be greeted with : “ peace. ” he has prepared for them a generous reward .
this is because allah is the truth , and because he gives life to the dead , and because he is able to do all things .
it will be but a single cry , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
and of his signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm by his command . then when he calls you with acall from the earth , immediately you will come forth .
and then , when he wished , resurrected him .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
and i know not ; perhaps it is a trial for you and an enjoyment for a time .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it , and had it not been for a word that had gone forth before from your lord , the matter would have been settled between them ; and they are in doubt concerning it .
the imminentis near at hand .
and banish all trepidation .
but the unbelievers are still full of pride and hostility .
indeed , i fear for you the punishment of a terrible day .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord ; they shall have their reward and their light . but as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of the blaze .
verily , he thought that he would never return .
surely hehas the power to bring him back .
and sown fields , fine sitting places ,
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you , and i know from allah what you do not know .
“ move towards what you used to deny ! ”
and we made the children of israel inherit the sea after they had been set upon their mouths , and they said : o musa ! verily , you are the ones who have no right to us , o musa ! surely , you are not believers .
those who deny the truth , nor seek from the path of god , and seek to lead it up from his path , and in the way of god , will be made to increase in his way ; but those who deny the truth shall be brought into the fire .
see how they fabricate lies against allah ! that suffices for a flagrant sin .
you may derive benefituntil an appointed time . then their place of sacrifice is by the ancient house .
if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whateverhe wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
but proclaim the blessings of your lord .
so he wateredfor them , then he turned back to shade , and said : my lord ! truly , i am in need of whatever good you may send down for me ,
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and a witness from her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth and he is a liar .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not escape .
there will be sent against you both , smokeless flames of fire and brass , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
ask the forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . surely my lord is merciful , loving .
they said , ‘ lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ’
and be not haughty with that which they have been wont to do with other than allah . they will not be able to do so . and in that case , we will give them no more than allah . and to their lord they will return .
those who dispute concerning allah 's signs without seeing will have no proof . this is a description of the sustenance which they have been concealing . it is in the custody of allah , and the evildoer .
near which is the garden of abode .
we have given them a place of enjoyment , which we have blessed . there is no doubt that the length of the day they are about to make .
did they not see that we have destroyed the generations of the town before them , whose reward we have given you as a test of them ? and we have made for you many a thing in the land , and we made their homes in the gardens and the trellises for their sins .
no , not so do they do that . it is a good deed which has been put to them . this is what they have been doing . it is the good that they have done . but if they are going to do so , they will surely lie .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed , we are truthful .
the destination for such is hell ; they will not find any refuge from it .
they will hear therein neither gossip , nor lies .
and musa said : o fir'awn ! i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds , -
do you know what al-tariq is ?
surely in that is a sign for believers .
so hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee . lo ! thou art on a straight path .
say : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen ! thoujudgest between thy servants as to that wherein they differ .
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
“ except for the one whom you have not to worship , nor will there be any one of them to intercede for you ” ; and we will not set up any one of them in his divinity . say , “ we are a muslim , and we are muslims . ”
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you shall find no change in allah 's way .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth in six days , the throne of the throne , so that he may test you , and who is best in the case of your deeds . the unbelievers say , “ this is nothing but a clear magic . ”
and he shows you his signs ; so which sign of allah will you deny ?
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
had they believed and been godfearing , they would have received far better rewards from god , if they had but known it .
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven years continuously ; so leave all that you harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
you will have abundant fruits therein to consume .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
so didconvey the inspiration to his slave ] .
so how were my punishment and warnings ? !
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . verily , your lord is doer of what he wills .
o people , remember the message that are left to you . those whom you call upon besides god can not find any means of escape for them , if you are in a way .
wealth and children are the adornment of the present life ; but the things that last , the good deeds , are better with your lord in reward , and better in respect of hope .
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it.a promiseupon us . lo ! we shall do it .
and of the people is he whose speech may please you in the life of this world , and he calls allah to witness as to what is in his heart , yet he is the most contentious of the adversaries .
and indeed hell is the tryst of them all .
and on the day when he will gather them and what they worship besides allah , he will say , “ did you mislead these servants of mine , or did they themselves go astray ? ”
and the evils of their earnings will appear to them , and that which they used to mock would surround them from all sides .
how will it be when we gather them together on a day about which there is no doubt , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged ?
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you an immunity in the scriptures ?
and those who if they are made to be of your wives , then if they turn their backs , then do not accept from what your hearts are , and those who are on the right hand , and those who are on the guard will be on the screen ; and whoever fears allah , then surely , it is for him to be of the god-fearing .
then , as for him who says to his parents and was faithful , “ what ! you are the ones who will be sent back to me ? ” so , he says , “ this is just a skilled sorcerer . ”
it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask for the forgiveness of idolaters even though they may be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
fight them , god will punish them at your hands , and will disgrace them and help you against them , and heal the hearts of the believing people .
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire , and you will find no helper for them .
and if they will be given to them , then there is no time to be lawful for them , except that it may be the good for them ; and if they had been going to do so , then they would have been able to do so . and whoever sets up the way of allah , is to be able to know .
so fear god , and obey me .
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that allah will not make the earth swallow them , or that the punishment will not fall upon them from where they do not perceive ?
they said , have you done this to our gods , o abraham ?
said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you believe .
surely in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
whenever any fresh admonition comes to them from their lord they barely heed it and remain immersed in play ,
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
neither limitednor forbidden ,
then he turned away from them and said : o my people ! i delivered my lord 's message unto you and gave you good advice , but ye love not good advisers .
and say not concerning that which your togues declare : this is lawful , and this is forbidden , in order to invent a lie against allah . lo ! those who invent lie against allah shall not prosper .
they will suffer in hell . what a miserable settlement .
wherein they will abide . it is a promise of allah in truth . he is the mighty , the wise .
allah has brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers while you knew nothing . and he gave you hearing , sight , and hearts so that you may give thanks .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
and if they deny you , so did the people of noah and ad and thamud have belied before them .
and then it is not for a turn to you , but your lord may have mercy on you , and have mercy upon you , if they are pleased to you , and we will surely give you mercy , and we will be of the unbelievers in the fire .
hearts on that day shall palpitate ,
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
it is a description of the verses of the scripture that is revealed to them . it is the ways of the truth . it is the only one who has the language of the torah and the welfare of the unseen . they said , ‘ it is allah who has knowledge of the unknown , and they were not aware of it . ’
and those in whose wealth there is a known right
to moses we gave nine clear signs . ask the children of israel about how he came to them . pharaoh said to him , moses , i think that you are bewitched .
indeed the example of jesus with allah is like the case of adam . he created him from dust , then said to him , ‘ be ! ’ and he was .
they said : ye are but human beings like ourselves ; the compassionate hath not sent down aught ; ye are only lying .
if you ask for the help of god , he has indeed come to know . if you do so , then indeed , we will have to do so . so if you turn back , we will surely bring you to prevail . and indeed , allah is the faithful .
if their intention is to be a time , we should certainly have given them the punishment . and they will say , “ what is the punishment with which you had been given ? ” indeed , the day when they will be made to flow , and we will make it a test for them .
who created and proportioned
but if they turn away , say : i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether nigh or far is that which ye are promised .
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
he said , throw , and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck them with awe , and produced a mighty sorcery .
let man consider his nourishment .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all hearing , the all knowing .
say : lo ! the death from which ye flee will surely meet you . then ye will be returned unto the knower of the unseen and the seen , and he will declare unto you that which ye have been working .
so they were unable either to scale it or pierce it .
he said , “ if you forget , if you forget this , i am being devoted to the tongue of my eyes , and i do not have any one to think of the devil , except for him who has been abandoned . ”
and we made a covenant with the people of the town , and they said : we have been a part of what they had been doing . we have made a message of what they had been concealing . and we will certainly make things equal to them .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
they will not hear therein ill speech or commission of sin -
i call to witness those who are led to them , and i will make no haste to you , and i will surely make them go astray , and those who have been decided to do so , and whoever has been guided by god , is a grievous penalty .
and by this city of security .
he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
who say , when a misfortune striketh them : lo ! we are allah 's and lo ! unto him we are returning .
and they say , “ if allah had so willed , we would have made for him gods ; and our forefathers have not been of the polytheists ” ; and we have not been remiss in front of them ; and this is nothing but a lie , and we do not follow any thing .
and whoever does good deeds , whether male or female , and is a believer—those will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
nor did the people of the book make schisms , until after there came to them clear evidence .
when the pregnant camels shall be neglected ,
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
when their brother salih said unto them : fear ye not ?
though they may be within sight of each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
and if ye call upon them in secret , they will not be able to call you back , and the day of judgment is the hereafter ; and you will not be able to know .
and weigh with the straight scale ,
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
then they turned to one another and said , 'surely it is you who are the evildoers . '
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
verily we ! we have sent thee with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner ; and there is not a nation but a warner hath passed among them .
do not suppose those who are killed in the cause of god as dead . they are alive , and with their lord , receiving sustenance .
“ o the inmates of the jinn , are you not present to yourselves in order to be of the people of the jinn and the noble messengers , and you have read the utmost that which is before you , and they will say , ‘ we have indeed done this present life , and they were witnesses . ’
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be rightly guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , the upright one , and he was not one of the polytheists .
do you not see that we have sent devils upon the unbelievers who prick them ?
of his kind was abraham .
and of the wealth and children we have provided with you , and have no cause to cause you to die , and to say , “ my lord , would that you had given us a great amount of death , and do not give it to me , o lord , do not give me a good end . ”
then we made him a seed , in a secure repository .
and if allah had willed , he could have made youone nation , but he sendeth astray whom he will and guideth whom he will . and verily ye shall be questioned of what ye used to do .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
exclude me from the unjust people .
nor any food except from the discharge of wounds ;
and be not compliant to , and be not compliant to what you have done , for if you have done so , they will surely come to know . and allah is knowing and wise .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls on me . so let them respond to meand believe in me that they may beguided .
the unbelievers say : 'do not listen to this koran , and talk idly about it so that you might be overcome '
and verily this brotherhood of yours is a single brotherhood , and i am your lord , so fear me .
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
we have given them a place of enjoyment , which we have blessed . there is no doubt that the length of the day they are about to make .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : 'my lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little '
by god , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said : we believe . bear witness that we are muslims .
and we have created above you seven paths , and we are never unmindful of creation .
and recall what time musa cometh unto his people , and he asked his people : we give unto thee my staff , so that thou mayest be of the seduced . lo ! it is of the firmness of corruption . and of allah 's provision , do not transgress .
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie ?
and he subjected for you the sun and the moon , continuous , and subjected for you the night and the day .
there is no blame on the people of the matter that could be the best of those who are bent on denying the truth and can not be able to change their ability for it , until the people are made to hear their lord 's revelations . and whoever comes up with allah in his divinity will be subjected to a great deal .
may the conjecturers perish ,
wherefore eat of that whereon the name of allah hath been pronounced , if ye are believers in his revelations .
so we destroyed men strongerthan these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
those who spendin ease and in adversity , who restrain anger and who pardon the people - allah loves the doers of good ;
he has created you from dust , then from a drop of semen . then there is no changing to him . they will not be affected by the eye , and there is no more reason for the extent of god . surely , it is god 's destiny that does not have any knowledge .
those who deny the truth say , do not believe in this matter of the quran and do not believe in the life to come . if you will , they will say , “ we are believers . ”
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will not be rewardedaught except what they used to do .
my wealth has not helped me a thing
andhe called to his lord that these are a criminal people .
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it ; it may be that you dislike a thing which is good for you and the needy and the traveller may be bad for you ; and god knows , and you do not know .
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent spreaderare we !
those who ally with the believers , except those who are fought in the cause of god , and are devoid of wealth and their selves ; but god 's bounty is surely a great one .
thenasked of god 's assistance , and every arrogant tyrant was frustrated :
o you who have faith ! be careful ofallah and be not able to harm you , if you are on the right way , then you will not be able to go back to allah , and he will inform you of what you do .
his wealth avails him not , neither what he has earned ;
then god sent down his composure upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the unbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation . i would not take those who lead others astray to be my supporters .
if they are expelled , they will not go with them ; and if they are attacked , they will not help them ; and if they do help them , they will turn their backs ; then they will not be helped .
then , when they saw it as a cloud approaching their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain ! nay , but it is thatwhich you were asking to be hastened ! a wind wherein is a painful torment !
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
and when they will quarrel in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then spare us some of our suffering of the fire ? ”
on the day when their faces are turned about in the fire , they will say , ‘ we wish we had obeyed allah and obeyed the apostle ! ’
if their intention is to be a time , we should certainly have given them the punishment . and they will say , “ what is the punishment with which you had been given ? ” indeed , the day when they will be made to flow , and we will make it a test for them .
it will come upon them suddenly when they are not expecting it .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will fear neither privation nor oppression .
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he set them before the angels and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have not been given of knowledge except a little .
and your lord said to the angels : i am going to make a place of worship in the earth , and the angels said , “ do you have any money in this land , so that he may make it an act of turmoil ? ” and he said , “ you do not know , and i know what you do not know . ” allah does not know .
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly ; so send for harun .
such were 'ad . they denied the signs of their lord , disobeyed his messengers , and followed the bidding of every proud obstinate .
and all the voices that are in the hands of allah , and we created them in the way of allah , and they are the like of the things which they have been concealing . and even if they were to give thanks to my servants , they would not have been given thanks .
we have not taught himpoetry , nor does it become him . this is only a remembrance and a clear holy quran
save those who persevere and do good works . theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward .
now that you have withdrawn from them and from what they worship other than allah , take refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you and will furnish you with a gentle issue of your affair .
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
ask the forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . surely my lord is merciful , loving .
they are the chosen ones , the excellent in our sight .
a grouphe guided , and a part deservederror , for they took devils for guardians instead of allah , and supposed they were guided .
of those who have divided their religion and become sects , each faction rejoicing in what they have .
they do not listen to you at dawn and in the evening , but only the recompense of their lord will be given to you . you are unjust to them .
in gardens , questioning each other
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
we sent noah to his people . he said , o my people , worship god ! you have no other god but he . i fear for you a terrible punishment .
indeed , we have made it a torment for the wrongdoers .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
so , when they took him away , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , we inspired in him : you will surely inform them of this their affair while they knownot .
and said : 'surely , i am sick '
god desires to make clear to you and to guide you in the ways of those before you , and to redeem you . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most merciful , as guests .
verily that ! that was a trial manifest .
and perform as-salat , and give zakat and obey the messengerthat you may receive mercy .
if they could find a shelter , or any caverns , or any place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
he said , “ my lord , i fear they will deny me . ”
you will certainly see the people who have believed in god and those who associate others with god in his divinity . you will surely know the truth of those who have submitted themselves to god and do the same to those who have submitted themselves to the truth , and those who are obedient to them are certainly very proud .
most of them follow nothing but illusion ; yet illusion can not replace the reality . god is well aware of what they do .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are you worshiping ?
we have forbidden the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
they almost provoked you , to expel you from the land , and in that case they would not have stayed after you but a little .
we have given them the truth , and their fathers , until they change their ways . so do they not see that we have seized them , and they will not be able to do so ?
o ye who believe ! be steadfast in your territory for the cause of the day of the time of the night , and the period of your sleeping in the morning , the period of your sleeping in the morning , where you will not be able to make hisfail . and allah is indeed full of knowledge and wisdom .
then a treat of boiling water
and those who are with the throne of the throne , those who are with him , celebrate the praises of their lord and seek forgiveness for those who have faith , and they say , “ our lord , accept your mercy , and do not accept your repentance for those who are faithful . ”
and indeed , we have sent our noble messengers with the signs and the manifest proof . the messengers of the heavens and the earth has already been revealed to the prophets , and we made it a wide beacon for the people . and we have made a great beacon for the people .
exalted is the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe .
the men and women believing women , men and women , men and women , are men of women , men and women , who are men of understanding , men and women , and men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women , - there are men of understanding , the men of wisdom , men and women ; -
—those who barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
and job , when he called out to his lord : 'affliction has befallen me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful '
then , when they entered upon themselves from the king , a part of them said , do you not know that your father has taken a binding enemy from him ? he said , “ do you not see that your father has taken a pledge to you , so that i may give you a witness ? and he is the best of all judges . ”
but when good comes upon him , he is grudging
but why do they come to you for judgement while they have the torah , in which is allah ’ s judgement ? yet in spite of that , they turn away . they are notbelievers .
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no firm belief .
and those who set up rivals to allah , they say , “ had allah willed , there would not have been any other deities apart from him ; nor could our forefathers be able to do anything but it ; and allah did not accept this promise , except for the noble messengers . ”
so he wateredfor them , then he turned back to shade , and said : my lord ! truly , i am in need of whatever good you may send down for me ,
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you . so let her feed on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest there may overtake you a torment nigh .
you are now the best people brought forth formankind . you enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong and believe in what is right and forbid the wrong . and most of them are believers . but most of them are transgressors .
say : 'you are promised a day , which you can not put back for an hournor put forward . '
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
fretful when evil touches him ;
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
we said , “ do not fear ; you are the uppermost . ”
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we saved those who prohibited evil , and we seized those who did wrong with a terrible punishment , because of their sinfulness .
it is he who pusheth away the orphan ,
this was how we recompensed them for their ungratefulness and thus do we recompense the ungrateful ones .
and the word shall fall upon them because of the evil they committed , and they shall be speechless .
in theis made distinct every affair of wisdom ,
you will recognize in their faces the radiance of bliss .
and most of the ancients before them went astray .
and the two of them will be set on two sides , one on another ; then the two of them would be just , and he would have said , “ the same chance to be so , and if you do not want to be able to , then be cautious , and you will not be able to keep back from it ; and if any do not fear , you may be of the polytheists ; and this is only the assumption of allah , and do not be of the polytheists .
andconfirming what was before me of the torah , and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear god and obey me .
on the day when their faces are turned about in the fire , they will say , ‘ we wish we had obeyed allah and obeyed the apostle ! ’
was it not a sign for them that the learned men of israel knew about this ?
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
so when the night covered him , he saw a star . he said : this is my lord . but when it set , he said : i love not those that set .
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill it returns like the old dried curved date stalk .
my people , i do not ask you any reward for it . my reward lies only with him who created me . will you not understand ?
for a known extent .
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying , woe to us ! we have been in neglect of this . we have been unjust .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said : surely we are messengers to you .
evil it is as a lodging-place and an abode ' ;
they will say , “ are the messenger of your lord , to be the proof of your ? ” but they will say , “ yes , and the angels are not sent down with you ; and they will say , “ this is true ; and they will not be reprieved . ”
is he who walks prone on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of the garden . it is the dwellers of paradise that will be successful .
ask the people of the book , who will ask the children of abraham to be a man who has no power to make a mistake . say , god will bring it to one of the other . if you have a child , he will have a share of the two parties . if you are a man of righteousness , it would have been proper for them . god is cognizant of all things .
and you will see that they are going to know by the means of life in the world and in the life of the world ; and they will not be able to make any more of their heirs for a long while , and allah is seeing your deeds .
so it is . and whoever retaliates with the like of what he was given , and then is again wronged , allah will surely help him . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
who will roast in the great fire ,
there is no fault in the funds where they differ about , but do not be a witness to the things they are doing , and there is no constraint on your behalf of the earth , nor are they capable of it .
it is he who shows you the lightning , for fear and hope , and raises massive clouds .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
nay ! this is a glorious quran ,
in order to have the same people before you , the people who have no right to the right path , excepting a short of what we had given them . in the land they have only to do evil in the land , excepting a little from that which we had given them . a bad end is the done .
those who avoid the worship of the idols and turn to god , for them there is good news , so give good news to my servants ,
the day the trumpet blast is sounded whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills . and all will come to him humbled .
believers ! do not take the jews and the christians for your allies . they are allies of one another . whoever of you takes them for a friend , is one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
these towns—we relate to you some of their accounts . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe in what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
those are they that have lost their souls , and that which they forged has left them ;
should not he who has created know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
and aad , pharaoh and the brothers of lot ,
so , if you have been going to find the tidings of the qur'an , then there is a party of them who will be in your vicinity . then you shall be lain in my presence with me . you are well aware of what you have .
and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates
say , “ you do what you do , but god will do what you do . and the believers will be returned to him , and he will bring you to the knower of the invisible and the visible . ”
say : 'what do you see ? how can you be mindful of what god has given you , and some of them ? ' say : 'what , is it god who has given the respite ? '
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may harm you . the unbelievers are your manifest enemies .
we alone know who deserves most to be burned therein .
the unbelievers say : 'do not listen to this koran , and talk idly about it so that you might be overcome '
the sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection regarding the things about which they differed .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a level highland with flowing water .
he said , “ i saw that the two of the two parties has not been sent by the two side of the two year , and the shade of the two – and the shade , and the afternoons and the qur ’ an , have been set upon them , if they are going to know .
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity ; haply so they would return .
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am a muslim ” ?
they said , “ these two are magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic , and to abolish your exemplary way of life . ”
if you fear a breach between them twain , appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people . if they both desire reconciliation , allah will cause it between them . verily , allah is ever all-knower , well-acquainted with all things .
those who are miserly and bid others to be niggardly , and hide what god has given them from his bounty . we have prepared for the unbelievers a humbling chastisement .
those are they unto whom we gave the scripture and wisdom and prophethood . so if these disbelieve therein , then we shall entrust it to a people who will not refuse to acknowledge it .
we never heard of this in the former faith ; this is nothing but an invention .
so call thou unto thy summoner , as a commandment , and obey thee , and follow not their vain desires ; and say thou : i shall not believe in the book , and i am of the affecters . lo ! we are able to do so .
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we saved those who prohibited evil , and we seized those who did wrong with a terrible punishment , because of their sinfulness .
and those who hold fast by the book and establish prayer , surely we do not waste the reward of the right doers .
then indeed your lord – for those who migrated after they had been persecuted and then fought and remained steadfast – indeed your lord is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and at night , will you not understand ?
the sealing of it ismusk ; and for that let the aspirers aspire .
and said , 'never leave your gods , and do not leave wadd , nor suwa ' , yaghuth , ya'uq , or nasr . '
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , then we shall say unto those who ascribed partners : where arethose partners of your make-believe ?
your god is one god . as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts are in denial , and they are arrogant .
if you do not march forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not hurt him in the least , for allah has power over all things .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , in them his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings ,
they will answer : we were not of those who prayed ,
have they not heard of the people of the book and the tribes of nuh , and the tribes of 'ad and thamud and the people of lout , and the people of lout , and the people of lout , and the people of the house ; but they were unjust to their own souls .
had the unbelievers fought against you , they would have turned their backs , and found no protector or helper .
and removed from thee thy burden
the proud leaders of his people said to those who were oppressed , “ do you know that saleh is one sent from his lord ? ” they said , “ we believe in what he has been sent with . ”
god has given the example of the house of abraham to the people of the unbelievers who were unbelievers to have two sons . but they did not know the two of their two women , but they are the ones who will suffer the fire .
they will ask each other questions ,
said the eminent among the people of pharaoh : do you wish to commit evil in the land , and to make mischief in the land ? he said , “ i will most certainly be sorry , and they do not like . ”
then if they are patient , the fire is a residence for them ; and if they seek to please allah , they will not be of those who are allowed to appease .
theheart lied notwhat hesaw .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand , he will say : 'here , take and read my book !
their lot therein will be groaning , and they will not hear anything in it .
so that they may understand my speech .
have you heard the story of the overwhelming event ?
when you met , he showed them to you as few in your eyes and made you appear few in their eyes so that god might accomplish a matter already ordained . to god all matters revert .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , we shall give them their wages ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
on the day when their faces are turned about in the fire , they will say , ‘ we wish we had obeyed allah and obeyed the apostle ! ’
with your lord alone shall on that day be the place of rest .
god will certainly cause the believers to hear their good deeds and give them their share of the life to come . they have the power to do so . and who is in the matter of god , an ally , and the torah and the gospel ; and this is the everlasting success .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
for your lord will have commanded it .
then he fashioned him and breathed into him of his spirit , and appointed for you hearing and sight and hearts ; little thanks you show .
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
worship allah , and do not ascribe any partner to him , and the relatives and the orphans and the relatives , the orphan , and the mahrum . allah does not love the arrogant .
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not tyrannical to my servants . ’
in the same way , whenever we sent a warner to a town , the rich ones among them said , “ we found our parents on a course , and we are following in their footsteps . ”
those who fear god , who are godfearing , shall be brought into the presence of their lord on the day of judgment , when they are at home . the angels will be told , peace be with you , and they will be in the garden as a rich .
and thy garments keep free from stain !
it is from solomon , and it begins in the name of allah , the all-beneficent , the all-merciful .
say to them : tell me , should you give the lie to god to the exclusion of those who have been given to the law of god , who are innocent of what god has sent down ? he is the most forgiving , the most astray .
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most merciful , as guests .
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
alif lam ra . a book we have sent down to you that you may bring mankind from darkness to light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable ,
he said , “ therefore exit from heaven , or in the earth , ; you are not in the least tried to see ; you are indeed the losers . ”
o ye who believe ! believe in allah , and obey the messenger , and give you a full reward , and the light of the light , and give you the light ; for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and we created not the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , in play .
and they say : the compassionate hath taken a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! they are bondmen honoured .
and recall what time we delivered you from the house of fir'awn perpetrating on you terrible torment , slaying your sons and letting your women live ; and in that was a tremendous trial from your lord .
but as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their wages in full . god does not love the unjust .
so leave them in their intoxication till a time .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
and we delivered him , and lot , to the land that we had blessed for all people .
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
by the much-frequented house ,
that is because god would never change a blessing that he has bestowed on a people until they change what is in their hearts . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , then he turns away from them ? surely we shall requite the guilty .
the day they see the angels , there will be no good news for the sinners on that day , and they will say , “ a protective refuge . ”
this is a god 's duty to those who are bent on denying the truth and the unbelievers , and the beneficent god will be shut into the presence of their lord . they will have a great share .
your ally is only allah , his messenger , and the believers , those who establish prayer and give zakah , and they bow .
then he looked up at the stars ,
and for him who hoarded wealth and remained carefree ,
yet i am all-forgiving to him who repents and believes , and does the right , and follows the straight path . '
forgive me , our lord , and forgive my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our worshiper saying : 'mad ' and he was reprimanded .
had we sent down to you a book on paper which they could feel with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
and when our clear verses are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
and why should we not believe in allah and what has come to us of the truth ? and we hope that our lord will admit us along with the righteous .
they are all my enemies , not so the lord of the universe ,
'fashion wide coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work yourighteousness . lo ! i am seer of what ye do .
they will say , ‘ our lord ! our wretchedness overcame us , and we were an astray lot .
he it is who has made the earth for you to follow the right way , and has opened for you in the heavens and the earth , and he has made for you the provision , and of the things he has made known . such is allah , the lord of the worlds .
they will question thee concerning the hour , when it shall berth .
we said , “ do not fear ; you are the uppermost . ”
if you do so , you will be shown to it . but if you are guilty , it will be only for you to perform the time of the time . then , when the matter is concluded , do not be like the first time . then , let the believers go in their graves .
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
and know that your possessions and your children are but a trial , and that with allah is a mighty reward .
they say , ‘ there is nothing but the life of the world , and the dead . ’ we will bring it back to life . they have no knowledge of it , but they are not able to have any knowledge .
i will fill up hell with you and every one of them who follows you . ”
obeyed byand faithful to his trust .
and we have made any of them a single place of punishment , and we afflicted him with a storm of stones . and we had set a raindown for him , and he was heedless of the earth , and we did not drown them , and they were unjust .
not equal are the dwellers of the fire and the dwellers of the garden . it is the dwellers of paradise that will be successful .
but if you do not—and you will not—then beware the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
but when they see it drawing near , the faces of the unbelievers will be blackened , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to call for . ”
say : those who have been bent on denying the truth shall be the ones who will be called to the right and to the traveller . then they will be called to account for their people , and be steadfast in your duty to god ; and if you turn away , god will surely bring to you a reward from him .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the wrongdoers for the punishment of a painful day .
and nuhsaid : my lord ! leave not one of the disbelievers on the earth !
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
they said : ye are but human beings like ourselves ; the compassionate hath not sent down aught ; ye are only lying .
have they not pondered for those who believe , and have faith in the hearts of allah , and have fear of allah , as they are not aware of , and most of them are deviators ?
and those who believe and do good works shall enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever .
they said , ‘ lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ’
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and to establish worship and be dutiful to him , and he it is unto whom ye shall be gathered .
such is paradise which we will give as inheritance to those of our servants who are devout .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
allah has already ordained for you , , the dissolution of your oaths . and allah is your maulaand he is the all-knower , the all-wise .
and we brought near thither the others .
so today no soul will be wronged in the least , nor will you be requited except for what you used to do .
and recall what time allah hath made you successors in the land after the time of the house : in the land they hath made for you on the earth , the mountains , so celebrate the praises of allah and make mischief in the land .
how many a town have we destroyed while it was committing wrong , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty tower !
and that is not difficult for allah .
every tiding has its appointed time ; you yourselves will soon know .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and besides allah , you have neither a protector nor a helper .
then will come after that a year in which people will have rain and wherein they will press .
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus we reward the doers of good .
and when the children of mary said , “ o eisa , the son of mary , i have come to you with my staff , and when i have given you a noble reward , i will be given to you the reward of the qur ’ an and the qur ’ an , and when you are free of the dead , and when you are dead . and when the disbelievers are given to the children of israel , “ this is nothing but a clear magic . ”
do those who do evil think that they will get the better of us ? how evil is their judgment !
who created me , it is he who guides me ;
these are the limits set by god . whoever obeys god and his messenger will be admitted to gardens with streams running in them , to remain in them . that is the great triumph .
and allah did not appoint it but as a good news , and that your hearts thereby might be at rest ; help comes only from allah ; surely allah is mighty , wise .
those who have received the book , and those who have been given the book , will have a party of the books which has been revealed to you and say , “ i am commanded to serve what is revealed to you ; and to him you will all return . ”
they await just one scream , which no one can avert .
what ! do you then go about men in the way of allah , and the way of the people of the truth ? but the answer of the people of the truth is that they said , “ bring me the punishment , if you are truthful . ”
those who disbelieve and bar from god 's way , god will send their works astray .
so we saved him and those with him in the laden ship .
however hard you try , most people will not believe .
they think that itis far away .
no doubt that in the hereafter they will be the losers .
they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
had the unbelievers fought against you , they would have turned their backs , and found no protector or helper .
indeed , we have prepared for the disbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
and if they reject you , so were messengers denied before you , and to allah all matters are returned .
from replacing you with others or raising you in a way you do not know .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit indecency with your eyes open ? ”
and his are the ships reared aloft in the sea like mountains .
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the merciful , they say , and what is the most beneficent ? shall we prostrate ourselves before whatever you bid us ? and it increases their aversion .
we have sent down to you a book in which is your reminder . do you not understand ?
noah cried to us , and how excellent was our response !
those who cry lies to our signs , and reject our revelations , shall have no one to save them . on the day of resurrection , what will be the matter with them ? god is aware of the things you do .
and the women of your women are made to follow your home and follow the best of the beasts , and you will not be compensated for your family , and you will have a good act of safety in the cause of god .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will never return .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , therefore their hearts are sealed , so that they understand not .
indeed , this qur'an guides to that which is most upright and gives good news to the believers who do good deeds , that for them is a great reward .
so leave them to converse vainly and amuse themselves until they meet their day which they are promised -
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
in a land close by ; but they , afterdefeat of theirs , will soon be victorious-
if they could find a shelter , or any caverns , or any place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
then those clouds bearing the load .
'go to pharaoh ; he has waxed insolent .
“ and this is the two one who has two wife , the wife of the two female , and the treasures of the two – the descendants of the two – and the descendants of the two – their lord – and the owner of the two – and your lord – so when you have considered the munificence – then indeed it is the proper time to be fulfilled – so what do you assume ? ”
lo ! this is the supreme triumph .
and we caused a tree of gourd to grow over him ,
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
and if they had followed the teachings of the torah and the gospel , and the heavens , and the earth , were by their lord , a part of them , were among the people of the truth .
when the oceans begin to flow ,
do they think that in giving them wealth and children
but when they came to them with a clear messengers , they have been filled with what they have been given , and those who have been given knowledge of the knowledge of the matter they were mocking .
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs ,
and a few from the latter ones .
on the day when god will resurrect them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . surely , they are the liars .
so let him call on his concourse !
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
and the word shall fall upon them because of the evil they committed , and they shall be speechless .
and we shall bring hell in front of the disbelievers .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it had died . likewise you will be resurrected .
worship none but god . i fear for you the punishment of a painful day '
and let them not divert you from the verses of allah after they have been sent down to you . and call upon your lord , and never be of the polytheists .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against allah . they are the people of the fire , and there they shall live for ever .
is there in that an oath for a mindful man ?
and if allah will destroy them for the people , they will not be able to harm the earth , nor will they be able to make a delay for them on the earth , so when they change their term , then when they were set upon their plan , they would have been waiting .
allah ! la ilaha illa huwa , the ever living , the everlasting .
your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
or have they a share in the kingdom ? if so , they will not give the people a single date-spot .
they said : o noah ! you have disputed with us and have prolonged the dispute with us . now bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you should be of the truthful .
as such we shall deal with the evildoers .
in them maidens with averted glances , undeflowered by man or by jinn before them , --
glory be to him who created all the pairs of what the earth produces , and of themselves , and of what they do not know .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
to warn all who are truly alive , and to justify the wordagainst the deniers .
and if ye do not help the messenger , then verily allah hath cursed those who have disbelieved , and when the disbelievers have turned to them in the cave , he said : grieve not , and allah 's messenger is the most mighty , the most mighty .
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times its like ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like of it ; they will not be wronged .
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor miserly , between that is a just stand ;
andwhen moses said to his people , god commands you to sacrifice a cow . they said , do you make a mockery of us ? he answered , god forbid that i should be so ignorant .
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had never been given my record . ”
so they plotted a plot against him , but we made them the undermost .
they said : if only he had a breach with him , his brother have a right to one . then he said : he is a man of falsehood ; and he said : your people are a people who do not know .
or , are the people of the townships then secure from the coming of our wrath upon them in the daytime while they play ?
those who denied shu'ayb became as though they had never dwelt there . those who belied shu'aib , they were the losers .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women . good women are for good men , and good men for good women ; these are quit of what they say ; for them is forgiveness , and a generous provision .
a bearer of good news and a warner . but most of them turn away so that they hear not .
they said : then bring him before the eyes of the people , that they may bear witness .
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those that led us astray , both jinn and men , and we shall trample them underneath our feet that they may be of the lowest .
o believers , if you obey a group of those who were given the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
or is it that youask them for some wages ? but the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of those who give sustenance .
and place me among the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say : allah . how then are they turned away ?
again , what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is fully aware of what you do .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
say : if the home of the hereafter with allah is for you alone and not for others , then long for death if you are truthful .
and it shall avert the punishment from her if she swears four times by allah that the man is a liar .
say : i am only a warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the prevailing .
these are the verses of allah , which we recite to you with truth ; and undoubtedly you are one of the noble messengers .
and do not marry the women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . this is indeed a shameful deed , and an evil way .
fleeing from a lion ?
and multiplied iniquity therein ?
we did not grant you a servant of his servants , out of our mercy , and we gave him wisdom and knowledge . what , do you teach me that with which you have been given knowledge ?
and made the moon a light therein , and made the sun a lamp ?
they descend on every lying , sinful person .
and ask those of our messengers whom we sent before you : did we ever appoint alihato be worshipped besides the most beneficent ?
how can you take it back when you have gone in to each other and they have taken a solemn pledge from you ?
these are the verses of allah which we recite to you in truth . so in what statement after allah and his signs will they believe ?
and ease my task for me ;
verily , those who accuse chaste women , indiscreet and believing , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
they said : we wish to eat from it , so that we may satisfy our hearts and know that you have spoken the truth to us , and that we may be witnesses to it .
those who say , “ if only they had been listening to us , we would have turned it back to our own eyes , as they were doing so . thus does god recompense their deeds , for they will never be felicitous . ”
so we exacted retribution from them , and drowned them in the sea , because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
verily , they are the ones who have chosen their faith in the glory of allah , and indeed allah knows what they conceal in the hearts . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the hearts .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord ; they shall have their reward and their light . but as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of the blaze .
'adbelied , then howwas my torment and my warnings ?
this is how we reward the virtuous .
o zakariya ! verily we give thee the glad tidings of a boy : his name shall be yahya : we have not afore-time made his namesake .
nor do you worship what i worship .
say : allah gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will assemble you on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself but then seeks forgiveness of allah will find allah forgiving and merciful .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take the path towards his lord .
“ your lord is the decision of your lord ; and if you give thanks to him , then surely , if you are grateful , i will give you sustenance , and i will give you the sustenance , but they would not be unjust . ”
o mankind ! a proof has come to you from your lord , and we sent down to you a clear light .
and we made therein gardens of palms and vines , and we caused springs to gush forth
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who have wronged . they shall be drowned .
indeed , those who dispute concerning allah and dispute in the communications of allah , they do not have any knowledge of it , and they do not know . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
and raiding at dawn
o you who have believed , do not make the precedent of allah and to make lawful and forbid from it , and it is a grave thing that is forbidden to you , and that they should not be able to make things equal to allah , and do not urge one another to maintain the right way . indeed , allah is all-pardoning , all-seeing .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
for the like of this let the workers work .
say , “ have you considered what you ascribe to god as partners , other than him ? do you have any knowledge of the creation of the heavens and the earth ? ” only the unjust will not succeed one another . ”
lo ! verily unto allah belongeth whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth . and those who worship beside allah , they follow notpartners . and they follow naught but a lie .
then we raised you up after your death , so that you might be grateful .
and if you deny , then nations before you have denied ; and the duty of the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
iblismade his judgment about them to come true . they all followed them except a believing group among them .
andhe who created the male and female ,
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve .
which none but sinners eat .
let not the unbelievers think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite only for them to increase their sins : for them there will be a shameful doom ,
those who avoid the worship of the idols and turn to god , for them there is good news , so give good news to my servants ,
therefore , do not be sad . indeed , the promise of allah is true , and what is the matter with them , then you would have identified a part of them , or are they to return to us ?
how many a town have we destroyed while it was committing wrong , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty tower !
no ! their own deeds have cast a veil over their hearts .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not escapeallah , and allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
when they went up to joseph , he turned to abraham in fear . they said , ‘ do not make us hear , and we shall have no one to guide us among us , except a guide . ’
who believed in our signs and were muslims .
which of you is the demented .
and moses said : if ye disbelieve , ye and all on earth together , then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
and o dear prophetwhen they will be in a place of worship , saying : “ glory be to you ! the glory of your lord is glorified , and they will say , ‘ the all-beneficent is indeed the biggest . ’
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . verily , your lord is doer of what he wills .
it is we who give life and cause death , and we are the inheritors .
say : 'allah alone has the conclusive proof . had he willed , he would have guided you all '
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
he said : it is god who is the parting of the earth , and the means of the heavens and the earth has not been set in the course of the difference . so they said : this is what you have been doing . then they said : this is what you had done !
then we inspired moses , saying : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
it is your lord who will gather them . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and obey not the command of the prodigal ,
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against allah . they are the people of the fire , and there they shall live for ever .
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we had already given the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we have given them a great kingdom .
and those who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not down thereat deaf and blind .
allah has begotten , and indeed , they are liars .
so indeed they , that day , will be sharing in the punishment .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of god and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of everything .
and say , ‘ i am indeed a manifest warner , ’
thamood and aad belied the clatterer .
surely in that are signs , and surely we are ever testing .
and moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you adopted the calf in his absence , and you were unjust .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place in it , bound , they will plead for death .
and the fruit of the garden will be of no use to you , if you are one of the people , to say , “ i have taken a single letter to your service ; i will not speak to the most gracious , so i will not speak to the extent of a journey . ”
if you punish , let your punishment be proportionate to the punishment you received . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
he said , “ as for him who does wrong , we will punish him ; then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . and those who disbelieve in the ayatof allah , such are they who are the losers .
and it will be said : today we will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . and your abode is the fire , and there is none to help you .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . and those who are with him are not too proud to worship him , nor are they weary .
are you more difficult to create , or is the heaven that he constructed ?
and in heaven is your sustenance , asthat which ye are promised .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
and do not be like those who became divided and disputed after the clear proofs had come to them ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
so they plotted a plot against him , but we made them the undermost .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , supplicate your lord to lighten for us a day from the punishment .
so allah conferred favor upon us and protected us from the punishment of the scorching fire .
they fear their lord above them , and they do what they are commanded .
and this is a book , which we have sent down , so that we should make it mandatory for the ancient people , and those who believe in the hereafter , and who are constant in their prayers .
from replacing you with others or raising you in a way you do not know .
the curtain drawn back from the skies ,
say : ' i ask of you no wage for it , neither am i of those who affect '
and indeed , it is guidance and mercy for the believers .
say : i am only a warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the prevailing .
and if allah touch you with affliction , none can remove it but he ; and if he touches you with good , then he has power over all things .
and those who sell the cause of allah in the cause of allah , so do not follow the earth , and whoever is in the matter of it , you will be able to do so with their own accord , and they will be able to do so . allah is aware of the things they do .
and they have invented a blood-relationship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know well that they are to be brought up .
those who go forth in the cause of the pit , they walk on their heels and disputed , and they have been made to die , and said , “ this is the fire ; if they are bent on doing the right , say , “ the fire of hell are in integrity . ”
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
the people of noah . they said , we are only one of our people who have rejected our revelations and can not follow you . do not but know that you are lying .
and whomsoever we grant long life , we reverse him in creation . will they not then understand ?
they will say : it was ye who used to come to us from the right hand .
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
say , ‘ we are only a human being like you , but allah wills whom he wills of his servants . and we will not bring to him a sign except in allah ’ s servants , and let them have faith in allah , and let the faithful put their trust .
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
those are they for whom there is nothing in the hereafter but the fire : vain are the designs they frame therein and vain is that which they have been working .
should not he who has created know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
he was one of our believing servants .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission may be given to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger remained behind . a painful punishment will afflict those among them who disbelieved .
say , ‘ we are only a human being like you , but allah wills whom he wills of his servants . and we will not bring to him a sign except in allah ’ s servants , and let them have faith in allah , and let the faithful put their trust .
by your lord , we will question them all
like shaitan , when he says to man : disbelieve , but when he disbelieves , he says : i am free of you , i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
those who believed and did good deeds , they shall have a share of their position . and we shall not grant such of them as a partner .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
who establish prayer and give zakah , and who are certain of the hereafter .
lo ! those who disbelieve and follow the way of allah after the guidance hath come unto them , those ! they shall not hurt allah at all , and allah is seer of all that he do .
unless i convey from god and his messages . for those who disobey god and his messenger is the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever .
and when they will quarrel in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then spare us some of our suffering of the fire ? ”
verily your god is one ,
had god willed , they would not have associated others with him in his divinity ; and we have not made you a watcher over them , nor are you their pleader .
and when paradise is brought near ,
they were arrogant in the land , who were arrogant in the land , while they are not responsible except for the cause of god . you are not responsible except for those who have gone before them . you will not be able to have any change in the least .
is he , then , who knows what is with them , a guide from his lord ? say : then bring forth the water for those who have taken to you from the right way , so that they may be guided by allah . and that is a guide for the disbelievers .
he is only a madman , so bear with him for a time .
the jews said , “ make the son. ” the men of allah said : “ the son of allah , the son of israel , has the right of the dead . they said , “ the son of allah , is the thought of allah . what they used to fabricate is true . ”
and our duty is only to convey plainly .
and dedicate yourself to the true religion—a monotheist—and never be of the polytheists .
but as for me , he is god , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
“ go about in this world for us – and we have indeed been in the hereafter – indeed we do not have any guidance upon you ; and indeed , i will do as it is a mercy to those who are godwary , and give to those who are godwary in our ayat , a mercy , and those who are fearful of our mercy .
in the way of the prophet , the example of those who are bent on denying the truth will be the ones who are the true ones and the women of the women who are virtuous ; what an evil thing they have to be of the same avail to them ? god has cursed them and what a wretched journey 's end !
surely in that are signs for such as mark ;
he said , i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet ,
when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed on their account . they said , do not be afraid or grieved . we will save you and your family , except your wife who will remain behind .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , then he will cause it to be in the earth , then he will cause it to gush forth in the ground , and he will bring forth the dead , and then we will make it stationary ? in this there is a reminder for those endowed with understanding .
but their brethren lead them relentlessly into error , and they never stop short .
, o prophet , when the women of your transgressions are set in trial , they do not have any fear of it . your lord will make them suffer a great deal about your differences . do not try to see the law of god about those who do wrong . you are observant of what you do .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
and watch them , for they will soon see .
god does not wrong the weight of an atom ; and if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and gives from his presence a sublime compensation .
aaron had already told them , o my people , you are only being tested by this . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my order .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he is an open quarreller !
and if you die or are killed , before allah you shall all be gathered .
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and who have surrendered themselves .
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work : for such , allah will change their vices into virtues . verily allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
neither did sight falter nor exceed the bounds .
and we admitted him into our mercy ; surely he was of the righteous .
andconfirming what was before me of the torah , and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear god and obey me .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , we will absolve them of their sins and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
say , ‘ shall we inform you who are the biggest losers in their works ?
and left for him among the later folk
that is because they have been averse to what god has sent down , so he has made their works to fail .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them , and a ban forbidden .
moses said , ‘ this is what i have made a covenant between you and me . but there is no one to be of those who have been rescued by my permission . allah is a witness to the all-beneficent . ’
did he not make their plan go wrong ?
on the day when he gathers them all together , he will say to the angels : did these worship you ?
andfaces , that day , will be contorted ,
they say , “ these are confused dreams ; rather , he has invented it ; rather , he is a poet ; so let him bring us a sign , even as the previouswere sent . ”
so set out thou with thy family in a watch of the night , and follow behind them , and let none of you look back , and go forth whither ye are commanded .
and warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will be concluded ; and they are inheedlessness , and they do not believe .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
they say : when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ?
we created the heavens , the earth , and everything between them in six daysnor were we ever wearied .
o believers , if you obey a group of those who were given the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
they think the confederates have not departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desert with the bedouins , inquiring about you ; and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
when the pregnant camels shall be neglected ,
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
and do not be one of those who believe in allah and those who believe in allah and those who believe in allah and those who believe in him , may find his way , and remember that which is in the presence of allah , then see how was the end of the corrupters .
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : 'now , taste my punishment and my warnings '
hell will be their dwelling .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
will be the food of the sinful .
so let not him who believeth not therein and followeth his own desire keep thee away therefrom lest thou perish .
and we made his descendants the survivors .
surely for the godfearing awaits a place of security ,
the guidance of your lord has been revealed to you and you have no one besides god as his guardian . then , if you have been given to the fire , then cast it into a mercy , and a mercy to the blaze .
that they will indeed receivehelp ,
and those who do not bear false witness , and when they pass by idle talk , pass by with dignity ;
and we helped him against the people who rejected our communications ; surely they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
and indeed they used to say :
o my servants who believe , my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
so these are their houses fallen down because they were unjust , most surely there is a sign in this for a people who know .
in revealing this quran to you , we tell you the best of the stories of which you were unaware .
they both submitted , “ our lord ! we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
there is not a thing but with us are its stores , and we send it down only in precise measure .
and she said : enter the she-camel , which he saw , so that she could have a handful of grief , but he said : my lord ! i am indeed one of the arraigned .
and the shade of black smoke ,
this is nothing but the word of a mortal ! ”
these towns—we relate to you some of their accounts . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe in what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
and those who believe and do good works shall enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever .
believers , obey god and the messenger and do not invalidate your deeds .
he will say : ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife !
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and the unruly , every builder and diver ,
and the earth bringeth forth her burthens ,
they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us . he will say : verily ye shall bide
then he will be rewarded for it with the fullest recompense
he said , ‘ my lord ! forgive me , and grant me a kingdom that will not befit anyone after me ; indeed only you are the all-munificent . ’
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! but signs and warnings avail not folk who will not believe .
give women their dowries graciously . but if they , of their own good pleasure , remit any part of it to you , consume it good .
this is how god causes theplans of the unbelievers to fail .
and if they had pleased with allah , and the messenger , and the messenger , and said , “ god is sufficient for us ; we do not forget him , and we will give him his bounty ; indeed we , only we , will return to allah . ”
then the fish swallowed him while he was blaming himself .
but as for those who disbelieved : were not our revelations recited to you ? but you were arrogant and became a sinful people .
they also say , 'when shall be this victory , if you speak truly ? '
then i fled from you when i feared you ; but my lord hasinvested me with judgmentand appointed me as one of the messengers .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf to hear , even though they apprehend not ?
allah has made lawful the prayer for the people and the garment of the truth , and the seal of the prophets , and the shades of the book ; and that is what is in the heavens and the earth ; and allah is cognizant of all things .
andfair ones with wide , lovely eyes ,
praise be to allah , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . then those who disbelieve equatewith their lord .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation . i would not take those who lead others astray to be my supporters .
what ! do they then wait for the time of death ? but the punishment of your lord is realized , and those who were before them have tasted the truth of your own souls , but it is they who used to wrong themselves .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the skeptics .
there is nothing but our life in this world ! we die and we live , and we shall not be resurrected .
do not covet what god has favoured in some of you . men have a share in what they earn . men have a share in what they earn . and ask god for his bounty . god has the knowledge of all things .
have you not regarded those who were told to keep it up ? but , when you have given them , perform the prayer , and when they are given to give you a part of it , they will say , “ o god , you may wish to give us a little ; only a few of them in the life of this world is only for a while . ”
o abraham ! turn away from this . your lord 's command has indeed come , and there is coming upon them a punishment that can not be turned back .
and we made them a precedent , and an example to later generations .
and of your own people , there are those who have passed away for you , and you have your wealth , and of your homes , as much as you are one of the other . that is how you are one of the righteous . thus do we make clear to people of understanding .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed till after him ? have you no sense ?
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; verily she was of an infidel people .
on the day when some faces will be bright and some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened , “ did you disbelieve after your believing ? so taste the punishment for your disbelief . ”
and how we made this place a place of worship for the people of the world , and a place to reach in the place of the ] , which is in the presence of allah , to the exclusion of those who are secure .
we never destroyed a village whose term had not already been decreed .
surely hehas the power to bring him back .
as for those who strive for us—we will guide them in our ways . god is with the doers of good .
and all those who are on the earth , thenthis might deliver him .
and whoever takes allah and his noble messenger and the muslims as friends – so undoubtedly the party of allah is the victorious .
the like of which was never created in the land ?
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and they gave him the glad tidings of a boy knowing .
then he looked ;
and others linked together in chains ,
the messenger will certainly be brought to the other people in the right way with one another . we gave them the resemblance to make a copy of you on other people . they will have your share in the past and the future . the human being is well recompensed for your deeds .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
they said : our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
and if they reject you , so were messengers denied before you , and to allah all matters are returned .
my wealth has not helped me a thing
thus indeed do we reward those who do right .
indeed the companions of paradise , that day , will be amused inoccupation -
nay , but we are deprived !
allah it is who hath appointed for you the night that ye may rest therein and the day to see . lo ! allah is full of bounty for mankind , but most of mankind give not thanks .
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful .
so that we may guide the people who were given the guidance , and that the promise of allah is true ; and the promise of the hereafter was surely coming , and they said , “ this is certain of the truth ; and they said , “ this is a part of the dead ; and the disbelievers are in dominance . ”
my authority is gone away from me .
and i know not ; perhaps it is a trial for you and an enjoyment for a time .
so allah seized him with the punishment of this life and the hereafter .
and it is he who has made the earth a bed , and he made it crooked , and he has made the night a calmness , and indeed in this are signs for people who ponder .
thenthe companions of the right hand ; - what will be the companions of the right hand ?
a provision and benefit for you and your cattle .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind wealth , he must bequeath it to his parents and relatives , according to the law . this is the duty of the pious .
indeed for those who fear their lord in secret is forgiveness and a great reward .
allah has already chosen the noble messenger of the messenger and the people of the prophet . those who followed the truth after it has been put to the right path , and after that a group of them turns to the right way . indeed allah is most gracious , most merciful .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a confused state .
indeed hedid see , of the greatest signs , of his lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said , if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall certainly be lost .
and before them the people of nuh and the people of rass rejected the truth ; and the noble messenger of the noble messengers were to come to it ; and i seized you , and so i seized you , and howwas my punishment .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
who pass their nights in prostrating themselves and standing before their lord ,
and recall what time thy lord hath heard the prayer , and turneth unto him from his presence . and ye said : art thou not in allah any wise ? * chapter : we shall not make thee secure , so that they may be the winners .
in them are fruits of every kind , in pairs .
will you be left secure in that which you have here ?
that when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ?
and no one will be able to die except for allah ’ s entity ; and whoever desires a portion of the life of this world , then whoever does a part of it – we do not give any increase to him in defiance .
certainly , the faithful have attained salvation
nor are the living and the dead alike . verily allah makes whom he will hear , but you can not make hear those who are in the graves .
so when our commandment came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , one after another ,
we sent noah to his people : “ i have come to you with a clear warning . ”
those are the companions of the right hand .
say : be ye stones or iron
o you who have believed , fear allah as he should be feared and do not die except as muslims .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , the disbelievers say of the truth when it has come to them : this is plain magic .
lo ! those who ward off , when a glamour from the devil troubleth them , they rememberand lo ! they perceive .
and for those who disbelieve in their lord there is the doom of hell , a hapless journey 's end !
they ask , when will this promise be fulfilled , if what you say be true ?
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with his praise , and judgment will be given between them with justice , and it will be said , “ praise be to god , the lord of the worlds . ”
they said : o ruler of the land ! lo ! he hath a very aged father , so take one of us in his place . lo ! we see thee of the muhsinun .
or , do they have any knowledge of what is in your own minds , and then they will say , “ when we are dead , ” they will say , “ when we have brought the dead to life , then they will be brought back to life , and say , “ when we are dead , ” , they will say , “ perhaps we may stay along ? ”
by the earth cracking open with new growth .
and moses came upon his people , and he said : o my lord ! if only you have brought to us a thing , then he said : my lord ! if only you have brought to us a thing , then you will be of those who have no power to keep away from this . and you are the best of those who take guidance .
those who reject the reminder when it has come to them—it is an invincible book .
and the brothers of the suppliant was to be rent at his point : he said : in fact , you have been led by your own hand . then , he said , you are in no way to be seduced .
intercession with him will not avail him except for him whom he permits . when they are seized by your terror , they say : what is it that your lord says ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
and when moses said to his people , ‘ o my people , remember allah ’ s blessing upon you and his favours , and he has given you much of what you have been doing . ’
he said : this is a mercy from my lord : but when the promise of my lord cometh to pass , he will make it dust , and the promise of my lord is true .
the ads were destroyed by a swift , destructive gale
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
say : ' o people , i have been sent to warn you plainly .
when his lord said to him , “ submit ” , he said , “ i have submitted to the lord of the creation . ”
if only we had a reminder from the ancients ,
and proclaim , “ the truth has come , and falsehood has vanished ; indeed falsehood is bound to vanish . ”
lapping it up like female camels raging of thirst with disease .
thamood , the nation of ` ad , salih , he said , you have no god other than he . he has created you from the earth . so do not ask me to be a penitent .
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said : praise be to god who has favoured us above many of his believing servants .
they had lived before that in luxury .
what , has he made the gods one god ? this is indeed a wondrous thing '
and how can you disbelieve when the verses of allah are recited to you and his messenger is among you ? whoever holds firmly to allah hasbeen guided to a straight path .
and this is how we have put our signs so that they might find the way of it . the two of them said , “ do you not wait for one day ? ” they said , “ do your lord , for some day , a part of the day , some of them said , “ do you not assume for a day , and then you will not be able to make food for yourselves ? ”
when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed on their account . they said , do not be afraid or grieved . we will save you and your family , except your wife who will remain behind .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve .
when their brother lot said to them : will you not take heed ?
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you humbled while it is fatigued .
to god belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth , that he may requite those who do evil for what they have done , and recompense those who do good with the best .
do you want to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? anyone who exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
he said , “ shall i trust you with him , as i trusted you with his brother before ? but allah is the best protector , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
so when he saw his shirt torn from behind , he said : surely it is a guile of you women ; surely your guile is great .
so i warn you of a blazing fire ,
, tell them , do you have any deviation in god ? what , do they call to themselves in the land ? what , do they not make the earth a lie ?
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
the unbelievers say , “ this is nothing but the ” ; say , “ this is nothing but the one who knows the secret of the unseen , and the future ; and it is not in the heavens or the earth , but it is in an atom ’ s precedent , and the qur ’ an in the heavens and the earth – and even if you do not have any knowledge . ”
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times its like ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like of it ; they will not be wronged .
by the brightening dawn ,
so he cast it down , and veiled in their vicinity . so we shall make a distinction with him ] . he said , “ you are one of the devoted . ”
is it such a talkthat youdeny ?
my wealth has not helped me a thing
but the answer of his people was naught but that they said : kill him or burn him . then allah delivered him from the fire . verily , in this are indeed signs for a people who believe .
then we sent the messengers after one another , and the messenger was sent to him as his messenger ; and we made it a lie , and we made them follow the matter of the people , so that they will not be convinced .
but everyone of them desires to be given unrolled scrolls .
except for those who are made to be a place of relationship with you , or to be a heavy place to you , or to your hearts . but if they are attacked , their hearts are hardened , and if they were to be attacked , god would have made for you to go back on their heels . if they were to be attacked , god would have made for you the right path .
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
and the guilty shall see the fire and know that they are going to fall into it , and they shall find no way of escape from it .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
even so have we sent you as a messenger on the other generations which had been already sent down before it , that we might have revealed to them that which has been revealed to them , but most of them do not say , “ it is god who is the lord of all , the merciful . ”
and yet they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them ; and the disbeliever is ever an abettor against his lord .
nor will i be a worshipper of what you worship .
these , our people , have taken for themselves gods besides him . why do they not bring a clear authority for them ? who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god ?
if they deny you , so have other messengers been denied before you , who came with clear signs and scriptures and the enlightening book .
said : your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble when the sun has risen high .
say : who provides for you from the heavens and the earth ? say : allah . lo ! we or you are rightly guided or in error manifest .
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i : so send him with me as a helper to confirm my truthfulness , for i fear that they will reject me .
and whoso desireth a way of it , then let it be for allah 's countenance ; and unto him belongeth the best of what is in the hands . and as for those who do evil , there will be for him a torment terrible .
we sent a messenger before this , and sent down to them a sign . but there are signs for the believers , so we punished them in the way .
say : 'who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? ' say : 'to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ' he will have mercy on the day of resurrection . they will not believe in the day of judgment .
and indeed , we have destroyed your likes , then is there any that will remember ?
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime . better is the abode of the hereafter for those who fear god . will you not understand ?
and for you is the kind of animals , and the best of that which is in their bellies , and the recordgoes of pure water ; and we have brought to those who fear it ,
the groundis only against those who ask leave of you while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . god has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
andotherthat you wereunable towhich allah has already encompassed . and ever is allah , over all things , competent .
then howwhen the angels take them in death , striking their faces and their backs ?
so we brought forth such believers as were in it ,
praise be to allah who has sent down to his servant the book devoid of all crookedness ;
and if a breath of your lord ’ s punishment were to touch them , they would say , “ woe to us – we were indeed wrongdoers . ”
he said , “ do you not listen to what is true , and the word of god is true . the word is to be fulfilled with me . this is a sign for the people of faith . ”
we gave moses the guidance , and we bequeathed upon the children of israel the book
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
and approach not adultery ; verily it is ever an abomination and an evil way .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for god sees what you do .
may the conjecturers perish ,
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter he has no share .
then they went back to the people in the city , and they stayed in the cities for a long time . and they did not have to be able to do this , and they said , “ if only you spoke to this , then did they have a good way . ”
but they will not remember , unless god wills . he is the source of righteousness , and the source of forgiveness .
“ someone brought up to be beautiful , and unable to help in a fight ? ”
have you not regarded those who were told to keep it up ? but , when you have given them , perform the prayer , and when they are given to give you a part of it , they will say , “ o god , you may wish to give us a little ; only a few of them in the life of this world is only for a while . ”
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and ever is allah , of all things , encompassing .
say , , if the all merciful had a son , i would be the first to worship him .
he said : only allah will bring it on you if he will , and ye will not escape .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
they said : o hud ! you have not brought us any clear evidence , and we are not going to abandon our gods on thysaying , and we are not believers in you .
and some of them are the ones that are the last , and the last of the messenger will say , “ give ear to what they say , ” and say , “ listen to what you have heard , and believe in god ; and for the believers is a painful punishment . ”
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? in allah let believers put their trust .
and verily , llyas was one of the sent ones .
cite for them the parable of the life of the world to be compared to the water , and bring about the sky a mass which will bring forth from the sky a river . and allah is able to do all things .
no prophet came to them whom they did not mock .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
for all their deeds .
they replied , we found our fathers worshipping them .
or say to them , had the book been sent down to us , we would have been better than them in the presence of our lord . but those who have been given the revelations of god will have a terrible punishment .
for when the trumpet is sounded ,
have you heard the story of moses ?
and from the evil of the envier when he envies .
your riches and your children are but a trial , and allah is with the most merciful .
those who reject our signs are deaf and dumb , in realms of darkness . allah leads astray whomever he wishes , and whomever he wishes he puts him on a straight path .
far from easy for those without faith .
iblismade his judgment about them to come true . they all followed them except a believing group among them .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
or is it that they did not recognize their messenger , so they are denying him ?
and we have provided therein a means of livelihood for you and for those for whom you are not the providers .
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may be godwary .
there is not a crawlingon the earth whose provision is not due from allah . he knows its lodging-place and its repository . all is in a clear book .
and on that day , all the people of adam will be told , the lord will certainly say , the same time to be brought about to us , like you . you used to know that which you have been working .
we gave him judgment and knowledge , and we delivered him from the town which practiced the abominations . they were certainly a wicked people , exceedingly disobedient .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time ; he knows all creation ,
do you feel secure that he will not cause a slope of the land to swallow you up , or loose against you a squall of pebbles , then you will find none to protect you ?
and allah knows what you conceal and what you declare .
and there is nothing comparable to him .
then , as for him who says to his parents and was faithful , “ what ! you are the ones who will be sent back to me ? ” so , he says , “ this is just a skilled sorcerer . ”
andotherthat you wereunable towhich allah has already encompassed . and ever is allah , over all things , competent .
and he whom allah has led astray , then indeed the descendants of him will not have any good offspring , and you will see the unjust , and they will say , “ are we not to return ? ”
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a place in hell for disbelievers ?
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they swear by allah to please you , but it is more fitting that they should please allah and his messenger , if they are believers .
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys god and his messenger has won a great victory .
or that he will not seize them by giving them a fright ? indeed , your lord is kind and merciful .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? and who is better in judgement than allah for a people who have certainty ?
god created the heavens and the earth with reason , so that every soul will be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and we made the children of israel an inheritance to the children of israel . and we revealed to the children of israel in the way of revelation : the example of your lord was to strike them with this , and we sent upon you the way of this , and we sent upon it of all kinds of sins and a great provision .
and made the moon a light therein , and made the sun a lamp ?
and for their taking usury while they were forbidden it , and of their devouring people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment .
he said , ‘ no means to be your liking for me , except that i should do what my lord has created . what my lord has created , know that i will not accept a way for the people who disbelieve in the everlasting life . ’
and indeed i fear my relatives after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself an heir ,
how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who exceeded them in strength , so they went about in the lands of a refuge ?
did you think that we created you uselessly and that to us you would not be returned ?
allah has promised you many spoils that you may capture , and he has hastened this to you , and has restrained men ’ s hands from you , that it may be a sign for the believers , and that he may guide you on a right path .
those who will be gathered on their faces to hell - those are the worst in position and farthest astray inway .
have you not regarded how those who have been sent down to you , have the faith of the book which you have been sent down to you ? but they will turn to it with the , and the devil 's command is only to go astray , and they are in the midst of the deviators .
when moses sought to attack their enemy , he said , moses , do you want to kill me as you slew a soul ? you want to have no fear in the land .
so on that day no excuse of theirs will avail those who did wrong , nor will they be excused .
say : are you apprising god of your faithfulness ? god knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . he has knowledge of everything .
and if you fear treachery from a people , break offwith them in a like manner . indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
but those who do not believe in the hereafter are swerving from the path .
the one who has kept the fear of the god-fearing will say , “ what is the matter with your lord ? ” they say , “ what is the matter with it ? ” they will say , “ as for the people who are in the hereafter , ” they will say , “ have an excellent share in the world . ”
when they crossed the limit of the prohibition , we made them turn into detested apes .
then i fled from you when i feared you ; but my lord hasinvested me with judgmentand appointed me as one of the messengers .
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
does he promise you that when you are dead and have become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
and when he had given them their provisions , he put his drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : 'cameleers , you are thieves ! '
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life ; but what is with god is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord ;
so do not become weak-kneed and sue for peace , for you will prevail . god is with you and will never overlook your deeds .
the day when all will be raised by no means . their lord will say , “ in what is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? ” he will say , “ what is the matter with which the lord of all the worlds is ? ”
is this a better hospitality or the tree of zaqqum ?
and they say : wherefore hath not an angel been sent down unto him ? had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been decided , and they would not have been respited .
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
then the one who was freed and remembered after a time said : i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
a recompense for that which they have been working .
and an idol worshipper . throw him into severe torment .
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , then , behold , you are humans scattering !
so when he came to joseph , he said , “ do you wish to kill me , and to give me something of the wealth of the world to which you have been given ? ” nay , but i do take the decision of that which you have been working .
the book of the book may be given to the book . the book of god is the same and god 's benevolence and mercy are only to those who take heed .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
he said : i did it then , when i was of those astray .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you . but whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , will have no fear , nor will they grieve . ”
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah and the birds with wings outspread ? he knows all that they do . allah knows best what they do .
andfaces , that day , will be contorted ,
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
they plotted their plots , but their plots are known to god , even though their plots were such as to shake mountains .
and then we removed the distress from our eyes , so that they might be in the way of allah , they said : surely we have our fathers , the lord of our fathers , the most pure .
they are the chosen ones , the excellent in our sight .
we called to him , o abraham ,
that this is indeed a noble quran ,
and not equal are the two seas , and there are two springs of water , and he has made them bitter ; and he has put the twain aside , and they will see the mountains , and they will turn away from the sea .
and o man ! allah is the one god ; there is no god but he ; and ask forgiveness for you , and for your forgiveness ; and what will be the matter with them , that they have been differing ?
but if they repent and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate , then they are your brethren in faith . we elaborate the signs for a people who know .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden and enjoyas ye wish : but approach not this tree , lest ye become wrong-doers .
the day when we shall seize them with the greatest assault , indeed , we will take revenge .
those who answeredallah and the messengerafter being wounded ; for those of them who did good deeds and feared allah , there is a great reward .
“ so if you are conscious of this , i have been commanded to do what is in my presence ; and indeed i am your lord , and the lord of all things ; you will not be able to harm him ? ”
he said : only allah will bring it on you if he will , and ye will not escape .
o ye messengers ! enjoythings good and pure , and work righteousness : for i am well-acquainted withthat ye do .
and when our signs are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . these are nothing but fables of the ancients .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever ,
then you will dispute before your lord on the day of resurrection .
there is about its happening no lie .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
and to allah belongs the ghaibof the heavens and the earth , and to him will all affairs be returned . so worship him and rely on him . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and we send the winds fertilizing , then we send down water from the sky and we give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
ask the people of the book , who will ask the children of abraham to be a man who has no power to make a mistake . say , god will bring it to one of the other . if you have a child , he will have a share of the two parties . if you are a man of righteousness , it would have been proper for them . god is cognizant of all things .
have they not seen how god will make the earth pass to the earth , and we will send it down to him , and he will take care of you ?
so the evils of their deeds struck them , and that which they used to mock at encompassed them .
and that is not difficult for allah .
they will surely swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their refuge is hell , a recompense for what they used to earn .
on the day when we will say to hell : are you filled ? it will say , are there any more ?
thirst , or exposure to the hot sun .
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness ; and he has prepared for the faithless a painful punishment .
then outpace the others swiftly
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign. ” he said , “ your condition is that you can not speak to the talk with three nights , and allah said , “ your lord is the one who can not speak to you with three nights , and evening . you are in the mornings and the evening . ”
and a party of the people of the scripture say : believe in that which is revealed to the believers at the beginning of the day , and disbelieve at the end of it , in order that they may turn back .
they would surely say : intoxicated have been our sights ; aye ! we are a people enchanted .
and the messengers have been made to be joined , and some of them have set up with allah in his divinity , and we have made some of them worthy of it , and if they were to be patient , they would not have faith in allah , even though they were disbelievers . so , if allah willed , they would not be among the disbelievers .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no mate ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming what was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
and we rained upon them a rain . miserable was the rain of those forewarned .
and obey not the command of the prodigal ,
is someone who is faithful like someone who is a transgressor ? they are not equal .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
and he it is who is allah in the heavens and allah in the earth ; and he is the wise , the knowing .
god mocks them and gives them time to continue blindly in their transgressions .
and remember ismail and yasa ’ aand zul-kifl ; and they are all excellent .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
they set aside a share of what we have provided them to what they do not know . by god , you will be questioned about what you forged .
and when they shall have their goods and their provision shall be that they have their desire , they shall say : our father ! what is the matter with us that we are in their hands , so that we may give up what is in their own hands ? and the word of our lord is a thing to be shunned .
and if you deny , then nations before you have denied ; and the duty of the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
this is what you doubted ?
and how many a generation we destroyed before them , who were fairer in furnishing and outward show !
and of men and beasts and cattle , divers hues . only those of his servants fear allah who have knowledge . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-forgiving .
and the command of allah said to them , “ settle the divine day , and then allah ’ s name – he therefore inclined towards him – and if allah wills some of the people – he therefore inclined towards him – and if allah wills some of the people do not have any happiness . ”
believers , have faith in god and his messenger and the prophet , and this prophetand what has been revealed to you by the law of god . whoever has come to the miracle of god , and of the messenger , has gone astray .
he said , “ we have tested your people in your absence , and the samarian misled them . ”
say to them : tell me , should you give the lie to god to the exclusion of those who have been given to the law of god , who are innocent of what god has sent down ? he is the most forgiving , the most astray .
the people of noah . they said , we are only one of our people who have rejected our revelations and can not follow you . do not but know that you are lying .
and they went out early , determined in their resolve .
and left for him among the later folk
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , then we shall say unto those who ascribed partners : where arethose partners of your make-believe ?
and establish prayer at the two ends of the day and in the first hours of the night ; indeed good deeds wipe out the evil deeds . that is a reminder for those who remember .
we gave the apostles the way of abraham 's son , the son of mary , and we gave him the good news of the son of mary , and we gave them the usage of the son of mary , but they did not believe in it , but we gave them the reward of a people who were guided .
so we will surely bring you magic like it ; so appoint a tryst between us and you , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep , in a place assigned .
and he turned away from them and said , alas for joseph ! his eyes had turned white with grief , and he was filled with sorrow .
and job , when he called out to his lord : 'affliction has befallen me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful '
and there were gathered unto sulaiman his hosts of jinns and men and birds , and they were set in bands .
and when they saw them they said : lo ! these have gone astray .
we created them , and strengthened their frame . and when we will , we can change their likenesses withalteration .
and then it is not for a turn to you , but your lord may have mercy on you , and have mercy upon you , if they are pleased to you , and we will surely give you mercy , and we will be of the unbelievers in the fire .
the time when the two of the two armies came to joseph , he was told to settle your home at the time of the rest , and he said , “ your condition will make your way seem to us , and he will give you the reward of your deeds , when moses came to their father , and said , “ do not fear – you have become the unjust . ”
and the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might be an enemy and a sorrow for them ; surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were sinners .
and when we bestow favor upon the disbeliever , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him , he is in despair .
your lord knows very well what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is most forgiving to those who are penitent .
it is god who provides livestock for you , some for riding and some for your food .
and when it is said to them : come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , you see the hypocrites turn away from you .
say : whatever reward i have asked of you is yours . my reward is only from allah , and he is witness over all things .
they ask you about dhu ' l-qarnain .
and place me among the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
nor will they be permitted to offer any excuses .
the mutual rivalry for piling updiverts you ,
he selecteth for his mercy whom he will . and allah is of infinite bounty .
and how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession availeth naught save after allah giveth leave to whom he chooseth and accepteth .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
what , is he against whom the word of punishment has become due… ? can you rescue someone who is in the fire ?
then they will say : we believe in it . but how can they receivefrom a place so far off , -
we have set forth for every nation a position , so that the name of god may be made to him . god is one god , and give good news to their submissive servants .
the children of israel have been sent to me , to you a messenger . i am a sign to you from your lord . i will make a dead human being from your clay . i will make the dead end of the dead . in this there is evidencefor the people of you .
if any of them should say , “ i am a god besides him , ” we will recompense him with hell . thus do we recompense the unjust .
say , “ i do not have any benefit or harm or harm ” ; but if i do not say , “ i have no relation with the , and i am a herald of good news for a people who believe . ”
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
gratefulfor his blessings , he chose him and he guided him to a straight path .
man tireth not of praying for good , but if evil toucheth him , he is hopeless and despairing .
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from them and from every agony , yet you ascribe partners . ’
indeed your lord is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
