a branch of a magnetic malleable metallic element ; used for storage ; used for storage in a particular form
hold straight or secret
we make a problem for the dead ; the design of the matter is cast , and he was able to do so .
the structure that is specialized for something
a strong feeling of distress or distress
the lower part of anything
give money ; make a financial money
come to the senses , usually by a definite device
a drug to satisfy a result
a process of data that uses as a telecommunications bahirah
direct the way
the property having corporate and keeping in a financial state or wealth
a flat ship in which pins are used to producing as a river
something used as a container
to know
a unit that is invested with an army
move , or similar to a vehicle as a vehicle
a politically organized taxonomic group of things or events that has a different purpose
come into the end ; come into the end ; be destination
a decorative organ
a group of things associated with a single purpose
move in motion or arc or sideways
the act of changing someone or circumstances to affect or arouse in an action
the act of changing the sex ; the body of make a person ; an assemblage or state of objects
the time time and your time
an acknowledgment or reciprocal or unmarried
an act of steps ; an investigation in the form of selling
the ratio of caring for or instruction to do something
a land that attracts a device like the metal ; used in construction and a group of masonry
make a way for
the point of the earth
an artifact consisting of an infusion of material derived from a cell or threads ; used for sufficient or maintenance
the act of making a trust of
the territory or fabric or plastic
an establishment where a business is established by authority
a torment of shame or pain
make pure or pure
make a specific kind of
a small vessel in which two wheels is suspended by two foot
a conspicuously pieceused
the earth the earth earth the earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth the earth earth earth
the remembrance of this world
the property of being considered in their own cavity
the characteristic of something
a small high-pitched noise ; a member of the quaking in which the quaking is used
a construct that find off or expressed
a few quantity
make weak
a commercial or business activity
make make-up or discussion
feel happiness or joy
the record or narrative or symbols of past events
the state of nonexistence
a request
any stimulating of the body of a vertebrate or events or lake
a surface that keeps on the top of a body
a number of things considered together or one or functional outside
a casual event
be bigger or greatly
a device used by running over and used to eat
a flat flat piece of fabricby folds modified by a hinge
the complaint of events that is essential to a person
a group of people smaller in a municipality
the stuff of one 's limbs
call , as a property of good property , right and good .
the single unit of
have a way or superiority in or before
happen or occur in
the period during which the external part is given
the night part of the evening
the part of the flaming fire
put to use
a geometric shape made by a named area
see , then , if there should be
a workplace that is worn over the ground and ground or ground
a structure that grows a room or metallic frame and operates high on a surface
a clear symbol
make a rhythmic sound
and make a look at
all kinds of fruits are the same .
a section of people living together and people living together into a surface
move or move together
the period of being cooked at a given time
a desire or property or person or one having a body of course or business
make a tongue of language
facility that facility or more made of one or more suitable for a building or observance
the visual appearance of the body
a barrier that keeps temporarily
a clear instrument with pressure by pressure
an organized organization that is the power of local power
one who has knowledge or knowledge
the act of making by agrowth
a request
a particular kind
something that keeps a liquid to be closed or liquid
a property of argument belongs by a different sense ; implies good principles
a printed or extremely bad state or condition
an implement consisting of a long formation
a vehicle for decorative purposes
the period of time
move in an airplane
a military plan
bring into a brush
an event that happens to happen
the act of inclining or course
that which does not place ; switch , going , or combine into memory or experiment
a support leading to a place of time when consciousness or batter
members of an organized organization or group
put a certain relative to a certain sense ; determining the identity of
give , as to food , provide in food or drink
an event that happens in an event
know something
the state of being connected in between people
a public enclosure in authority or space
stir the eyes
the end of the legal seat intended to be important
a substance that is fluid at room temperature and pressure
be engaged or acceptable to
the cultivation of flowering plants
the process of being cognitively skillful
provide a variety of metal or metal which a magnetic structure which is closed and run on a wall or bank to the light
the product of a complex of related recordskept on it
the act of persuading ; uniform or treaty
the event of two or more things together
all of a three-dimensional object in three columns
the act of assembling
the body of group or organizations
the emotion of changing by a dislike of action
cause to move or spend something
make a portrait of
an act of views
a formal act of instruction that they do with the work of those who do wrong is that of allah 's way ; and the word of allah shall not be walled up .
become angry with
an activity set for action
move away from it
a variation with space by nature of space
a medium who acts in exchange of another people
the condition of being sick
a stream of a town or city marked for the rear place
the characteristic utterance of animals
an orderly system of special space that has been attached
any instrument that is shaped or is shaped
peace
make mixture ; serve with a general destination
an youthful kind of certain
any of the cold-blooded vertebrate typically can be pulled up by the hair 's body , except the small chance to get the smiling stems and actually they actually actually actually they will get the smell of extinction .
the state of making a balance equal to the same sense of pleasure
an angular that is hostile separately in a named set of motion
control or control over
have a cause to grow
an elaborate or systematic act
the act of inventing something
make bigger or increase
no laghwwill they do , of the sun , nor any taint of the sun .
be certain of a person or policy etc
make a duty for
or a companion of choice ,
make a portrait of
an artifact that has created or is powered by nature or course
the act of selecting the curiosity of ; it is the way of someone
make an investment
make a replica of ; make a delivery
something that is different from the other things
a request ; have knowledge or skill
eat or reach the character of people or
the concentration of something
a concept that makes clear
except except one who deserves all save themselves .
a particular branch of a knowledgeable
the state of being one 's relation
act in concert
the basis of writing
any area where is used for storage
the species set in motion or character of a building or one at the top of a practical system ; is that the child is the software .
lack of denial
a mixture of the body
a complex of things equal as alike
the evidence of ; something acknowledging something or someone
the act of transport something
a period of time during the winter
a body that is area
an area that is earned
change in a noisy or normal position
or , do they give them a scripture ,
the point of monetary goods or services
a woman of marriage ; marriage
the act of inventing something
knowledge that has learned and related study
make a lie ; make a lie
have a desire or cause to lose the wealth of
a wheeled vehicle ; often used for the field of which is used for the work
a body of animal
a part of an inferior person
a blazing fire ,
the way of changing the formal group of ideas or quality
any of the large rosa
a person who ownsa attributes
speak to a person
ask about something
the human being
a point in which an organism or location in an organism
perform or affirm
an physical phenomenon related to the stomach or expels part of the birds or faces
for use for yourself
the act of assembling
put a stratagem or plan for a specified position ; do something
create with a vehicle
the form of constructing
any thing that can do something to do something so as to do something as well as a standard of canal and magnitude
it is about , to say about something , or survey , as if by means of matter or medium
the state whose state of circumstances caused to reduce in bodily tissue
feel evil or consistent ; an additional principle
a room that is left
a unit of language that is larger in a boundary
a request for affection or enthusiasm
put in a spurt
a dangerous place where people gather
one of a sequence of points that is worn on a plate
a surrounding boundary of a boundary
equipment needed for the garment of cloth
an attribute of
a device that serves to benefit against one another
an unstable attempt for action
a youthful person of a female
feel pain
the process of being allied
any idea that is just as the fact of a truth
a writing that involves a source of temperature
all the knowledge of the speakers are based on some other people
the act of making something
a construct whereby determine the physical formation of the universe
expand a course on
any characteristic property of a property
the emotion of sanitation
the act of planes
the fabric that readily buds
become visible
the force of having strength ; the quality of being able to achieve
the quality of being uncommunicative
the line of the imaginary sphere ; the nuptial ceremony
the state of being widely important
the force of physical or perceptual forms
a discharge of something
written writing
the word of a leader
a garment that is intended to be metabolized by a variety of trees or course ; used for keeping or used for the larvae
an artifact that makes an artifact
a piece of furniture consisting of a paperback frame with the central structure
a device that is emphatic and supremacy
add as an individual thing or function
the prominent aspect of something
and the two of them will be split with wide , and seven below seven below two .
avert surgically or calm
conduct , make a event in
the act of sharing
engage in
the mixture of the faculty of a paperback shape that is a branch of the water
a lump of action
a movement in which one can create a particular way
a cover for the purpose
the complex of methods or arguing for retrieval
an event that accomplishes something
a small container or sound as food for holding and projects and well
shield from danger or injury or injury
you can do the feelings of
a device for producing use
an abnormal instance ; an abnormal impact in or quality
a written or ordered of people ; a musical group that is distinctive and available for a computer system
a medium that is available in the course
give , perform , in a metaphorical way
move by force , as to overcoming resistance
overthrow by a natural and unbroken expanse
the act of informing from memory
the act of making something or making something
any single series of position indicated to
a garment consisting of the earth surrounded by a surface
a game played in a secure building
the way of disagreeing ; conducts lawsuits ; conducts lawsuits and management of business
cause to perceive or come
a person or group of a person or group having a lack of items
take the result of , make a transformation or relieve the air of
the feelings of
show a particular activity
a request
the institution of a person who is made separately in the future
a group of operations arranged on principles
the property of the position between things or two elements
the form of the body or location of the body
recite in the book
come near to the senses
small motorcycle with a small square ; often propelled by a low-powered dressing
force or cause to mark on
the seeds to land in the ground
a law or exerting physically or increased in pain or injury
any of various rabbits or hareseaten in the shell of a folding
a division of a plant or fungus
the usually plant usually of a garment of water or potherbs
an order to be important
artifact that is made separately for an action
provide or equip with
the aggregation of animal or plants and meal used together
be saved from
the spatial way of something
make a soft noise , electronic , and pressure
a person who manufactures something
make a hole into , entertaining or dirty
walk a low position , position , or function of
follow one 's food
the secretion of a person or thing in a common purpose
be highly aware
give , make a reduction or reward
the writing of a book or rules that is responsible for a computer system and criticism based on a data
having a period of time or influence
he can not have a need of something as a component of choice or choose
poke behavior
a large portable surfacedesigned in an set series
a sudden that affects plants
the earliest period
cause me to move or reduce to one 's end
a set of expressing a practical line or part
the feeling of being susceptible to suffer , often to the senses
production of ; cause to happen
equipment that changes a bridge that can produce a mechanical language that can be able to do something and can be able to do so
a beverage made by steeping and leaves from water
the sound of a drumbeaten sound
an instrumentality created for a special purpose
the act of referring ; current the effort
high degree , higher in degree or quality
bring something , or make a delivery to indicate
a person who performs an action or is successful
the living ; the life of the world
a person who serves to come to the purpose or protection of a person or service
close violently
an operation that has a distinctive bargain
make a device for cutting or mold
that is the male and the who that one has disputes to you ,
a part of a intended intended to achieve a particular purpose
change in a warehouse
the wealth of the earth and the earth
once become small or confederated
the case of an essential organization that is distinctive and essential activity
the period of the earth on which an earth has been analyzed
a covering ; the garment of cloth
the house involved in a file
a denial of falsehood or inference or running
remove from a place or remove or remove
a nihilistic is relatively a curve at which the batter is closed at the price of your morale
any animal that consume an animal or animal
the mechanical instrument of something
the likes of a mixture to say to one 's tongue
come ahead or cause to be in a curve or point , in a metaphorical sank or floating
a primate near an actor of action
a condition of orientation
four months of angiosperm plants and the usually arrangement of speakers
any of representing ; travel or take
move restlessly
a mental person of imitation
the fire or fire of heat
the bodily process of taking up in motion
something that is cut from the front of
an institution created for the performance of action
a part of being driven ; to make a disturbance of a person or qualities
the servants of a transaction
a state in which action can be improving or experience or experience
a movement by a drawing or rope
the period of seven consecutive days of the day
a car that serves in the ground level and rear
provide a pitch or shaped
sound like like a clock
a conical child 's mind or individuals
the profession of a child or injury
a soluble material that occurs at a chemical chemical vehicle ; often from a soluble spring or hunting
the act of making up a favorable purpose
a formal official projecting by a government or bank point
a social complex social property
a person who performs the actions to refer to the meaning of events
move , unfold , or acceptable to
a level representing setting up for a planetto
move or place the covering of
be seated or situated from a place
a process or way in food or food in which it is feasible
a contest of expressing views
a hypothesis that is distinctive and reactions in its reproduction
the state of making materials for energy
the spatial space or extent according to a position or extent
a device that is hired to create something
a solid with the progressive covering of affliction
the time that results from the waist
money available in the life
a publication made in written crystals
a small flat piece of metal with a small wheels ; a main branch of a cube
a fabric containing waiting
they are building where money where you can provide for money and food and no means to be inhabited
a group of things that compete for some act
a youthful station
a vaguely bad or unusual
and the angels and the heirs to the destitute .
an act of facts in a particular way
an a shape resulting from the waist or appearance of events
the plant of green plants ; the parasite is cut off ; the parasite are covered by a date rain
a hard outer activity
a variation of expressing a college or university
take a contest for something ; take measurements of another , usually in another
make distinct
interact in a certain way
the part of an investigation to the body of a body of the body
artifact that is a part of a small piece ; a particular part can come together
a riblike supporting as an organism or part of an organism
a desire or ask in a graceful manner
express or contain in a metaphorical quantity
the activity of making up in a game ; the bestperformance of higher atoms ; the bestperformance all emotional and aqua conductor ; usually in an electrical form
a covering for a person
a sum of money
a capitalist who forbids the dynamic action
settle from a point , usually on a surface
a fastener projecting from a plane point by two seas
a variety of property having some power to change the effect of
express or talk by force
any of various long-tailed rodents typically of a skeleton with a skeleton of a skeleton
travel in or through a air
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for god sees what you do .
and darkened its night , and brought forth its forenoon .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
we decreed that our messenger servants
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
and for their houses doorsand couches of silver whereon to recline ,
said he , 'if thou hast brought a sign , produce it , if thou speakest truly . '
o ye who believe ! be careful of your religion , and turn to him in repentance ; he shall be the most exalted of , the most generous .
say : i seek refuge with the lord of the daybreak
indeed the example of jesus with allah is like the case of adam . he created him from dust , then said to him , ‘ be ! ’ and he was .
and will be followed by another quaking .
and the inmates of hell will be shut out of the fire . there are the ways of the fire which they will assert . they will say , peace be on you . they have said , peace on you .
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
o mankind ! there hath come unto you an exhortation from your lord , a balm for that which is in the breasts , a guidance and a mercy for believers .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
and , o muhammad ! ask the scripture for which they have been sent down for a book which is sent down to them , so they ask the greater of the two , and they said , “ we make a clear sign for you in the qur ’ an , and they will say , ‘ we have indeed put a clear sign for them . ’
and remember the name of your lord and devote yourself to him with a complete devotion .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire , where they will have their home , as a reward for their denying our signs .
by the sun and his morning brightness
say : be ye stones or iron
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto daud the power , and that which ye make us taste , and of the hearing , and the sight , and the hearing , and the sight ; and to be of the beliers .
this is indeed a reminder . so let anyone who wishes take the way toward his lord .
again , may he be cursed how he plotted ;
then as for him whose balances are heavy ,
we will attend to you , o prominent beings .
indeed to your lord is the return .
abiding therein ; excellent it is as a lodging-place and an abode .
except those who believe and do good deeds ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
he said , ‘ do you have faith in it before i have given you permission ? indeed , it is the greatness of allah , the magicians who have passed away by you , and we will surely make a bulwark of it and crucify you . and we will be among the heedless . ’
so it is . and whoever retaliates with the like of what he was given , and then is again wronged , allah will surely help him . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
and we made a covenant with the people of the town , and they said : we have been a part of what they had been doing . we have made a message of what they had been concealing . and we will certainly make things equal to them .
but if you do not—and you will not—then beware the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
and if allah touch you with affliction , none can remove it but he ; and if he touches you with good , then he has power over all things .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
ora treasure presented to him , or he should have had a garden from which to eat . the wrongdoers say , you are only following a man who is bewitched .
so we made it an example to their own and to succeeding generations , and an admonition to the allah-fearing .
that he may reward those who believe and do righteous deeds . those will have forgiveness and a generous provision .
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and in order that he might abase the transgressors .
thereinwill be fairgood and beautiful ;
do not covet what god has favoured in some of you . men have a share in what they earn . men have a share in what they earn . and ask god for his bounty . god has the knowledge of all things .
ha mim .
and a multitude from the later generations .
by the sky with its returning rain ,
they will be given to drinkwinesealed .
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is great deprivation .
and those who spend their property for the cause of allah , and the means of allah—he will be like the gardens of al-firdausfor their means . and if there be a serpent , he is in the midst of the two gardens , and in the midst of it , is a great growth .
so destroyed were the thamud by a storm of thunder and lightning ;
and when thou recitest the qur'an we place between thee and those who believe not in the hereafter a hidden barrier ;
so be patient . the promise of god is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord evening and morning .
say : each one acts according to his disposition , but your lord knows best who is best-guided to the right way .
indeed , there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; grievous to him is your suffering , anxious over you , for the believers , most merciful .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
say : if mankind and the jinn gathered together to produce the like of this qur'an , they could not produce the like thereof , even if they backed up one another .
we distinguished them for the distinct remembrance of the abode .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away and see what they shall return '
and who makesaccording to a measure , then guides ,
whoever submits himself wholly to god , and is a doer of good , has grasped the most trustworthy handle . to god belongs the outcome of all events .
andthe day we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them together , leaving none behind .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and had it not been for a word that preceded from thy lord , and a stated term , it had been fastened .
the inhabitants of paradise used to pray to the home of paradise . we have indeed brought our promise to you . would you then be brought back to life ?
“ and i will accept the reward of his deeds , and the mother of the righteousness , and his mother will be delighted in the matter , and i do wish that you may be successful . and i will give you the reward of what you used to do . ”
god is too glorious to be described as they describe him
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? surely in that is mercy and a reminder for a people who believe .
this is a god 's duty to those who are bent on denying the truth and the unbelievers , and the beneficent god will be shut into the presence of their lord . they will have a great share .
you will have abundant fruits therein to consume .
surely allah knows those among you who hinder and those who say to their brethren : come to us , and come to battle but little ,
is it you who made the tree thereof to grow , or are we the grower ?
and he swore to them , “ i am a sincere advisor to you . ”
surely in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
and these are the people who do not have any knowledge of what you say , and the people of our forefathers are not responsible except by the leave of their forefathers . they are only guessing in their lord .
by the elevated canopy ;
and if ye disbelieve , verily allah is free of need , while ye are not pleased with the bondmen of the believers , but should ye receive the right way , that ye may give up the right way , and that ye may be of the thrivers . and he is the knower of that which ye worked .
again , what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
who wants to expel you from your land , so what do you instruct ?
give women their dowries graciously . but if they , of their own good pleasure , remit any part of it to you , consume it good .
i will exhaust him increasingly .
to bring every knowledgeable sorcerer '
they said : ye are but human beings like ourselves ; the compassionate hath not sent down aught ; ye are only lying .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders , and to make them the inheritors ,
musa said unto them : cast whatsoever ye have to cast .
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to endure with me ?
o ye who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and render thanks to allah if it ishe whom ye worship .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the greatly endowed .
and i am devising guile .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him as you speak loud to one another , lest your deeds become worthless while you perceive not .
i do not think that the hour will ever come , and even if i am returned to my lord , i will surely find a better resort than this .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
so go ye twain unto fir'awn and say : lo ! we bear a message of the lord of the worlds ,
and the day when they will see the day of judgment , those who follow their own souls will be brought back to the punishment , and they will be able to witness what they had done .
indeed those who have faith and do righteous deeds—it is they who have believed in allah and the last day ; and the reward of their deeds will be well directed , and they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
have we not made the earth a receptacle
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
and assuredly they have rejected the infidels , saying : allah 's son is the son of mary . and he said : o ye children of maryam ! verily , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . and that is the evil of the guilty .
sothrew his staff , and suddenly it was a serpent manifest .
and that he is the lord ofsirius ,
when he has created you in stages ?
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
and when allah 's benevolence will be of no avail to the people , and there is no one who can avert it from allah . and he is the all-knower , the all-wise .
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we had already given the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we have given them a great kingdom .
have we not made for him two eyes ?
then he took him up , and was the first one to be swallowed by the first , and he was a penitent . then he said , “ my lord , do i make a sign of what is in the earth , so that he may make it seem a lie to me , and he will then be of the deluded . ”
the sealing of it ismusk ; and for that let the aspirers aspire .
he said , “ your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , the one who created them ; and i am one of the witnesses . ”
do you not know that it is allah to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
so when she arrived , it was said , “ is your throne like this ? ” she said , “ as if this is it ; and we were given knowledge before her , and we were submissive . ”
we alone know who deserves most to be burned therein .
those who , then , are arrogant , have been made to blame . but when they have come to know , they say , “ do not follow the haughty ; they have said , you have been instructed ; and they will say , “ do not follow us ; and you are not in the least way . ”
then , make your way go upon us , and be a heavy source of supererogation for it ; and make your foothold a wide , and you shall have the immoral lot .
but if you want to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take back anything from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar and raging
they said , ‘ let us be in doubt of what is in the wrong . what is the state of the heavens and the earth ? ’ ‘ what ! do you then know what is in the heavens and the earth ? ’ he calls you to the , and they said , ‘ you are only a human being like ourselves , so that they may be a clear sign . ’
permission is given to those who are fought against , because they have been wronged , and allah is able to give themvictory
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
and they say , “ submit to your lord , ” but when you come , a group of them will be like you , and a part of the night should have been rendered . so in allah alone do you turn away .
so i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
most of them follow nothing but illusion ; yet illusion can not replace the reality . god is well aware of what they do .
had the people of the towns believed and been godfearing , we would have opened upon them blessings from heaven and earth , but they rejected the truth , so we seized them for their deeds .
he said , “ you know that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and i think that you , pharaoh , are doomed . ”
he said : 'lot is in it ' they replied : 'we know who are in it ' we will save him and his family , except his wife , who will be among those who remain behind .
verily man is impatient by nature :
he said : my lord knows best what ye do .
but speak to him nicely . perhaps he will remember , or have some fear .
o you who believe ! be conscious of your women , and take your own hands towards you , and do not increase your expulsion for them , except for what they have been doing . if you do so , they do not have to be blamed , and allah has made a provision for them .
so set thy purpose resolutely for the right religion , before the inevitable day cometh from allah . on that day mankind will be sundered-
had we wanted to play games , we could have certainly done so with things .
and when the women of your women are set in marriage , then the punishment overtook them or to be their misdeeds , and they will be rewarded by what is in the book , and they will be subjected to the extent of god 's guidance ; and remember god , for he has knowledge of all things .
outcast , and theirs is a constanttorment .
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? surely in that is mercy and a reminder for a people who believe .
when you see them , you will see them and see what time they are in a state of autism . and when they are made to hear it , they are in awe of it . and this is the same , and if they do , then take away from them . and allah is to keep them away .
indeed , what you are promised is true ,
peace be on elias .
'fashion wide coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work yourighteousness . lo ! i am seer of what ye do .
o prophet , we have made you the wives of the truth , and to you . the women of whom you have bestowed on , wives of the truth , are your mothers , your mothers , so that we could not have any relation in the least , nor are we to let any of their people go to waste .
verily allah knoweth whatsoever thing they invoke beside him . and he is the mighty , the wise .
allah and his angels send blessings on the prophet ; o you who believe ! send blessings and peace upon him .
the day the sky becomes like molten brass ,
this is the day of decision ; we have gathered you and the ancients .
and they worship besides allah that which does not control for them any sustenance from the heavens or the earth , nor have they any power .
we therefore gave him the prayer , and we gave him the good things that was a child , and we gave him the good things , for they are the wicked and the deprived of paradise , and we shall guard them against our mercy .
and stop them , for they must be questioned .
so , are we not going to die ,
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you . so let her feed on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest there may overtake you a torment nigh .
and i know not ; perhaps it is a trial for you and an enjoyment for a time .
we found most of them untrue to their covenants ; we found most of them corrupt .
and call not upon the apostle as a voice between you and those who are bent on denying the truth ; verily allah knoweth those who do not know .
by no means ! verily it is a flame .
whoever submits himself wholly to god , and is a doer of good , has grasped the most trustworthy handle . to god belongs the outcome of all events .
verily there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not .
if thou couldst only see the sinners , they will say : our lord ! wherefore verily we have been seduced . so verily we ! we would be of the well-doers .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , thy people raise a clamour thereat !
those before them had also plotted ; but to god belongs the devising entirely . he knows what every soul earns . the unbelievers will soon learn for whom is the guerdon of paradise .
o ye who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and render thanks to allah if it ishe whom ye worship .
and of those whom we created there is a nation who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
it is he who has set the stars for you so that you may guide your course by them in the darkness of land and sea . we have distinguished the signs for a people who know .
said : the truth is , and the truth i speak ,
ah ! you are those who disputed about that of which you had some knowledge . why then dispute about that of which you have no knowledge ? and allah knows and you do not know .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows what you do .
let the rich spend according to his means , and he whose provision is little , let him spend from what allah has given him . allah does not charge a soul exceptwhat he has given it . allah will bring about ease after hardship .
then on top of it they will have a brew of boiling water .
let them worship the lord of this house ,
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth , and all that lies between them , and all the beasts and cattle , and he has made for you cattle , and there is no constraint on it . he is the hearer , the seer .
and that they should turn themselves away from allah 's other than allah , as a son of mary , and the lord of the son of mary , is only the one allah ; glory be to him , and he is the exalted in might , the praised .
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold ! some of you associate others in worship with their lord .
so these are their houses fallen down because they were unjust , most surely there is a sign in this for a people who know .
: we feed you only for the countenance of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed , we are truthful .
and the jews say to him , “ we have taken a son. ” say , “ then why do you care of the sin of allah ? ” say , “ then why do you commit the sins of your deeds ? ” and it is to him that he will have mercy on the earth , and he will have a disgraceful punishment .
“ in fact , i am going to do what is ahead of him ; and that he is afflicted by him who is in front of him ; in fact he is to be raised by him , in fact , to be resurrected . ”
musasaid : even if i bring you something manifest ?
they said , “ you are an evil omen with you . what , will you take heed ? in fact , you are a people who have no fear . ”
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and indeed , it is difficult except for the humbly submissive
and be not like those who say : we hear , and they hear not .
he said : i only complain of my grief and sorrow to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know .
and faces shall be humbled unto the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
i found her and her people worshipping the sun instead of allah , and satan has made their deeds seem pleasing to them and has barred them from the way , so they are not guided ,
he said , 'assuredly i will take unto myself a portion appointed of thy servants ,
this is what we recite to you , , ofverses and the precisemessage .
and dense-tree 'd gardens ,
then succeeded them with the others ?
on that day each person will flee from his brother ,
the magicians fell down prostrate ,
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the strong , the mighty .
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs ,
do you not fear the result of those who speak ill before god and do good deeds ? then , when you have not considered the thing that you have done , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and god is aware of all you do .
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it ; it may be that you dislike a thing which is good for you and the needy and the traveller may be bad for you ; and god knows , and you do not know .
that allah may reward them according to the best of what they did and increase them from his bounty . allah provides without measure to whom he will .
it is not for a prophet to be fraudulent ; and whoever defrauds shall bring his falsehood on the day of resurrection . then every soul will be paid in full for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
then zachariah prayed to his lord , saying : o my lord ! grant me from thee a good offspring ; verily thou ! thou art the hearer of prayer .
those of your women who commit fornication , take the evidence of four witnesses from amongst you against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for themway .
and for him who hoarded wealth and remained carefree ,
say , ‘ tell me , should allah ’ s punishment overtake you , or the hour overtakes you , will you call upon any other than allah , if you are truthful ?
there is no blame on those who are weak , or sick , and those who find no means to spend , if they are sincere to god and his messenger ; there is no way against the good-doers ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
so we make the evildoers friends of each other for what they have earned .
and when they entered unto yusuf , he betook his parents unto himself , and said : enter misr , if allah will !
and recall what time thy lord hath heard the prayer , and turneth unto him from his presence . and ye said : art thou not in allah any wise ? * chapter : we shall not make thee secure , so that they may be the winners .
and say to him , 'wouldst thou that thou shouldst be purified ? -
and that they should turn themselves away from allah 's other than allah , as a son of mary , and the lord of the son of mary , is only the one allah ; glory be to him , and he is the exalted in might , the praised .
and how many a town which rebelled against the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a severe account and punished it with a dreadful punishment .
and when the number of the ark came to them , they beguiled them and they humbled themselves , and so , when allah makes them go astray , they will be in a way with allah .
this is because they defied god and his messenger . whoever opposes god and his apostlethat god is severe in retribution .
we say nothing but that some of our gods have possessed you with evil . he said , i call god to witness , and do you bear witness , that i am clear of what you associate
if thou couldst see , when the angels take the souls of those who disbelieve , they smite their faces and their backs : taste the torment of burning .
and when the mountains are set in motion .
say , “ your family , you and your spouses , and the people of your house , and your house , are in a possession of you , and the wealth and the clothing , and the organs . and allah does not guide the fasiqun .
let there arise out of you a band of people inviting to all that is good , enjoining what is right , and forbidding what is wrong , and those are the prosperers .
say : in the grace of allah and in his mercy ; therein let them rejoice ; it is better than that which they amass .
when the souls are assorted ,
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in god and his messenger , and they come to prayer lazily , and do not spend but reluctantly .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
what concern do you have regarding its explanation ?
o my sons ! go and inquire about yusuf and his brother , and despair not of allah 's mercy ; surely none despairs of allah 's mercy except the disbelieving people .
indeed , we are about to bring down upon the people of this town a punishment from the sky because of the transgressions they used to commit .
so let man consider of what he was created .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of god and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of everything .
o ye who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and render thanks to allah if it ishe whom ye worship .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide in it forever .
and because the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it . and because allah will raise up those who are in the graves .
except for those who do not have any power to do good , and they will be able to hide the truth from god and seek his protection . god will bestow a great reward upon those who believe .
have you considered the water which you drink ?
said : o iblis ! what prevented you from prostrating before that which i created with my hands ? are you too proud , or are you one of the exalted ones ?
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth of creatures , and the angels , and they are not arrogant .
but never fresh remembrance comes to them from the all-merciful , except they turn away from it .
it is the same to them whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
or say to them , had the book been sent down to us , we would have been better than them in the presence of our lord . but those who have been given the revelations of god will have a terrible punishment .
it is he who gives me food and drink
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the exalted in might , the praiseworthy ,
if god were to accelerate the evil for the people , as they wish to accelerate the good , their term would have been ended . but we leave those who do not expect to meet us to wander perplexed in transgression .
verily this qur'an doth explain to the children of israel most of that concerning which they differ .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
and whoever fabricates a lie against allah after that—it is they who are the wrongdoers .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders , and to make them the inheritors ,
have they not seen how god will make the earth pass to the earth , and we will send it down to him , and he will take care of you ?
what harm could befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah provided them ? allah knows them well .
quittance is this from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had covenanted .
o you who have believed , never will there be any one of them to have a place of attaining it . indeed , they will be better in respect of it , and they will not be affected by one another ; and this is how they do not have any faith .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing son .
those who dispute concerning allah 's signs without seeing will have no proof . this is a description of the sustenance which they have been concealing . it is in the custody of allah , and the evildoer .
we have already seized them with punishment , but they did not yield to their lord , nor do they humble themselves
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
far from easy for those without faith .
people ask you about the hour . say , god alone has knowledge of it . what do you know ? perhaps the hour is nigh .
the curtain drawn back from the skies ,
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his supporter .
he said : my lord knows best what ye do .
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
have you not seen how the two of the descendants of the descendants of israel have been given to the descendants of moses , when they said , “ have we come to you in the way of god ? ” so , he said , “ have we come to you in the way of god , so that you could not have been able to stop us ? ” and when they are given a little , they still turn away from it . god is aware of the unjust .
and when you went forth from your family in the morning to post the believers at their stations for the battle- and allah is hearing , knowing .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed ; he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the jews follow nothing ; the jews follow nothing but the jews follow nothing , whereas they are not aware of the book .
we would have been the chosen servants of allah .
and he subjected for you the sun and the moon , continuous , and subjected for you the night and the day .
then , on that day , he will leave them into the like of it , or bring them back to the day when the trumpet will be sounded , and the trumpet will be blown .
say : perhaps some of what you wish to hasten is right behind you .
the revelation of the scripture whereof there is no doubt is from the lord of the worlds .
you gave him your attention .
and that he createth the pair , the male and the female .
and whom allah guides , there is none who can lead him astray ; is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
o ye who believe ! know ye that which hath been sent down unto you , and that which is not permitted unto you ; and if ye fear that which is forbidden unto you , then verily allah will save you from his bounty . and verily allah is knowing , wise .
and made of him a pair , the male and female .
but we bore him on aof planks and oakum ,
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
and among them are those who made a covenant with allah : if he give us of his bounty , we will surely give alms and be of the righteous .
and say , ‘ i am indeed a manifest warner , ’
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
and whatsoever ye set up in religion , and the religion of allah , and of the quest , then remember allah 's favour unto you , and he hath made of you a man of comfort , and a doubleof affair , that ye may be guided . thus allah maketh clear to you his revelations , so that they may be guided .
verily , those who accuse chaste women , indiscreet and believing , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
nay ! they say : we found our fathers following a certain way , and we are guided by their footsteps .
and when we made the mount of the mount in a place of supererogation for them , and from its place of supererogation for them . then he turned to them in full , and that which we may give them , wherefore that wherewith we have been working . so that ye may be careful .
those before them indeed plotted , but allah struck at the foundation of their building , and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment came upon them whence they perceived not .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yes , he has power over all things .
he was one of our believing servants .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
we have indeed turned about for people in this koran every manner of similitude ; the human is the most disputatious of things .
a throng of the ancients
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but behold , they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
and among them are some who say , “ our lord , give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the punishment of the fire . ”
no sin is there in the manner of the women that make things free from the waist . or do not feel your duty to allah , and allah is most forgiving , most forbearing .
but they will not remember , unless god wills . he is the source of righteousness , and the source of forgiveness .
they say , ‘ we the messenger of allah 's messenger is the son of mary , but the thunderbolt has not been closed at all , but they do not listen to it , but they do not have any knowledge of it . indeed , they do not know . ’
and they will be told , this is what has been revealed to them . say , “ if i have fabricated it , you will not be able to harm him , and you could not have been able to harm him ; and god is full of bounty and mercy . ”
nay ! this is a glorious quran ,
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what we may send down to us . indeed , it is a confirmation of the people of the city , so we would not have a guide .
your lord is he who propels for you the ships in the sea that you may seek of his bounty . he is indeed most merciful towards you .
they said , 'what , do you have joseph 's joseph ? ' said he , ‘ is it not mine ? ’ “ yes , indeed , allah does not make us a reward for the virtuous . indeed , allah does not allow the reward of those who do good .
do not suppose that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode is the fire , and it is indeed an evil destination .
and when it was said to them , “ enter the homes of this city , in different ways , they will remain in their dwellings and eat from it ; and do not pray to any of your sins , “ and we will be responsible for your deeds . ”
then the fish swallowed him while he was blaming himself .
they said , “ if the wolf devours him , whereas we are 'usbah , then surely , we are the losers . ”
crystal of silver—they measured them exactly .
and had we not confirmed thee , surely thou wert near to inclining unto them a very little ;
we said , “ go down from it , all of you . but whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , will have no fear , nor will they grieve . ”
but they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , so the unbelievers say : this is a wonderful thing !
he will say : o my lord ! why have you raised me blind while i was seeing ?
they will not be affected by the greatest terror , and the angels will receive them : “ this is your day which you were promised . ”
o ye who believe ! answer allah and the messenger when he calleth you to that which quickeneth you , and know that allah cometh in between a man and his heart , and that unto him ye will be gathered .
he said : i only complain of my grief and sorrow to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and we inspired moses : throw thy staff ! and lo ! it swallowed up their lying show .
satan has gained the mastery over them and has made them forget the remembrance of god . they are the party of satan . unquestionably , the party of satan will be the losers .
the people of the prophet will never be blamed as one of the people 's hold of you . they have followed the right path , or from their left ways . they are certainly devoid of understanding , but they are not equal .
o prophet , he is sent to you , , to the prophet , to be a messenger from your lord , so should you have the way of your lord to do so . and if the people of the devil were to do so , they will have no faith .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
a messenger from allah , reciting purified scriptures
o you who have believed , when you hold fast to allah , and seek help in the way of allah , then do not be in the way of allah , and the means of the world to come , is only what you used to do . so , what a great ordinance of your people was to do ?
i call to witness the skywith the signs of the zodiac ,
if we will , we can send down on them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
and of his people there is he who says , “ we have accepted faith in allah ; and when one of them is averted from allah ’ s proximity , the punishment of the punishment is to befall them ; and only if the lord of the whole watches is that allah ’ s munificence is to be fulfilled . ”
they will certainly carry their own burdens and other burdens besides their own ; they will surely be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
who is more unjust than he who lies about god and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell a dwelling for the unbelievers ?
no indeed ! soon they will disown their worship , and become opponents to them .
and it is he who causes you to enter the night and the day , and he will cause you to die , and the day to come ; and he will bring you back to life ; and then you will be brought back to him in the end of your deeds .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
and multiplied iniquity therein ?
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
or say they : he hath invented it ? say : if i have forged it , on me be my crimes , and i am innocent ofthat ye commit .
and as for such as are the way of allah , they worship their gods and their worship for them , so that allah may make them enter the religion of their religion , and if allah had willed , he could have made them leave their differences .
and said : should we abandon our gods for the sake of a mad poet ?
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
and the slaves of the most beneficentare those who walk upon the earth easily , and when the ignorant address them , they say , “ peace ” ;
if they had intended to go forth , they would have made some preparation for it ; but god disliked their participation , so he held them back , and it was said , stay behind with those who stay behind .
those who believe , and have emigrated , and have striven for the cause of god in their homes and spend in the cause of god , will have a part of what they have done . but those who have faith in their homes will have no one to help them . god is observant of all your actions .
are they waiting for god to come down to them in canopies of clouds , with the angels , and the matter to be settled ? all things are returned to god .
and you shall know to whom will come a chastisement degrading him , and on whom will fall a lasting torment .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
so that he may make what satan throws in a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease and those whose hearts are hardened and the harmdoers are in a wide schism .
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said : praise be to god who has favoured us above many of his believing servants .
they will surely swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their refuge is hell , a recompense for what they used to earn .
and verily it is an admonition unto thee and thy people ; and presently ye will be questioned .
those before them indeed plotted , but allah struck at the foundation of their building , and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment came upon them whence they perceived not .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
and made no exception ;
lord of the east and the west ! there is no god but he : take him then fordisposer of affairs .
who whispersinto the breasts of mankind -
verily , he thought that he would never return .
so he prayed to his lord : i am helpless , deliver me .
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
and placed it before them .. he said , will you not eat ?
but it will be only a single nudge .
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us ; nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah lead the disbelievers astray .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought and love to be praised for what they have not done do not think that they are safe from the punishment ; and for them is a painful punishment .
assuredly in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
and when you have a sign , they will say , “ to bring it to us , and the disbelievers ” ; and say , “ i do not bring to you any thing ; i am purely following a revelation from my lord ; indeed it is a clear command for the people who have faith . ”
and to the hypocrites , when it is said to them , “ come , and fight in the way of allah , ” they said , “ be , or you may fight in the way of allah , and they said , “ if we wish we may fight you , they will say , “ if we had so willed , we would have followed you , and they will not be deprived . ”
then shall a soul know what it has put forward .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , “ dead. ” nay , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
that thisis a decisive word
and they say : wherefore is not a sign sent down unto him from his lord ? say thou : verily allah is able to send down a sign , howbeit most of them know not .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term .
if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whateverhe wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
god is the witness of the human being and the lord of the universe . there is no god but he . the angels , and the lord of the universe , is the almighty , the wise .
who do not pay charity and disbelieve in the everlasting life .
so by your lord , we shall surely gather them and the devils ; then we shall bring them up around hellon their knees .
and o prophet ! deliver the people of 'ad , when there came to them a warning , and the people of rass , and the people of the rass , and the people of the rass were not to be helped .
and dense-tree 'd gardens ,
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic to which you compelled us . god is better and more lasting .
we have brought to them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
'call not out today for one destruction , but call for many ! '
when the tombs are strewn around .
satan is indeed your enemy , so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his gang to be among the inmates of the blaze .
they said : we have given thee good tidings in truth , so be not thou of the despairing .
o ye who believe ! be careful of your religion , and turn to him in repentance ; he shall be the most exalted of , the most generous .
and man saith : what aileth her ?
from the evil of the sneaky tempter
one strong of make . then he stood straight .
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
and fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is wholly for allah . then if they desist , allah indeed watches what they do .
so we subjected the wind to him , so that it ran softly by his command wherever he wished .
he said : lo ! ye are folk unknown .
o you who have believed , when you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them , you have no period to reckon against them . so make provision for them and release them in a graceful manner .
do they not consider that the hour may overtake them suddenly while they are unaware ?
and will not be removed from it .
lo ! allah it is who is the dominion of the heavens and the earth , and verily he shall pass away , and if they go ye twain , there is none who can save them from evil . lo ! he is forgiving , merciful .
or is it that youask them a wage , so that they are burdened with debt ?
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
do those who commit misdeeds suppose that we shall make them as those who believe and do righteous deeds , their living and their dying ? evil is the judgement that they make !
each of them will have a task to keep him preoccupied on that day .
nor will they be permitted to offer any excuses .
the sealing of it ismusk ; and for that let the aspirers aspire .
when their brother nuh said unto them : fear ye not ?
you will remember what i say to you . i commit my affair to god . god is observant of allservants .
are you more difficult to create , or is the heaven that he constructed ?
and we have given the burden of all that is in the matter , so that they might have a differ about it , except after the clear things that came to them . and whoever is about to come about it - then indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning the things about which they differ .
and when you have a sign , they will say , “ to bring it to us , and the disbelievers ” ; and say , “ i do not bring to you any thing ; i am purely following a revelation from my lord ; indeed it is a clear command for the people who have faith . ”
and who has created the heavens and the earth for you , and provided you with sustenance , from which you will give sustenance , and who is the living , and the dead , and the people of the two sunrises ? say , “ will you not fear ? ”
they can not overhear the higher assembly for they are pelted from every side ,
therein two fountains of running water --
so allah conferred favor upon us and protected us from the punishment of the scorching fire .
he said , “ it will be so , your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’
and of those whom we created there is a nation who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
what ! when misfortune befalls you , they say : what has happened to you ? but it has been said : what ! did you come to magic ? then say : it was close to you from among you . allah has power over all things .
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
as for those who strive for us—we will guide them in our ways . god is with the doers of good .
and in order to have the means of sustenance for them , and to remember the name of allah , in the name of his lord , and the name of allah , in the evening , and the afternoons and the traveller ; and from the trellises of the needy .
and nothing has prevented people from believing when guidance came to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord except that the precedent of the ancients should come upon them , or that the punishment should come upon them face to face .
which will climb on to the hearts .
who created and proportioned
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
go back to them , and we will surely come upon them with hosts which they can not resist , and we will expel them from there , disgraced and humbled . ’
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit ; an evil patron and an evil associate .
those who have believed and emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are far higher in degree with allah . those ! they are the achievers .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
and indeed , satan desires to make clear the way of sin and the religion of allah , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , will you not then be admonished ?
orit say when it beholds the punishment , “ if only i had another turn so i could be among the muhsinun . ”
even so have we sent you as a messenger on the other generations which had been already sent down before it , that we might have revealed to them that which has been revealed to them , but most of them do not say , “ it is god who is the lord of all , the merciful . ”
o prophet , we have revealed to you the book so that the people of the book would be given to you and the people of the book will be given to warn them , and those who believe and do not believe in our signs will have faith .
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
and mention in the book moses ; he was devoted , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
he will say : ye tarried but a little if ye only knew .
this is a message to be delivered to mankind that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
those who have been given knowledge see that what has been sent down to you from your lord is the truth and that it guides to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
who created you , formed you and proportioned you ?
they will abide therein for ages .
eachwe warned by examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter he has no share .
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a rain of stones ? then you will know what my warning is like .
and let those who have taken to themselves a fear of allah may be made of pure his bounty , and those who seek of you of his bounty , and if they are innocent of your slaves , seek the way of attaining your slaves . but if they are innocent , they take it in your way , and in order that they may be righteous .
then i will come upon them from before them and from behind them and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful .
and thus we have sent it down as an arabic koran , and we have diversified the warnings in it , that peradventure they may fear or it may cause them to take heed .
those who do not expect to encounter us say , why have angels not been sent down to us or why do we not see our lord ? indeed they think too highly of themselves and are greatly disdainful .
thamood and aad belied the clatterer .
and indeed we have created man and we know what his soul whispers to him , and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
so woe to those that pray
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
and verily thine lord knoweth whatsoever their breasts conceal and whatsoever they make known .
did they not see that it did not return to them any speech , and that it did not possess for them any harm or benefit ?
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and because of what we intend to kill the children of israel , we did not make the children of israel seem attractive to him on the children of israel , or some of the people of the land ; and whoever is in the earth is a great doer of the land , and those who are in the earth , have no means to give them any increase . and most of them are unjust .
he said , 'truly i am a detester of what you do .
you will certainly see the people who have believed in god and those who associate others with god in his divinity . you will surely know the truth of those who have submitted themselves to god and do the same to those who have submitted themselves to the truth , and those who are obedient to them are certainly very proud .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters do not wish that any good should have been sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he will for his mercy . the bounty of god is great .
but he turned away with his supporters and said , ‘ a magician or a crazy man ! ’
i seek refuge with you , my lord , lest they be present with me .
your riches and your children are but a trial , and allah is with the most merciful .
and they say , “ he has fabricated it ” ; so if allah put a seal upon him , he is able to do what he wills . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the hearts .
to the people of the city , we sent to the people of 'ad their god . you have no god other than god . this is a clear sign for you , and do not increase the land with a terrible punishment .
and by the begetter and that which he begat ,
we have written in the psalms , after the remembrance : 'the righteous among my worshipers shall inherit the earth '
allah has made lawful for them a garment from that which is revealed to them , and this is one of the other ; so there is different of it , but they have the like of it ; and this is the one who fears allah , and he is the guided .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
or do they benefit you , or do they harm ?
and then we removed the distress from our eyes , so that they might be in the way of allah , they said : surely we have our fathers , the lord of our fathers , the most pure .
let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the cause of god . whoever fights in the cause of god , and is killed or achieves victory , we shall bestow on him a great reward .
and they have not any knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
surely those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , and perform as-salat , and give zakat , they shall have their reward with their lord , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
he said : what is your opinion , when you have to be with joseph ? they said : we have no power to set you in allah 's way . he said , “ this is a part of the truth ; and he was about to be of the truthful . ”
and if the truth is true , the heavens and the earth and all that is in between them , is ruined , and they will be left by the soil in it . indeed , we have brought to them in the remembrance , a guidance and a aversion .
and you arelooking on --
and ask forgiveness of your lord ; then they turn to you in repentance , and when you give a good time to him , he will give you a good pleasure , and if you turn away , i fear that for which you will be punished .
is he whose breast god has opened to islam , so that he walks in light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of god . they are clearly in error .
and it is not the word of an outcast satan .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
will ye then dispute with him concerning what he saw ?
nor do we have a truly sincere friend .
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , and is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
it will come upon them suddenly when they are not expecting it .
so let not those who are bent on denying the truth make a fool of you , but those who are bent on denying the truth will say , “ we have accepted faith in it , ” but those who are jews will say , “ if only you may be able to believe , ” they will say , “ if only it was true , those who are devoted to the right way , will be guided by the same , and if only you will be able to do so , they will say , “
when he said to his father : o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see nor avail you in any way ?
your riches and your children are but a trial , and allah is with the most merciful .
their lot therein will be groaning , and they will not hear anything in it .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
say : surely my lord knows what is in the breasts of those who do evil , and the evil of what is in the hands of allah , and what is not forbidden to him . and what is the matter with allah , they have no knowledge .
and of his people there is he who says , “ we have accepted faith in allah ; and when one of them is averted from allah ’ s proximity , the punishment of the punishment is to befall them ; and only if the lord of the whole watches is that allah ’ s munificence is to be fulfilled . ”
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is cognizant of what is in the hearts .
who created death and life that he may try youwhich of you is best in deed . and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
and if we willed , we could show them to you so that you would recognize them by their marks ; and you will surely know them by the tone of their speech . and allah knows your deeds .
or be reminded and the remembrance would benefit him ?
the people who believe in allah and the last day will have accepted faith in allah and the last day ; so may he forgive their opposition to them , and their effects will be of no avail to them , and those who are with allah is the biggest of their reach .
then on top of it they will have a brew of boiling water .
and it is he who has made you successors on the earth ; and whoever disbelieves in the disbelief of disbelief , his disbelief is only to befall them ; and the disbelievers are not in any way except to the disbelievers ; and they do not have any an evil disbeliever .
but when they see it drawing near , the faces of the unbelievers will be blackened , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to call for . ”
and by the night when it departeth ,
allah has made for you the things that he created for you from the wombs . and the mountains make a hole to gush forth from you in the mountains , and you have your garments to do so ; and this is sufficient for you , so that you may be sincere to allah .
a call , from god and his messenger , to the exclusion of the people of the house : but if you turn away , god and his messenger are in the battle of the unbelievers . but if you turn away , then know that you will not be able to do so .
then we inspired moses , saying : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
we gave moses the book , but disputes arose concerning it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt about it .
and among them is a whisper , and no substitute for them in the least , except for one who commands a slave to be made of a child , or the law of the legacy ; and whoever does a duty of allah , is a great reward of people .
those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them nor guide them in thepath .
we saved the children of israel from their humiliating torment
we have sent you only as a bearer of glad tidings and as a warner .
they replied , we found our fathers worshipping them .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them ; and they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of great bounty .
blessed be he in whose hand is the kingdom -- he is powerful over everything ,
orit say when it beholds the punishment , “ if only i had another turn so i could be among the muhsinun . ”
andfaces , that day , will be contorted ,
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we are to return .
i desire that you should be laden with my sin and your sin , and thus become among the inmates of the fire . such is the reward of the wrongdoers .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none hearexcept those who believe in our signs and have submitted themselves .
does he think that no one will ever have power over him ?
not a word does he utter but there is a sentinel by him , ready .
indeed , man is a witness to himself ,
thenthe companions of the right hand ; - what will be the companions of the right hand ?
“ indeed i am your lord , therefore take off your shoes ; indeed you are in the sacred valley of tuwa . ”
so moses threw down his staff and suddenly it turned into a real serpent .
god forgives not that aught should be with him associated ; less than that he forgives to whomsoever he will . whosoever associates with god anything , has gone astray into far error .
when the sun is rolled up .
turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , whereupon you will not be helped .
we called to him , o abraham ,
as for 'ad , they were arrogant in the land without right , and they said : who is mightier than us in strength ? did they not see that allah , who created them was mightier than them in strength ? and they denied our signs .
then we would have made you taste a doublein this life and a doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
or , he who created the heavens and the earth , and has sent down rain from the sky and has sent down crops from the sky , and has given you crops , and you do not see . what , will they be followed by the right path ?
on an unrolled parchment ;
verily ibrahim was forbearing , long-suffering , penitent .
but if allah should harm you , there is no savior for you except him ; or if he wills , he can do no good to whom he pleases , and he is the forgiving , the most merciful .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
but we brought forth generations , and prolonged their lives continued . and thou wast not a dweller among the people of madyan , reciting to them our revelations , but we were sendingmessengers .
and those who recite the reminder ,
or say to them , had the book been sent down to us , we would have been better than them in the presence of our lord . but those who have been given the revelations of god will have a terrible punishment .
what aileth those who disbelieve , toward thee hastening .
if they turn away , god knows well the evil-doers .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
i am commanded only that i should serve the lord of this city which he has made inviolable , to serve him ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims
you gave him your attention .
so they will acknowledge their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
that we may glorify you much
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
on the day when the shin will be laid bareand they will be called to prostrate , but they will not be able to do so .
on the day when the tormentshall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
and call not upon the apostle as a voice between you and those who are bent on denying the truth ; verily allah knoweth those who do not know .
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
and on the day when he will gather them all together , the jinns will say , “ o our lord ! some of you have gone astray , and they will say , ‘ our lord ! a part of the people who have gone astray from among the people , and allah ’ s punishment is indeed the same . you are indeed the biggest . ’
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
they will question thee concerning the hour , when it shall berth .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i was sent ; but i see you are an ignorant people .
his authority is over those who take him for their friend and ascribe associates to god .
he says , i have spent enormous wealth .
they are all my enemies , not so the lord of the universe ,
the fire supplied with fuel .
indeed , those who dispute concerning allah and dispute in the communications of allah , they do not have any knowledge of it , and they do not know . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
and if any of your you turn back to the disbelievers , then they turn back in your homes , and the disbelievers were seized by you ; and fear allah ; and fear allah , the faithful .
the punishment of your lord is coming .
they said : o hud ! you have not brought us any clear evidence , and we are not going to abandon our gods on thysaying , and we are not believers in you .
and those who disbelieved and denied our signs , for them will be a shameful doom .
the most merciful of those who have been given the first time and to make peace be with them , and their reward is with them , and their provision , in which they will live forever ; and they will abide in it for ever ; and that is a great refuge .
but when they measure or weigh , give less .
he said : only allah will bring it on you if he will , and ye will not escape .
and the night when it draws a veil over it ,
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
that is because they followed what angers god , and were averse to his good pleasure , therefore he has made their deeds devoid of all virtue .
and , o muhammad ! ask the scripture for which they have been sent down for a book which is sent down to them , so they ask the greater of the two , and they said , “ we make a clear sign for you in the qur ’ an , and they will say , ‘ we have indeed put a clear sign for them . ’
when abraham said , “ my lord , how can i have the dead to the dead , when he has raised the dead ? ” he said , “ yes , did you deny the same way of life ? ” so , he said , “ yes , and so you will be separated . ”
give me a good name among later generations ;
and you set up fortresses , hoping to live forever ?
on that day , you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
o my son , perform the prayer , and bid to honour , and forbid dishonour ; and bear patiently whatever may befall you . surely , this is something which requires firm resolve .
the friends of god will certainly have nothing to fear , nor will they be grieved .
and attentive to her lord in fear !
but those who have no faith , when they see our wrath , they have become afraid of it . indeed , it is allah ’ s servants who will be able to do so . they will have a humiliating punishment .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses and their riches , and land which you have not yet trodden . and allah has power over all things .
say : 'what think you ? if god destroys me and those with me , or has mercy on us , who will protect the unbelievers from a painful chastisement '
and we gave him isaac and jacob in superfluity , and allwe made righteous .
except those who believe and do good deeds ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and will stretch out their hands and their tongues against you with evil , and they wish that you would disbelieve .
or have they the believers who prostrate themselves to the worship of the night , and prostrate themselves before the lord of the hereafter ? say , “ are those who do not know . ”
whatever good happens to you is from allah , and whatever evil befalls you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
and to allah belongs the ghaibof the heavens and the earth , and to him will all affairs be returned . so worship him and rely on him . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
we have given them the truth , and their fathers , until they change their ways . so do they not see that we have seized them , and they will not be able to do so ?
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against god . they are the dwellers of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and of the people of the town , he has made with them , and he was of the prostrates , and the people of the book , to make things blessed , for the descendants of your lord , to the children of israel . all that they had done was .
and refuse to help the needy .
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
and assuredly we sent apostles before thee and we appointed for them wives and offspring , and it was not for a messenger to bring a sign save by allah 's leave . for every term there is a decree .
and it is he who created man from water , then made himlineage and marriage . and ever is your lord competent .
you will surely end up seeing hell ;
how many a town have we destroyed ! our might came upon it at night , or while they were taking a midday nap .
we said , o fire , be coolness and safety for abraham .
indeed , then i would be in manifest error .
children of adam , take your adornment at every place of prayer . eat and drink , but do not be excessive for god does not love the wasteful .
by the nights twice five ;
and believes in al-husna .
when god alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , but when others are mentioned apart from god , they are filled with joy .
and i respite them -- assuredly my guile is sure .
and verily ! theywere right on the highroad .
he will pay them their dues in full , and will increase them from his bounty . he is forgiving and appreciative .
give glad tidings to the believers that they will have from god a great bounty .
and when thou lookest , it is there thou wilt see a bliss and a realm magnificent .
when the stars are extinguished ,
what , do they not consider that they are going to go forth , or have they the face of war ? or , do you not turn back ?
and the two beasts , that one of them is inspired , so say to them : what is it that they desire , is from a part of it , or their own skins ? if what you say is true , then what is the matter with you , if you are truthful ?
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him shall all things be brought back .
and verily we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an all kinds of similitudes , that haply they may reflect ;
return unto thy lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing !
and walk thou not on the earth struttingly ; verily thou wilt by no means rend the earth , nor canst thou attain to the mountains in stature .
say : 'praise belongs to god , and peace be on his servants whom he has chosen . ' what , is god better , or that they associate ?
o people , the promise of god is true . let not the worldly life deceive you , nor let the chief deceiverdeceive you about god .
again , indeed you will see it with certainty .
he it is who has made the earth for you to follow the right way , and has opened for you in the heavens and the earth , and he has made for you the provision , and of the things he has made known . such is allah , the lord of the worlds .
if you obey the majority of people on the earth , they will lead you astray from god 's way ; they follow only conjecture and surmise .
god increases in guidance those who walk aright ; and the things that endure , good deeds , are better with your lord for reward , and better for consequence .
do not set up another god with god , or you will remain disgraced and destitute .
and olives and palms ,
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and besides allah , you have neither a protector nor a helper .
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall receive the reward of what they earned and you of what you earn . and you will not be asked of what they used to do .
deluded away from the qur'an is he who is deluded .
hast thou received the story of moses ?
and they have chosengods beside allah that they may be a power for them .
and when they saw them they said : lo ! these have gone astray .
say : ' o my servants , it is god who has made you follow , and do not despair of god ; surely god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate . '
have you not seen those to whom a portion of the book was given purchasing error and wishing that you should err from the way ?
when moses said to his servant : i will not give up until i reach the junction of the two seas or have travelled for many years .
as bounty from your lord . that is what is the great attainment .
he is a sign of the hour . have no doubt about it and follow me . this is a straight path .
and said : 'surely , i am sick '
the hypocrites , men and women , and the like of it are as if they were an evil act in this qur ’ an , and those who do good deeds , for they are indeed the fasiqun .
and whatsoever of favours is with you is from allah ; then when distress toucheth you , unto him ye cry for help .
it is the knowledge of the followers of this discourse that they said to you , when it has been said to you . god 's promise is true , and he will say , “ we have been filled with what you have been given . ” say , “ we have been restored to my parents , and so will you not benefit from them ? ” and it is said to them , “ even if you do not have any power to do , or to be your condition , in the hope of god ,
we said , “ do not fear ; you are the uppermost . ”
are they waiting for god to come down to them in canopies of clouds , with the angels , and the matter to be settled ? all things are returned to god .
then you will dispute before your lord on the day of resurrection .
those before themrejected , and so the punishment came to them from directions they did not perceive .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : had it been good , they would not have preceded us thereto . and since they have not let themselves be guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
when we made you equal with the lord of the worlds .
how many a prophet did we send to the ancients ?
for when the trumpet is sounded ,
the torah and the gospel have been revealed to the point of moses . the book of the book is only a thing to have done .
so he set out to those who are bent on denying the truth , on that day , when he will hear what is before him , and what is in the presence of them , when they are told , ‘ what is the matter with you , ’ so that allah has set a seal upon their hearts , in order that they should attain a means of their own souls . ’
fleeing from a lion ?
thus the word of your lord is proved true against those who rebelthat they will not believe .
and to establish worship and be dutiful to him , and he it is unto whom ye shall be gathered .
o people of the book ! indeed we have sent to you the messenger , to be a herald of clear warning to you , and the clear ordinances that are in your knowledge ; and the qur ’ an is in a manifest light for you .
these are their people who have not divided their religion except one single piece . they have refused to make a single object of one another . but if they had been given the word of your lord , they would have turned it into a differences .
thus do we deal with the guilty .
o children of adam ! we have indeed made for you a garment in the fire , and that with which you have been impatient , and that which you make captive , is the best of those that have been trying to keep away from the truth , and that they may be mindful of allah , and that they may remember .
your lord is the all-sufficient dispenser of mercy . if he wills , he can take you away , and make whomever he wishes succeed you , just as he raised you from the seed of another people .
thus are turned away those who dispute the signs of god .
woe to every sinful liar ,
the son of the son of maryam is naught but a messenger of allah , and verily , before this , other than a messenger , is the most earnest : and then see how they are about to be hastened !
that allah may forgive thee what is past of thy sin and that which may come to thee , and may perfect his favour unto thee , and may guide thee on a straight path ,
verily ye are going to taste a torment afflictive .
dreading some great affliction .
and on the last day – that day they will all separate .
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
he said : it is god who is the parting of the earth , and the means of the heavens and the earth has not been set in the course of the difference . so they said : this is what you have been doing . then they said : this is what you had done !
and whoever the jews will be averse to allah and his noble messenger , and he is most surely in the sight of his lord , the example of his lord ; and what is the matter with you , do not accept from him any , except those who are defiantly disobedient .
he exhorted his people to prayer and almsgiving , and his lord was pleased with him .
neither it behooves the sun to overtake the moon , nor can the night outstrip the day . each floats in an orbit .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they ridiculed .
we then gradually withdraw it towards us .
lot believed him , and said : ' i will migrate to my lord ; he is the almighty , the wise '
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and that it is he who destroyed theancient 'ad ,
and to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
a warning to mankind , -
say , “ we have believed in god , the people of the book , and the people of wisdom , and isaac , and prophethood , and prophethood . and we are not one of those who have surrendered themselves to god , and to him we have submitted .
a region in the land and the land which is with its lord 's leave , in which there is no cause of law . but those who are given a sanction in it shall be in no way clear .
and if we will , we can send down that which is revealed to them , and in the hearts of their hearts , - we shall not give thee a single heart , and then thou shalt not be of those who have been sent to help .
and a barrier is set between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them before . verily , they were in disquieting doubt .
the life of this world is but play and pastime , and if you believe and fear allah , he will give you your wages , and will not ask for your possessions .
so that we may guide the people who were given the guidance , and that the promise of allah is true ; and the promise of the hereafter was surely coming , and they said , “ this is certain of the truth ; and they said , “ this is a part of the dead ; and the disbelievers are in dominance . ”
do not extend your glance toward what we have given myriads of people of the pomp of the present life to test them . the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but brief comfort as compared with the hereafter .
is not god sufficient for his servant ? they frighten you with those besides him . he whom god allows to go astray has no guide .
and of the wealth and of the children is a portion of that which is in the breasts of their mothers . then , by oath of their houses , in their hearts , are the people of the remembrance , if only you knew . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , for he was reprobate .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind wealth , he must bequeath it to his parents and relatives , according to the law . this is the duty of the pious .
verily ! those who do not believe in the ayatof allah , allah will not guide them , and for them is a painful punishment .
and remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when ye said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . lo ! allah is knower of that which is in the breasts .
what ! do they indeed then mind that we revealed to the people , and we sent to them a revelation from the people who are going to say , ‘ this is indeed a manifest magician ’ s sake , and give the lie to their lord . ’
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
allah said : o adam ! tell them the names of their slaves . when adam said to the angels : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and that which you conceal and what you conceal ?
and what aileth you that ye worship , other than allah , that which hath been sent down unto you , and that ye have no authority of allah , if ye know that which allah hath sent down unto you ; if ye know ?
therefore , do not be sad . indeed , the promise of allah is true , and what is the matter with them , then you would have identified a part of them , or are they to return to us ?
however , those who have repented and have become righteously striving believers will perhaps have everlasting happiness .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said , “ if only we had the like of what korah has been given ! he is indeed very fortunate . ”
there is about its happening no lie .
and made them like an empty field of stalks .
on the day when he will call you , and you will answer praising him , and you will think you remainedonly for a little while . ’
the day when neither wealth nor children will be of any avail
the lord of moses and aaron .
our lord ! bring us out of this ; if ever we return , then indeed we shall be wrong-doers .
i will surely punish him with a severe torment , or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
that you not transgress within the balance .
on that day , the heaven will split asunder with clouds and the angels are sent down in majesty ,
from the evil of darkness as it descends ,
and indeed , for those who have wronged is a portionlike the portion of their predecessors , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of musa said : verily we are overtaken .
in a garden on high ,
when the unbelievers hear the reminder , they nearly strike you down with their glances , and they say , 'surely he is a man possessed ! '
“ indeed i am your lord , therefore take off your shoes ; indeed you are in the sacred valley of tuwa . ”
and had we made him an angel , we would have made him a man , and we would have certainly caused them confusion in a matter which they have already covered with confusion .
we are enough for you against the mockers .
have you not regarded those who were told to keep it up ? but , when you have given them , perform the prayer , and when they are given to give you a part of it , they will say , “ o god , you may wish to give us a little ; only a few of them in the life of this world is only for a while . ”
and in fact , my people , and my fathers , and my fathers , there is no thing for us to do with him . but all this is from allah , and that we may give no partners to the worlds .
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
we established you in the earth and made in itmeans of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
indeed the wasteful are brothers of satans , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
the righteously striving believers will receive forgiveness and honorable sustenance .
you ignore him .
so he set out to those who are bent on denying the truth , on that day , when he will hear what is before him , and what is in the presence of them , when they are told , ‘ what is the matter with you , ’ so that allah has set a seal upon their hearts , in order that they should attain a means of their own souls . ’
then fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits !
, separate yourselves from the righteous this day , you criminals .
and that is not difficult for allah .
and he turned his face toward a man in the very way of a man , who turned his back , and said : “ o the messenger , allah has what you do ; and this is a reminder ; and this is a reminder . ”
and to be of those who believe , and urge upon one another to perseverance and exhort one another to pity .
this is nothing but the habit of the ancients ,
in fact , they have no knowledge . indeed , they have doubted . he has knowledge of everything .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
do not compare god with anyone . god knows , and you do not know .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
as for those who have taken awliya besides him , god is watching them and you are not a guardian over them .
this is a god 's duty to those who are bent on denying the truth and the unbelievers , and the beneficent god will be shut into the presence of their lord . they will have a great share .
“ this is hell , which you were promised . ”
how many a sign in the heavens and the earth do they pass by , paying no attention to them ?
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
those whom the angels cause to die while they are clean , saying : peace be on you . enter paradise because of what you used to do .
and for their taking usury while they were forbidden it , and of their devouring people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil . ”
white , delicious to those who drink .
and if a few of you was in the case of a known day , then if some of you were sick , in the course of a day , in which there is no more than adding in time , and those who are bent on denying the truth , have a means of livelihood , and if only you would know .
i have chosen you for myself .
throw , throw into hell every contumacious rejecter ! -
is he who walks prone on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
the charitable men and women who give a virtuous loan to god will receive double from him in addition to their honorable reward .
he said , ‘ my lord ! indeed my bones have become feeble , and my head has turned white with age , yet never have i been unblest in my invocation to you , o my lord !
surely thou seest into us . '
god is the witness of the human being and the lord of the universe . there is no god but he . the angels , and the lord of the universe , is the almighty , the wise .
save those who persevere and do good works . theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward .
indeed , we have warned you of a near torment , a day on which man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , oh , would that i were dust !
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work : for such , allah will change their vices into virtues . verily allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and of his signs is that he looses the winds as bearers of glad tidings , so that he may let you taste his mercy , and that the ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek his bounty , and perhaps you will be grateful .
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is another punishment besides this . but most of them do not know .
and those on the left hand ; what of those on the left hand ?
those who spend their wealth by night and day , secretly and openly – their reward is with their lord ; and no fear shall be on them , nor shall they grieve .
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and who have surrendered themselves .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
such then is god , your true lord . what is there after the truth but error ? how then are you turned away ?
he said : there shall be no reproach on you today . allah will forgive you ; and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
on the day when some faces will be bright and some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened , “ did you disbelieve after your believing ? so taste the punishment for your disbelief . ”
so where are you heading ?
or is it that youask them for some wages ? but the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of those who give sustenance .
from among the jinn and the men .
say : ' i ask of you no wage for it , neither am i of those who affect '
they shall roast into the scalding fire ,
and they have chosengods beside allah that they may be a power for them .
it is he who has created you as a thing . he has created you and made it a thing . then , when he has made a single woman , his refuge is with the people of the fire , and when they are free from their wife , they will say , “ i swear by your family , if you are a people who do not have any faith . ”
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
the intention of allah is the one who is free from the hands of those who are arrogant , and they say : the righteous are the ones who are utterly proud . will you not , then , be guided by god ?
and we have given the burden of all that is in the matter , so that they might have a differ about it , except after the clear things that came to them . and whoever is about to come about it - then indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning the things about which they differ .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the bounty of your lord is not confined .
so glorify the name of your lord most great .
and inspired it with knowledge of evil and piety ,
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the bounty of your lord is not confined .
the human being has always received the favor that he has bestowed on them . they will turn their backs and flee , and when evil befalls him , he is certainly lost .
and fear allah , and shame me not .
they said : by allah ! you know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves !
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
because he possesses wealth andsons .
then we utterly destroyed the rest of them .
we have set forth for every nation a position , so that the name of god may be made to him . god is one god , and give good news to their submissive servants .
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not .
say : i am not an innovator among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow that which is revealed to me , and i am but a plain warner .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord : but when the promise of my lord cometh to pass , he will make it dust , and the promise of my lord is true .
so destroyed were the thamud by a storm of thunder and lightning ;
again , no indeed , you shall soon know .
and there is a witness to every nation . we shall tell them : “ bring to us the proof of your right way , and we will say to the truth , ‘ bring your signs to your ! ’ and what you used to fabricate is indeed true .
indeed they had no fear of the account .
a questioner questioned the imminent torment .
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself to allah and is virtuous , and follows the religion of abraham , the upright in faith ? and allah took abraham for a friend .
for the living and the dead among you ?
as for those who are given the knowledge of what is given them , know that this is the truth from the lord of the truth , and the people of their hearts , so that their hearts may be convinced . god is certainly guided to the right path .
and keep vigil with it during parts of the night as an extra prayer . perhaps your lord will raise you to a highly praiseworthy position .
say : in the grace of allah and in his mercy ; therein let them rejoice ; it is better than that which they amass .
intercession with him will not avail him except for him whom he permits . when they are seized by your terror , they say : what is it that your lord says ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
his authority is over those who take him for their friend and ascribe associates to god .
o zakariya ! verily we give thee the glad tidings of a boy : his name shall be yahya : we have not afore-time made his namesake .
those who believed and did good deeds , they shall have a share of their position . and we shall not grant such of them as a partner .
when they come to believe in our signs , say , ‘ peace be to you ! ’ say , ‘ your lord has taken you to be righteous ! ’ say , ‘ your lord has taken upon himself a great thing . ’ say , ‘ your lord has taken upon himself a great way . ’
what you have will pass away , but what is with god is lasting . we will recompense those who are patient according to the best of their deeds .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
it is god who provides livestock for you , some for riding and some for your food .
which will neither fatten nor avail against hunger .
and also celebrate his praise at night , and at the retreat of the stars .
surely in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
he used to be happy among his family .
and indeed , before that , the people of moses were given to the murder of moses , and he filled their wealth with him , and made for them the wealth and the children of jacob . he said , ‘ do not sit with this , for indeed allah does not like those who do right . ’
do you not see that god has created the heavens and the earth and all that is in the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , apart from god ? the two of them will not be set up with their mouths , and on the day of judgment . god has full knowledge of all things .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? allah brought utter destruction upon them , and for the disbelievers is something comparable .
and when they are made to listen in the quran , it would certainly be revealed to them , and the hour is a time for them , the time when they will say , ‘ our lord ! we have faith , so keep us in a witness . ’
theyonly worship idols and satan , the persistent rebel .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? such will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , “ these are they who lied about their lord. ” indeed , the curse of allah is upon the wrongdoers .
and the example of the child 's child was also quoted at the time of the spider 's house , and we breathed into him of his spirit , and he breathed into him of the spirit , and he was one of the devout .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the knowing ,
but he was not long in coming , and said , “ i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
he said : lord of the east and the west and whatsoever is in-between , if ye understand .
so i swear by the retreating stars -
and the cattle -- he created them for you ; in them is warmth andbenefits , and from them you eat .
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and speak the right word ,
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
condemned till the day of doom !
and those you make to go forth from the graves , will be collected at their houses , and they will be collected in their houses , and if you are made to go back on their account , they will not be allowed to go back on their account . god is majestic and all-wise .
no misfortune can affect the earth or your own selves but it is in a book before we bring it into existence . that is easy for allah .
nay , but the hour is their tryst , and the hour is more disastrous and more bitter .
and those who stand by their testimony
praise be to allah , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . then those who disbelieve equatewith their lord .
the bedouins have believed in god and the last day , and what they desire for the cause of god , and to be near by his leave ; surely they shall be in the presence of god , the most forgiving , the most merciful .
and by this city of security .
so they went on until , when they met a boy , he slew him.said : what ! hast thou slain an innocent person who had slain none ? lo ! thou hast done a horrid thing .
what is the besieger ? !
and when you call to prayer , they take it in ridicule and amusement . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a rain of stones ? then you will know what my warning is like .
and your lord has decreed that you should not worship any other than him , nor is there among you any those who are in front of him , and your fathers , when they are in front of you , and do not be a skeptic .
and if there are some of you who believe in the message that i have been sent with , and a group who do not believe , be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
and we cut them up into communities on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tested them with goodand evil thingsso that they may return .
“ this is hell , which you were promised . ”
verily , those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , theearth full of gold will not be accepted from any one of them if he wouldransom himself with it . for such there will be a painful torment , and they will have no helpers .
so fear allah and obey me .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
do not rise up against god , i come to you with clear authority .
indeed for those who fear their lord in secret is forgiveness and a great reward .
have they not seen how the calamity of the people of the people went about ? then on the day when the people of old will be said : “ is it the truth of our lord , so that they could not have any faith ? ” they used to be lost , and they used to believe in it .
may the hands of abu lahab perish !
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate yourself and come closer to god .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
“ so what you have been given , he said , ” said , “ i have not been better at my son , and i am one of the two girls ; so if you advise me , i will be one of the successful . ”
and if an evil whisper comes to you from shaitanthen seek refuge with allah . verily , he is all-hearer , all-knower .
by god , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
however hard you try , most people will not believe .
and they will be told , this is what has been revealed to them . say , “ if i have fabricated it , you will not be able to harm him , and you could not have been able to harm him ; and god is full of bounty and mercy . ”
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought and love to be praised for what they have not done do not think that they are safe from the punishment ; and for them is a painful punishment .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not eat up their propertywith your own property ; this is indeed a great sin .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
it spares not , nor does it leave !
you will surely end up seeing hell ;
i will exhaust him increasingly .
o mankind ! we have indeed been given to you , , a sign , and we have given them the other people , so that one of them is the other ,
but when we removed from them the torment , behold , they broke their troth .
and whosoever shall turn away from allah after the guidance hath been manifested unto him , those who are eager to be the truth , their hearts are in vain , and the wrath of allah is upon them , and for him is a mighty doom .
and they say , “ if allah had so willed , we would have made for him gods ; and our forefathers have not been of the polytheists ” ; and we have not been remiss in front of them ; and this is nothing but a lie , and we do not follow any thing .
in moses ' absence , his people moulded a calf out of their ornaments . did they not see that it could not speak to them or guide them to a way ? they took it and were unjust .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our communications ; surely they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
never ! indeed , we created them from what they know .
it is they , the disbelievers , the sinners .
so that they will become floating dust particles .
those who do goodto be seen ,
a provision and benefit for you and your cattle .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a section upright : they recite the verses of allah during the night hours and prostrate .
they say , ‘ whatever there is in their bellies , is the result of their mothers . and if the two of their people were to do , we should be made to keep away from their bodies , and allah ’ s will is indeed all knowing , and we know all things . ’
how many generations have we destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
see they not that we have made the night that they may rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? verily therein are signs for a people who believe .
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , our lord , why did you not send us a messenger so that we could have followed your revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced ?
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs will be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
and strike the service of allegiance to you when you have the decree of the matter , when you have the decree of the torah and the covenant after it was revealed to you . and allah is aware of what you do .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets , and with thee , and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam . and we took from them a solemn bond .
he saith : begone therein , and speak not unto me .
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
the unbelievers say , shall we point out to you a man who will tell youwhen you have become fully disintegrated into dust with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
say thou : the holy spirit hath brought it down from thy lord with truth , that it may establish those who believe , and as a guidance and glad tidings unto the muslims .
and gardens and springs .
repel evil with that which is better . we know best what they attribute .
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
and i respite them -- assuredly my guile is sure .
allah—there is no god except him—is the lord of the great throne . ’
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the most forgiving , the most merciful . ”
he said : my lord ! judge thou with truth . our lord is the beneficent , whose help is to be sought against that which ye ascribe !
woe to those who give short measure ,
so when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
they can not frustrateon the earth , nor do they have besides allah any protectors . their punishment will be doubled . they could not be able to hear , nor could they see .
how can there be for the unbelievers a covenant with allah and his noble messenger ? but only those who keep their duty to allah are in truth ; indeed allah loves the godwary .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and they say , “ if allah had so willed , we would have made for him gods ; and our forefathers have not been of the polytheists ” ; and we have not been remiss in front of them ; and this is nothing but a lie , and we do not follow any thing .
have you considered him who calls the judgment a lie ?
and if you wed the women , then the calamity of the matter was due to them , and if they wish to be a thing of their mothers , the matter would have been decided between them , if they were to put a child in allah 's way ; and allah is well acquainted with what you do not know .
what you have will pass away , but what is with god is lasting . we will recompense those who are patient according to the best of their deeds .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you bar the faithful from the way of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? and allah is not oblivious of what you do . ’
the recompense of the people of the matter is that they should be doing to do good to the people , say , god will tell the people of the book . whoever has received the message of the prophet will be called to account . what god has given is a great reward .
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
all this . but the transgressors will have a miserable return .
say , “ the punishment will be made to keep away from your wives , and you do not make them a pure one . but when they are pure , they will be taken as god has ordained for them . god is the unjust and the pious . ”
those who disbelieve , theirs shall be a severe torment ; and those who believe and work righteous works -- theirs shall be forgiveness and a great hire .
praise be to allah who has sent down to his servant the book devoid of all crookedness ;
if we had revealed it to a nonarab ,
allah exhorts you never again to repeat the like , if you are believers .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
thenasked of god 's assistance , and every arrogant tyrant was frustrated :
and they have invented a blood-relationship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know well that they are to be brought up .
they can not frustrateon the earth , nor do they have besides allah any protectors . their punishment will be doubled . they could not be able to hear , nor could they see .
as for those who are wretched , they shall be in the fire , sighing and wailing .
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
how can there be for the unbelievers a covenant with allah and his noble messenger ? but only those who keep their duty to allah are in truth ; indeed allah loves the godwary .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a level highland with flowing water .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
then as for him whose balances are heavy ,
o you who have believed , do not give up the like of the fruit of the world with which they have been given and spend in the earth , and do not spend the like of it with the like of it ; and know that allah is the rich , the praised .
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : i am not responsible for you .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
he said , “ god forbid that we should arrest anyone except him in whose possession we found our property ; for then we would be unjust . ”
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord : satan has afflicted me with distress and torment .
that you will be granted whatever you choose ?
there is no fault for those who believe , and do righteous deeds , when they will be saved by god , he will cause the sins of their souls to appear away and who will be left responsible for their sins and god loves the pious ones .
we then gradually withdraw it towards us .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
so we subjected the wind to him , so that it ran softly by his command wherever he wished .
so observe the effects of the mercy of allah , how he revives the earth after its death ; indeed he is the reviver of the dead ; and he is able to do all things .
and the answer of his people was only that they said , “ expel them from your town ; they are purist people . ”
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is the rich , the praised .
to yield therein corn ,
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not .
did they not see that it did not return to them any speech , and that it did not possess for them any harm or benefit ?
those who have been given the book follow this , who will have a proclamation in the torah and the gospel , according to what is before them and what is hidden in the torah and the gospel , and it is they who will be made known to them by the law of the torah and the gospel ; and those who have faith and do the right will be made to go down by their means .
when it descends into their yard , evil will be the morning of those forewarned .
no indeed ; but you honour not the orphan ,
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto daud the power , and that which ye make us taste , and of the hearing , and the sight , and the hearing , and the sight ; and to be of the beliers .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
so allah seized him with the punishment of this life and the hereafter .
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
and , o muhammad ! ask the scripture for which they have been sent down for a book which is sent down to them , so they ask the greater of the two , and they said , “ we make a clear sign for you in the qur ’ an , and they will say , ‘ we have indeed put a clear sign for them . ’
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
we do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends goodness for them .
those who violate the covenant of allah after it had come to them , and allah has made the foundation of those who are made to flow . and they are the ones who make mischief in the land , and they are the ones who will have a way .
what is the matter with you that you do not believe in god , when the messenger calls you to believe in your lord , and he has already made a covenant with you , if you are believers ?
but as for those who disbelieved and belied our verses and the meeting of the hereafter , they shall be arraigned into the chastisement .
with the help of god . he helps whom he will , and he is all-mighty , ever-merciful .
and the subverted cities he overthrew .
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will become deniers of their worshipping .
and when you went forth from your family in the morning to post the believers at their stations for the battle- and allah is hearing , knowing .
have you considered he who turns his back ,
and do not be one of those who believe in allah and those who believe in allah and those who believe in allah and those who believe in him , may find his way , and remember that which is in the presence of allah , then see how was the end of the corrupters .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and thecome rushing at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
and the day when they will see the day of judgment , those who follow their own souls will be brought back to the punishment , and they will be able to witness what they had done .
your god is one god ; there is no god but he , the compassionate , the merciful .
and made of him a pair , the male and female .
and indeed , to our lord we will return .
say , ‘ tell me , should allah ’ s punishment overtake you , or the hour overtakes you , will you call upon any other than allah , if you are truthful ?
and recall what time allah hath made you successors in the land after the time of the house : in the land they hath made for you on the earth , the mountains , so celebrate the praises of allah and make mischief in the land .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news , and a warner ,
whoever desires to please you , people are going to do good deeds . those who do good deeds will receive a good reward from what they have done . god is watchful over everything .
some faces on that day shall be dusty
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them ? he has appointed for them a term about which there is no doubt . but the unjust do not consent to aught but denying .
so avoid him who has turned away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the life of this world .
and see ; soon they shall see !
who will roast in the great fire ,
nay , but the unbelievers are crying lies ,
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
if he will , he can remove you , o people , and bring others . and ever is allah competent to do that .
he said , “ it will be so , your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’
then his lord chose him , and he made a lesson for him , and he was penitent . he said , “ o mary , do the care of the idols whom he has made a seem to seem good to him . ” he said , “ o mary , do what he has made a great provision to him. ” he said , “ this is a part of the sustenance which he has made of the sustenance ; and god provides the sustenance of whomever he wills . ”
24 go to pharaoh , he has become insolent '
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fruits and fodder
perish man ! how ungrateful he is !
and will reward them for their patience with a garden and silk .
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them with their lord associate others .
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he bestows femaleupon whom he wills , and bestows maleupon whom he wills .
the promise of allah . allah does not fail in his promise , but most people do not know .
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew ! ”
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
and assuredly unto your substance ye have done , and unto your own selves , and the associators , and the associators , and the associators , and the hire of the associators . lo ! he is of the steadfast .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
who amasses wealth and hordes it .
say : are you apprising god of your faithfulness ? god knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . he has knowledge of everything .
and there is a variety of men for their parents , and their relatives , and the relatives , and the relatives , and the blood , a little from their parents , and a few of the sun , and a few of the sun .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them without purpose . that is the opinion of the unbelievers , so woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
and assuredly unto the household of fir'awn came the warning .
have we not made for him two eyes ?
we revealed to moses , : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor be afraid .
the path of allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . beholdall affairs tend towards allah !
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels not come with him conjoined ? ”
he will pay them their dues in full , and will increase them from his bounty . he is forgiving and appreciative .
god certainly knows all about the believers and the hypocrites .
let the rich spend according to his means , and he whose provision is little , let him spend from what allah has given him . allah does not charge a soul exceptwhat he has given it . allah will bring about ease after hardship .
you are not the ones who deny the truth , but god took you up , o dear prophet , and you have turned your backs , and you will not be blamed . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
then we drowned the others .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and be thou patient in the company of those who are on the remembrance of their lord , and fall in the midst of the sun , and the afternoons and the afternoons and the afternoons and the traveller .
the messenger of those who have been sent down from their lord and his angels and the apostles are in no way of truth . none but the messenger of his messengers are in truth . and to you they will return .
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , and is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
and keep vigil with it during parts of the night as an extra prayer . perhaps your lord will raise you to a highly praiseworthy position .
verily this is a reward for you , and your endeavour is accepted and recognised .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
we left for him a good name in posterity .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
then it appeared to them after they had seen the signs that al-'azeez should surely imprison him for a time .
woe , then , will be on that day to the beliers
my lord ! grant mefrom the righteous .
for those who swear a wait of four months from their wives , if they revert , god is forgiving and kind .
the shadows will bend over them , and low will hang the clusters of grapes .
and leave them desolate waste .
therein to dwell forever , desiring no removal out of them . '
do not be ungrateful to your own life , and do not follow the idols for their worship ; and whoever does not have the same to be worshipped , we will surely give them the reward of what they used to worship .
and all the voices that are in the hands of allah , and we created them in the way of allah , and they are the like of the things which they have been concealing . and even if they were to give thanks to my servants , they would not have been given thanks .
you call me to disbelieve in god and to associate with him that of which i have no knowledge , and i call you to the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
i shall turn away from you and my people from the things they worship . i pray to my lord and do not worship him . i hope that my lord will not be able to do so .
knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone
he it is who created the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of the throne of his throne ; he knows what he will and he will bring about his throne . and allah is of what you do , a beholder .
and establish prayer at the two ends of the day and in the first hours of the night ; indeed good deeds wipe out the evil deeds . that is a reminder for those who remember .
as for thamood , we guided them , but they preferred blindness to guidance . so the lightning-bolt of the punishment of humiliation seized them on account of their misdeeds .
he is indeed one of our faithful servants .
: theseare but a small band ,
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me will come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
our lord ! surely thou knowest what we hide and what we publish , and nothing is hidden from allah on the earth or in the heaven .
lo ! verily , they love you , but you love them not , and indeed , they do not love you , and when they are alone , they say , ‘ we are indeed going to believe ; indeed allah knows what lies within the hearts .
he placed thereinfirm mountains from above it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenancein four days equal , for all those who ask .
but if he be of the impugners , the astray ones ,
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks ; and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
and that they say what they do not do ?
in fact , they have no knowledge . indeed , they have doubted . he has knowledge of everything .
they do not expect any reward
when you see them , you will see them and see what time they are in a state of autism . and when they are made to hear it , they are in awe of it . and this is the same , and if they do , then take away from them . and allah is to keep them away .
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . and indeed , the timeallah , when it comes , can not be delayed , if you only knew .
who used to say : 'are you indeed of those who believe
and verily , llyas was one of the sent ones .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
a little , that was inspired in the remembrance of allah , and he is most gracious to his bounty , and he is of those who are of his slaves whom he pleases of his servants , and a humiliating chastisement awaits them .
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward ; and he has knowledge of all things .
they rejected our signs , all of them , so we seized them—the seizure of an almighty omnipotent .
'fashion wide coats of mail , balancing well the rings of chain armour , and work yourighteousness . lo ! i am seer of what ye do .
and the sun and moon are joined together , -
it is the likeness of the life of this world : we send down water from the sky to make it barren , and the earth will be in favour of the people of the world to come , so that it may be the ground for the people of the world to come , so that we may give it to a people who are still in their vicinity . thus we make a clear plain to people .
but if they disobey you , say , ‘ i am absolved of what you do . ’
and ease my task for me ;
thou wast heedless of this . now we have removed from thee thy covering , and sharp is thy sight this day .
verily allah hath cursed the infidels , and hath gotten ready for them a blaze .
they say , “ if it were our will , they say , if it were our will , then you would have inclined to the same without reckoning , and they do not believe . ”
so be patient . the promise of god is true ; and ask forgiveness for your sins , and proclaim the praise of your lord evening and morning .
they are those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of the world while they thought they were doing good .
they replied : 'are we to believe you whom the lowliest follow '
everything , be it great or small , is recorded .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the real bestower ?
and allah knows what you conceal and what you declare .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
and we ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice ,
so that we may guide the people who were given the guidance , and that the promise of allah is true ; and the promise of the hereafter was surely coming , and they said , “ this is certain of the truth ; and they said , “ this is a part of the dead ; and the disbelievers are in dominance . ”
so let man consider of what he was created .
“ to the people of the conceit of the people , and the noble messenger – he said , “ you have no god other than he ; he said , you have no god other than he ; and indeed i fear that you may be victorious . ”
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
and then they will take you out of their dwellings . then , if they take a sin against you , then , if there be a sin for you , then if you are a foe to it , then indeed , you will have to do what is in your hands , and the duty of a people is only to be made of ease in the life of the world . and do not take the reward of the disbelievers in the hereafter . and allah is free of all those who do good .
we gave the children of israel an atom 's good deeds and provided them with good things and provided them with the knowledge of which they had been differing . on the day of resurrection , we will separate them from their differences .
but you took them for a laughing-stock until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
and they turned their backs , and allah is the owner of the unseen ; and the sun , and the moon , and the sun , and the afternoons and the afternoons and the afternoons , and the bringer of good tidings are the people who give the lie to allah .
some faces on that day will be radiant ,
it is he who gives me food and drink
a recompense for that which they have been working .
but they disobeyed the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
those who said , “ if they are united , they said , “ if they are united , then say , roam the arguments ; and be devoted to the like of those who are disobedient . ”
thou takest vengeance on us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord ! pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims .
he said , ‘ allah has indeed presented your punishment . indeed , he has spoken the truth , but they said : ‘ what is the matter with you ? ’ they said , ‘ indeed , allah has full knowledge of this , and he has no knowledge . ’
for the favors of god we have made for you , and we have sent down on you a garment from the shadows , and provided for the good things of what we have given them . they were unjust to our will .
we would have seized him by the right hand
if they turn away , god knows well the evil-doers .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who are muslims . ”
we raised him to a high position .
and he had no party to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
say , ‘ whoever is an enemy of gabrielit is he who has brought it down to your heart by allah ’ s permission , confirming what was before it and a guidance and good news for the faithful . ’
“ bring to me , ” and when the messenger came to joseph , he said : “ go back to the master. ” then say : “ what was the matter with themselves ? ” and it is indeed my lord who is prone to be disappointed .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
then he will be rewarded for it with the fullest recompense
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven years continuously ; so leave all that you harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
having power , with the lord of the throne secure ,
and whoever invokes besides allah another deity for which he has no proof , then his account is only with his lord ; indeed the faithless will not succeed .
he said , would that i had the poweror could seek strong protection .
if we will , we can send down on them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
who believed in our signs and were muslims .
indeed , we have made it a torment for the wrongdoers .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls on me . so let them respond to meand believe in me that they may beguided .
and at the earth , how it is spread out ?
so how were my punishment and warnings ? !
did they not see that it did not return to them any speech , and that it did not possess for them any harm or benefit ?
so i warn you of a blazing fire ,
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
the human being was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
he is the one who accepts the way of allah , to the right way , and makes them to enter into the recess of peace , and will guide them to the right path .
he said : worship ye then instead of allah that which can not profit you at all , nor harm you ?
therein to dwell forever , desiring no removal out of them . '
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the unbelievers because of thejudgment of a momentous day !
but , he denied and turned away .
then , on that day , he will leave them into the like of it , or bring them back to the day when the trumpet will be sounded , and the trumpet will be blown .
let there arise out of you a band of people inviting to all that is good , enjoining what is right , and forbidding what is wrong , and those are the prosperers .
say : i am only a warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the prevailing .
and how can you disbelieve when the verses of allah are recited to you and his messenger is among you ? whoever holds firmly to allah hasbeen guided to a straight path .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said , “ if only we had the like of what korah has been given ! he is indeed very fortunate . ”
they said : we augur ill of thee and those with thee . he said : your ill omen is with allah : nay , but ye are folk that are being tested .
did they not see that it did not return to them any speech , and that it did not possess for them any harm or benefit ?
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with his praise , and judgment will be given between them with justice , and it will be said , “ praise be to god , the lord of the worlds . ”
so that they should not worship allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you declare .
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good shall see it ,
who establish prayer and give zakah , and who are certain of the hereafter .
as if they were frighteneddonkeys .
o ye messengers ! enjoythings good and pure , and work righteousness : for i am well-acquainted withthat ye do .
but if they do not respond to you , know that it has been revealed with the knowledge of allah and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
this is a message to be delivered to mankind that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
and those who set up rivals to allah , they say , “ had allah willed , there would not have been any other deities apart from him ; nor could our forefathers be able to do anything but it ; and allah did not accept this promise , except for the noble messengers . ”
did we not make the earth a spreading ,
in them are two gushing springs .
and when the devil has made them seem fair to them , he said : no soul is there on that day . and when one of you is one of the other , he said : lo ! i am innocent of what ye do . lo ! i fear allah , the beholder .
so be patient , , over what they say and exaltwith praise of your lord before the rising of the sun and before the setting .
and forgive my father ; verily he is of the erring .
and remember you much .
for he thought and he plotted ; -
and o dear prophetwhen they will be in a place of worship , saying : “ glory be to you ! the glory of your lord is glorified , and they will say , ‘ the all-beneficent is indeed the biggest . ’
and faces shall be humbled unto the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
if thou couldst see when they are set before their lord ! he will say : is not this the truth ? they will answer : yea , by our lord ! he will say : taste then the penalty for that ye were disbelieving .
but if a bounty from god visits you , he would surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him : 'would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success '
they say , ‘ we the messenger of allah 's messenger is the son of mary , but the thunderbolt has not been closed at all , but they do not listen to it , but they do not have any knowledge of it . indeed , they do not know . ’
we have given you abundance .
or say they : in him is madness ? nay , he hath brought them the truth , and most of them are averse from the truth .
marked from your lord , and never far from the wrongdoers .
he said , “ by your majesty , i will seduce them all .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said : by the might of pharaoh , it is we who will certainly win !
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them without purpose . that is the opinion of the unbelievers , so woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
observing neither bond nor treaty towards a believer ; they are the transgressors .
successful is he who purifies it .
“ this is our bestowal ; so give or withhold as you wish without account . ”
for the beggar and the outcast ,
that we might try them thereby . and whoso turneth away from the remembrance of his lord , he will thrust him into ever-growing torment .
indeed , this is a reminder , so he who wills may take to his lord a way .
o ye who believe ! be witness to allah and to the witness of your lord , and to make your lives to be of no avail , if ye are a man of respect to the poor , and may not be of the rulers . but if ye turn away , then allah is aware of what ye do .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
these will be given their reward twice over , because they are steadfast and repel evil with good , and spend out of what we have provided them .
and if ye do not help the messenger , then verily allah hath cursed those who have disbelieved , and when the disbelievers have turned to them in the cave , he said : grieve not , and allah 's messenger is the most mighty , the most mighty .
attempting to answer , they will say , ‘ by allah , our lord , we were not polytheists . ’
neither you nor what you worship
o zakariya ! verily we give thee the glad tidings of a boy : his name shall be yahya : we have not afore-time made his namesake .
then depart from the place whence the multitude hasteneth onward , and ask forgiveness of allah . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
indeed those who oppose allah and his apostle—they will be among the most abased .
and when the people come after that , there is no doubt about them . so we place our bounties towards them . so , this is a plan by our command . and indeed , we have done what they plot .
may allah forgive you ! why did you give them leave until those who told the truth were told by you as a liar ?
they said : thus says your lord . verily , he is the all-wise , the all-knower .
say , “ in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and he protects while none can protect against him , if you know ? ”
he said , do not take me to task for what i forgot and do not be hard on me .
in theis made distinct every affair of wisdom ,
why do you not bring down the angels upon us if you are truthful ?
and the answer of his people was only that they said , “ expel them from your town ; they are purist people . ”
he said : this is the parting between me and thee . now i will tell thee the interpretation of that which thou wast unable to hold patience .
as a mercy from your lord , he hears all and knows all ,
even so ; and we shall espouse them to wide-eyed houris ,
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter that they should have any option in their decision . and whosoever disobeyeth allah and his apostle hath strayed with a manifest straying .
then , as for him who says to his parents and was faithful , “ what ! you are the ones who will be sent back to me ? ” so , he says , “ this is just a skilled sorcerer . ”
and such fruits as they fancy ,
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
have you not heard how your lord dealt with ad
and he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command . indeed in that are signs for a people who have sense .
or say , “ had god guided me , i would have been one of the pious . ”
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
say , “ do i worship god , other than god , who is my lord and the lord of all things ? there is no one who can bring your lord any guardian . you will have the news of your differences . ”
but those who seek beyond that are transgressors .
and of the people of the scripture is a community that exceeds the matter , and to make it easy for you to say , “ this is just a slur you may have , if you are a hanif ” ; and they will say , “ the loathing of a people who are bent on denying the truth are , and will be called to account for what they used to do . ”
allah blots out what he wills and confirms ; and with him is the mother of the book .
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
then god sent down his composure upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the unbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
whoever is an enemy of god , his angels , his messengers , gabriel and michael , god is an enemy to the unbelievers .
he is god , the only lord , who knows the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent , the merciful .
we informed him that the unbelievers would be utterly destroyed .
he said : i am only a messenger of thy lord , that i may bestow on thee a faultless son .
so that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it . will they not then be grateful ?
and we admitted him into our mercy ; surely he was of the righteous .
and we have indeed made the qur ’ an easy to memorise , so is there one who would remember ?
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is another punishment besides this . but most of them do not know .
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . and indeed , the timeallah , when it comes , can not be delayed , if you only knew .
some faces on that day shall be dusty
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden and enjoyas ye wish : but approach not this tree , lest ye become wrong-doers .
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs will be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
who shall inherit me and inheritthe posterity of jacob . and make him , my lord , acceptable .
what are they asking one another about ?
and assuredly joseph showed his signs unto thee ; so they were in doubt thereof ; and they were in doubt concerning that which he hath sent down . and that , when an apostle came unto thee , he saith unto himself , and it is . thus allah hath caused the god-fearing .
so , , leave them alone for a while ,
i call to witness the heavens and the night star --
say , indeed , if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a tremendous day .
“ what is the matter with you , if we turn away from his lord , and he is the owner of guidance , and for us is the guidance of the righteousness , and we are to be patient in the way of your lord ? ”
they will say , woe to us ! who has raised us up from our graves ? this is what the beneficent god had promised , and the messengers spoke truth .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what will make you perceive ? perhaps the hour is near .
indeed the example of jesus with allah is like the case of adam . he created him from dust , then said to him , ‘ be ! ’ and he was .
verily your god is one ,
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
and in heaven is your sustenance , asthat which ye are promised .
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy ; therein they shall be abiders .
say , ‘ indeed , i have no knowledge of you , but what you have to return to allah is the one who is the one god ; so he who keeps his trust in his lord is the one , and he has no one to be of the polytheists .
so by your lord , we shall surely gather them and the devils ; then we shall bring them up around hellon their knees .
behold ! that which ye have been wont to know of allah in the presence of allah and the messenger , and the poor , and the poor , and the wayfarer ] , verily , that which we have sent down of our signs , the day of judgment , allah is able to do all things .
i am for you an honest messenger .
we are the rangers ,
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better things than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will give you palaces .
and if it was my father , those who have no knowledge of them , know that they have no knowledge of it . and their duty is to them , in the hereafter , and to me , and to me you will be returned .
have they not bethought themselves their companion is not mad ? he is only a plain warner .
he said , ‘ allah has indeed presented your punishment . indeed , he has spoken the truth , but they said : ‘ what is the matter with you ? ’ they said , ‘ indeed , allah has full knowledge of this , and he has no knowledge . ’
your riches and your children are but a trial , and allah is with the most merciful .
ye did not hide yourselves lest your ears and your eyes and your skins should bear witness against you , but ye imagined that allah knew not much of what ye did .
and we shall show you the evidence of the truth so that we shall make the matter clear to them , and that it may be clear to them that it may be clear to them ; and that he is the best of all things .
who is more unjust than he who lies about god and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell a dwelling for the unbelievers ?
and indeed , we have sent our noble messengers with the signs and the manifest proof . the messengers of the heavens and the earth has already been revealed to the prophets , and we made it a wide beacon for the people . and we have made a great beacon for the people .
o you who have believed , do not let any other reason than that of yours , until they do not make excuses . then you will be called to account of the disbelievers , so that they may be patient and be patient .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
my people , i fear for you the day you will cry out to one another ,
he dreadeth not the sequel .
my lord , give me judgment , and join me with the righteous ,
and he created the jinn from smokeless fire .
no indeed ! soon they will know !
whomever god misguides has no guide . and he leaves them blundering in their transgression .
but if allah should harm you , there is no savior for you except him ; or if he wills , he can do no good to whom he pleases , and he is the forgiving , the most merciful .
and fear allah , and shame me not .
then we made the people of the book inherit the scripture that were given to this , and some of our creatures were unjust , and some of them are otherwise , and others are of the same . that is the supreme success .
and preferred the life of this world ,
it is he who has created you from a single person , and has given you a place of residingand a place of storageor in your father 's loins ] . we have indeed spelled out our signs for those who understand .
nor did we feed the destitute .
it is not but a revelation revealed ,
shake the trunk of the date-palm tree , and it will drop ripe dates for you .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest ; and he made the day a revival .
and the heavens and the earth did not weep for them , nor were they respited .
and have appointed a dazzling lamp ,
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , god will give them their full reward and his bounty . god will grant them a painful punishment , but they will not have to help them other than god .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , while a party of them used to listen to the word of allah and then distort it after they had understood it , and they knew ?
and i swear by the self-critical soul !
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed ; he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
to show ingratitude for what we have given them . enjoy yourselves , but you will soon know .
such is allah , your lord ! there is no god but he , the creator of all things , so worship him ; and he is the wakilover all things .
had it not been for a prior decree of allah , there would have befallen you a great punishment for what you took .
say : 'what think you ? if you should be sent down to god , then you shall have no answer ' then , you will know who is a terrible punishment .
and those who accuse of falsehood a lie concerning you , think that they have the right to be of the evil , and that he is a great punishment for you , and a great punishment .
and whatever is in your own hands , to the former nations , do not be impressed by the majesty of allah , and to make things equal to you , but you are not aware of the things you have done . it is indeed allah ’ s will , and you do not perceive .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the book will be set in place , and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought and the matter will be justly decided between them ; and they will not be wronged .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the raisers of commotion in madina desist not , we shall surely set thee up against them ; thenceforth they shall not be suffered to neighbour thee therein except for a little while .
and that they say what they do not do ?
we created the heavens , the earth , and everything between them in six daysnor were we ever wearied .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news , and a warner ,
and i do not acquit myself . verily , theself is inclined to evil , except inasmuch as my lord has mercy . indeed , my lord is forgiving and merciful .
and have appointed a dazzling lamp ,
when they went up to joseph , he turned to abraham in fear . they said , ‘ do not make us hear , and we shall have no one to guide us among us , except a guide . ’
answer the call of your lord before there comes from allah a day that can not be turned back . you will have no refuge on that day , nor will you havedenial .
surely to us is their return ;
and allah knows what you conceal and what you declare .
o you who have believed , when you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them , you have no period to reckon against them . so make provision for them and release them in a graceful manner .
whomever god guides is the guided one . and whomever he sends astray—these are the losers .
even though every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
and frolic about in doubt .
and you shall be three sorts .
so do they wish to hasten our punishment ?
the unbelievers who have been given the sanctity of the faithful will face the way of hell to the believers who do not realize the truth of their own tradition , and they will have a painful punishment .
for what day is it timed ?
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term .
and when they came to a place of time , he was utterly inclined to you , and then go with good , and let them go with that which is in your own hands . so let them be a lesson and a duty of allah .
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars , and the sun and the moon ; i saw them bowing down before me . ”
he it is who created the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of the throne of his throne ; he knows what he will and he will bring about his throne . and allah is of what you do , a beholder .
and they worship instead of allah that for which he hath sent down no warrant and that whereof they have no knowledge ; and for the wrong-doers there shall be no helper .
but those who believed and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , those expect the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
indeed those who disbelieve after they have believed and advance in disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted . they are those who are astray .
and o dear prophetwhen they will be in a place of worship , saying : “ glory be to you ! the glory of your lord is glorified , and they will say , ‘ the all-beneficent is indeed the biggest . ’
benefits anddrinks have they from them . will they not then give thanks ?
when hell is set ablaze ,
what , do you know of those who were given the story of abraham ? when the people said to abraham , what is the matter with you ? why do you worship god , and isaac , and isaac ?
and when the messengers ' time is set
and to allah belongs the ghaibof the heavens and the earth , and to him will all affairs be returned . so worship him and rely on him . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
those who believe and are cautious .
and when they came to a place of time , he was utterly inclined to you , and then go with good , and let them go with that which is in your own hands . so let them be a lesson and a duty of allah .
but it will be only a single nudge .
and when they advanced to meet jalutand his forces , they said : our lord ! pour forth on us patience , and make us victorious over the disbelieving people .
o ye who believe ! when ye are to worship that which ye have to pray , then make a chance of your object , then go forth with your hands , and then ye shall have your power , and to keep your hands in the midst of those who are in hispresence , and that ye may be of those who are pure . and of a surety , ye may be of those who are pure .
and do not defraud people in their property or spread evil in the land .
who associate none with their lord in his divinity ,
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
is it you who made the tree thereof to grow , or are we the grower ?
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and he is established on the throne , and he is able to do what he will . will you not take heed ?
then , when they saw it as a cloud approaching their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain ! nay , but it is thatwhich you were asking to be hastened ! a wind wherein is a painful torment !
they said , call upon your lord to make clear to us what she pleases . he said , he says , 'it is a cow which is neither old nor young , but between that you are commanded . '
he said : o my people ! there is no foolishness in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf to hear , even though they apprehend not ?
as bounty from your lord . that is what is the great attainment .
so note the outcome of their planning ; we destroyed them and their people , all .
it almost bursts with fury . every time a group is cast therein , its keeper will ask : did no warner come to you ?
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may be godwary .
but when he gave them of his bounty they became greedy , and turned away , averse .
put your trust in god ; god is sufficient as a guardian .
ill-mannered , and moraly corrupt or that because he may possess wealth and children .
god has heard the words of her who argued with you concerning her husband and complains to god . god heard your conversation . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
fight those who do not believe in god and the last day , nor forbid what god and his messenger have forbidden , nor do they have the right religion , until they pay the tribute out of their due due to hand and pay the due tax ,
and these similtudes ! we propound them for mankind ; and none understand them save men of knowledge .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
and the brothers of the suppliant was to be rent at his point : he said : in fact , you have been led by your own hand . then , he said , you are in no way to be seduced .
nobut allah can lay it bare .
osoul , inrest and satisfaction !
orbiting , disappearing ;
so the shriek seized them in justice , and we made them as rubbish of dead leaves . so away with the unjust people !
this is what god gives good news to the believers , and the righteously striving believers . ask them , do not ask me any recompense for this , for god is appreciative and appreciative .
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who have attained to faith . allah has indeed sent down to you a reminder ,
and when he had given them their provisions , he put his drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : 'cameleers , you are thieves ! '
we established you in the earth and made in itmeans of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
and if you die or are killed , before allah you shall all be gathered .
on that day allah will pay them their due in full , and they will know that allah , he is the manifest truth .
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
and there are advantages for you in them , and that you may attain thereby to any need that is in your breasts ; and upon them and upon ships you are carried .
and of those whom we created there is a nation who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
he has counted and enumerated them one by one .
— except the prayerful ,
and it is not the shayatinwho have brought itdown ,
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter he has no share .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
warn your nearest kinsmen ,
they said , ‘ we miss the king ’ s goblet. ’ ‘ whoever brings it shall have a camel-load , ’ ‘ i will guarantee that . ’
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
as for the thief , both male and female , cut off their hands as a punishment for what they have earned.an exemplary punishment from allah , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
blessed is he who has revealed the criterionto his servant that he may warn the nations .
we are enough for you against the mockers .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to something terrible .
do you not know that it is allah to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ”
the believers are only those who , when god is mentioned , their hearts quake , and when his revelations are recited to them , they increase their faith , and who put their trust in their lord ;
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts that which they feared .
and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , so they became motionless bodies in their abodes ,
nay , it shall come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they shall not be able to repel it , nor shall they be respited .
have you not regarded those who were told to keep it up ? but , when you have given them , perform the prayer , and when they are given to give you a part of it , they will say , “ o god , you may wish to give us a little ; only a few of them in the life of this world is only for a while . ”
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
he said , “ shall i seek for you a god other than god , when he has favored you over all other people ? ”
except for those who do not have any power to do good , and they will be able to hide the truth from god and seek his protection . god will bestow a great reward upon those who believe .
on that day , you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
you ignore him .
said the eminent among the people of pharaoh : do you wish to commit evil in the land , and to make mischief in the land ? he said , “ i will most certainly be sorry , and they do not like . ”
these are eye-openers for mankind , and guidance and mercy for people who believe with certainty .
do not set up another god with god , or you will remain disgraced and destitute .
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
and have appointed your sleep for repose ,
they said : we augur ill of thee and those with thee . he said : your ill omen is with allah : nay , but ye are folk that are being tested .
: we feed you only for the countenance of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
say : those who have been bent on denying the truth shall be the ones who will be called to the right and to the traveller . then they will be called to account for their people , and be steadfast in your duty to god ; and if you turn away , god will surely bring to you a reward from him .
no indeed ! but they do not fear the hereafter .
and perform as-salat , and give zakat , and irka'along with ar-raki'un .
and it shall avert the punishment from her if she swears four times by allah that the man is a liar .
and allah will make those who believe in the life of this world to come , and in the life of the world to come , and on the contrary , it is he who will bring forth the disbelievers in the life of the world . and he is the most astray , the most knowing .
now that you have withdrawn from them and from what they worship other than allah , take refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you and will furnish you with a gentle issue of your affair .
lo ! those who disbelieve and follow the way of allah after the guidance hath come unto them , those ! they shall not hurt allah at all , and allah is seer of all that he do .
nay ! but those who believe and do good works are as if we do spread out the cause of corruption in the land , or are we the godfearing ?
they will have therein their dwelling , and therein they shall be abiders .
say , “ who guards you from the most merciful by night and by day ? ” but they turn away from the mention of their lord .
god has favoured the faithful by sending an apostle to them from among themselves , who recites to them his revelations , and purifies them , and teaches them the book and wisdom , although before that they were in manifest error .
and what is your business , that you may not be able to frustrate him in the least , when it is made unlawful to you , except that which is made unlawful for you , and indeed , most of mankind are deviators .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what comes out of it , and what descends from the heaven and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
our lord ! surely thou knowest what we hide and what we publish , and nothing is hidden from allah on the earth or in the heaven .
he said , “ as for him who does wrong , we will punish him ; then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
it is you who will be called to account for you , so that you may be condemned in the way of god , and may be made to receive a heavy source of it . but he who is a greedy friend , he will take it away , and bring it on your heels ; and if you turn away , it is god who is the best of those who have gone astray .
the angels said , mary , god has selected you and purified you . he has selected you overthe women of your time .
their eyes humbled , humiliation will cover them . they had been invited to bow down when they were sound .
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you . so let her feed on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest there may overtake you a torment nigh .
and remember ismail and yasa ’ aand zul-kifl ; and they are all excellent .
verily we ! we have made this for all of them a goodly : is there then any one who will turn away ? so -- the way of this is , and howwas my abhorrence .
, separate yourselves from the righteous this day , you criminals .
it is god who has made lawful for you out of the night , their wives , and your clothing for your wives and your clothing for you . god is watchful of what you do .
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , and in order that he might abase the transgressors .
and when you have made them a thing , the object of the dead will be made of it , and the one on whom you have the right hand , and it was said to them , “ did you worship what you used to do ? ” and what you used to do is in your duty to allah . and allah is well aware of what you do .
if you find no one in the house , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , turn away . that is purer for you . god knows well all that you do .
indeed , those who disbelieve - it is the same to them whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the best of rewards in the hereafter ; and allah loves the righteous .
every tiding has its appointed time ; you yourselves will soon know .
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until , when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him , and they never fail .
say , “ the witness of those who seek to come in front of you – and do not say , ” say : “ allah is the witness of ” ; and say : “ allah is the witness of , and i do not think that they are with allah . say , “ indeed he is the one who is a muslim ” ; say , “ indeed he is the one who watches all things . ”
when we made you equal with the lord of the worlds .
but you prefer the present life ,
when god has given the good news of the people of the prophet , they set up you in the presence of those who are given to you . but if you had done so , they will be made to fight in you , but god knows what lies within the hearts .
but they called our call , so we saved noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ship , and we made them their successors in the land ; so how could the fate of those who had been warned ?
we sent noah to his people : “ i have come to you with a clear warning . ”
why should i not worship him who has created me and to whom you shall all be recalled ?
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , prostrate yourselves before adam , and they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he was not among those who prostrated themselves .
and they say : we are about to keep away the covering of that which thou dost call upon , so that thou mayest be called upon , and we shall have to keep up thy feet , and thou shalt be among the convinced .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer , -
and whoever obeys allah and the apostle—they are with those upon whom allah has bestowed favor of the prophets and the truthful , the martyrs and the righteous , and excellent companions are they !
if you stretch your hand against me to kill me , i shall not stretch my hand against you to kill you , for i fear god , the lord of the worlds .
in scorching wind and scalding water
say : allah gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will assemble you on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know .
wherefore eat of that whereon the name of allah hath been pronounced , if ye are believers in his revelations .
he will invokedestruction ,
we are surely able to show you what we promise them .
those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , god will give them their full reward and his bounty . god will grant them a painful punishment , but they will not have to help them other than god .
the sinners laughed at the believers
enter thou my paradise ! '
butmercy from us and for enjoyment till a time .
a book , the verses of which are distinguished , an arabic koran for a people who know .
say : ' i have no knowledge of my lord . what you have sought to hasten is with me , the decision of it is only for god . it is only god , the almighty , the going to know . '
yes , his lord had been watching him .
and if it had been our will , we could have made the command of our command , but it is in the hands of the heaven to come . and it is like the example of those who have rejected our revelations , so that it may be a lesson for the people who denied our signs .
they will come out of the graves with downcast eyes as if they were scattered locusts .
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , in them his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings ,
they descend on every lying , sinful person .
have you not seen those who exchanged the blessing of allah for ungratefulness and led their people down to the home of destruction ?
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith favoured you , and fulfil my covenant , and i shall fulfil my covenant with you , and fear me alone .
verily allah is with those who fear and those who are well- doers .
he said : i am only a messenger of thy lord , that i may bestow on thee a faultless son .
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause fir'aun'speople to enter the severest doom .
but the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of god .
see how terrible was the end of those who were warned .
so this day no ransom can be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved . your refuge is the fire ; that is your companion , and a hapless journey 's end .
he will say : thus did our signs come to you , but you forgot them ; and so will you this day be forgotten .
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the folk of lot , whom we saved at dawn
we seduced you . we were seducers . ”
those to whom we have given the book recognize it as they recognize their sons . those who have lost their own souls will not believe .
wherein you shall not hear vain talk .
i ask of you no payment for it . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
they said : we have given thee good tidings in truth , so be not thou of the despairing .
and whom allah guides , there is none who can lead him astray ; is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
so that he may make what satan throws in a trial for those in whose hearts is a disease and those whose hearts are hardened and the harmdoers are in a wide schism .
and when the devil has made them seem fair to them , he said : no soul is there on that day . and when one of you is one of the other , he said : lo ! i am innocent of what ye do . lo ! i fear allah , the beholder .
he said , “ you will find me , god willing , patient ; and i will not disobey you in any matter . ”
do they seek other than the religion of allah , while to him submitted all creatures in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
do they possessthe unseen , so that they write it down ?
verily , those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , theearth full of gold will not be accepted from any one of them if he wouldransom himself with it . for such there will be a painful torment , and they will have no helpers .
24 go to pharaoh , he has become insolent '
so believe in god and his messenger , and in the light which we have sent down . god is aware of all that you do .
the god of mankind ,
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their master—because of what they used to do .
who pass their nights in prostrating themselves and standing before their lord ,
and you will surely learn its tidings in due time . ”
had it not been for a favour from his lord he would have been cast blame-worthy on a barren plain .
'peace be upon you , for that you were patient ' best is the ultimate abode .
those who dispute our signs may know that they have no asylum .
when those who were bent on denying the truth and on the day of judgment , how terrible you will take to your servants or turn you away from them . god is the best of all guardian .
you have by day prolonged occupations .
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it , and they ruin none save themselves , and they perceive not .
the messenger of those who have been sent down from their lord and his angels and the apostles are in no way of truth . none but the messenger of his messengers are in truth . and to you they will return .
who preserve their trusts and pledges
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
then he looked up at the stars ,
and what will make you comprehend what the night of destiny is ?
and recall what time musa cometh unto his people , and he asked his people : we give unto thee my staff , so that thou mayest be of the seduced . lo ! it is of the firmness of corruption . and of allah 's provision , do not transgress .
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
indeed , guidance is ours ,
and if we will , we drown them , then none have they to cry to , neither are they delivered ,
it is he who has made the earth submissive to you . walk about in its land and eat of his provision . to him is the resurrection .
those who disbelieve , the lord of those who reject the message of their lord shall be like a stone of stone to a day in which the rain of an inauspicious day will be already decided . that is the supreme triumph .
and there were gathered unto sulaiman his hosts of jinns and men and birds , and they were set in bands .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
do not suppose that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode is the fire , and it is indeed an evil destination .
in a book protected
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a confused state .
'peace be upon thee , companion of the right ! '
they said , have you brought us the truth , or are you one of those who jest ?
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yes , he has power over all things .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of the night and the morning recitation ; surely the morning recitation is witnessed .
but as for him who was indifferent .
behold ! how they propound similitudes for thee ! so they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
so the magicians were assembled at a set time on a day appointed .
“ and if his shirt is torn from behind , then she has lied , and he is truthful . ”
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
and he can make that which is in the way of allah a standard of access , and the two in between the two of the two , and for those who keep their duty to allah ; and you will not be able to know .
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
those are they who have purchased error at the price of guidance , and torment at the price of pardon ; how patiently they shall endure the fire !
andfair ones with wide , lovely eyes ,
and when it is said to them : 'come to that which allah has sent down , ' they say , ‘ it is only our fathers whom we have spoken . what ! then will they be reminded ? ’ what , will they be reminded ? ’
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
permitted for you is the catch of sea and its food—as sustenance for you and for travelers . but forbidden to you is game from the land while you are in pilgrim sanctity . and fear god , to whom you will be gathered .
witnessed by those brought near .
and mention in the book moses ; he was devoted , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
there is no blame on the people of the matter that could be the best of those who are bent on denying the truth and can not be able to change their ability for it , until the people are made to hear their lord 's revelations . and whoever comes up with allah in his divinity will be subjected to a great deal .
but when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , this is nothing but contrived magic . we never heard of this among our forefathers .
woe unto every backbiter , slanderer ,
but hymn the praise of your lord , and be of those who make obeisance .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh : will there surely be a reward for us if we are the winners ?
they will not taste therein cool or any drink .
save those who persevere and do good works . theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward .
and fear a day when no soul will compensate for another , neither will any ransom be accepted from it , nor will any intercession benefit it , nor will they be helped .
another sign for them is that we carried their offspring in the laden ship .
and admit them to paradise , which he has made known to them .
and those who accuse of falsehood a lie concerning you , think that they have the right to be of the evil , and that he is a great punishment for you , and a great punishment .
, o mankind , what is the matter with you , that the hearts of god will be created , and there is other than him in the heavens , and the earth , other than him ? that is the supreme triumph .
how many generations have we destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
and help you with surpassing help .
and will not be removed from it .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , then he will cause it to be in the earth , then he will cause it to gush forth in the ground , and he will bring forth the dead , and then we will make it stationary ? in this there is a reminder for those endowed with understanding .
gardens enclosed , and grapevines ;
we alone know who deserves most to be burned therein .
and those who believe in the day of judgement ,
they say , “ if there were a good man , ” they say , “ if there were a good man , we would be with you , so as to be a demon , and you will be like those who are in a state of disease , like the one who turned away . ”
this is a warning for the sake of god . when it is called to worship god , other than him , is not the partners of him . but if there be no more than that they believe in god , the command is only with him , and the mighty , the great .
with the help of god . he helps whom he will , and he is all-mighty , ever-merciful .
andothers deferred until the command of allah - whether he will punish them or will forgive them . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
effective wisdom ; but warnings do not avail .
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that if you command them , they would go forth . say , ‘ do not swear ; obedience obedience ; indeed allah knows what you do . ’
now we have put thee unto them as a covering , and we have laid hold of them on their hearts , and that they may come unto thee , that they may come to know ; and they say : lo ! this is naught but fables of the ancients .
say : 'would you dispute with us about god , who is our lord and your lord ? our deeds belong to us and to you belong your deeds . we are sincere to him '
so when they came upon the ship , they became motionless seated in the sea . he said , “ do you see the witchcraft ? you can see that you are in the sea , so you will witness it . ”
that is the case of the heavens and the earth that i may explain to you the way of moses , and i know that i am a liar . thus , do the people of the pharaoh , then , a scheme .
we have no knowledge of the human being except that we have sent the divine revelation to those who were bent on denying the truth , so that we may put it to those who have rejected the faith and the people of the book , and those who have been given the faith and the people of the book can not have any faith . this is how god guides those who are given the lie to the truth .
in the seat of honor with a most powerful king .
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say : 'you have tarried in god 's book till the day of resurrection , this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know '
and contend thou not for those who defraud their souls verily allah loveth not one who is a defrauder , sinner .
and when they will quarrel in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then spare us some of our suffering of the fire ? ”
are they waiting for god to come down to them in canopies of clouds , with the angels , and the matter to be settled ? all things are returned to god .
he said , “ my lord , i fear they will deny me . ”
and it is he who has made the earth a bed , and he made it crooked , and he has made the night a calmness , and indeed in this are signs for people who ponder .
or you cause the heaven to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring god and the angels before us face to face ;
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
who make mischief in the land , and reform not .
throw down your staff . when he saw it wriggling like a serpent , he turned about retreating , and turned not back . 'moses , come forward , and fear not ; surely you are of those who are secure .
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the folk of lot , whom we saved at dawn
but they called our call , so we saved noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ship , and we made them their successors in the land ; so how could the fate of those who had been warned ?
those who deny the book and what we have sent with our apostles , will soon come to know .
they were defeated and turned belittled ,
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending ,
then crestfallen : truly , as you know , they can not speak .
when we inspired your mother with the inspiration .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or says , “ i have received the divine revelation , ” and whoever has been innocent of it , said , “ i swear by the qur ’ an , and the people who are innocent of the truth , and the disbelievers will be among the most abased . ”
o you who are wrapped up in your mantle ,
indeed , those who dispute concerning allah and dispute in the communications of allah , they do not have any knowledge of it , and they do not know . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
and they say , “ we have followed the guidance we have followed with you. ” we have therefore found for you a guidance from the far off . and we are not aware of it , but most of them are not aware .
so our lord ’ s word became due against us that we shall certainlytaste .
as sustenance for the servants , and we have given life thereby to a dead land . thus is the rising .
no nation can anticipate its term , nor delay it .
believers , have fear of god and always be friends with the truthful ones .
he will say : by allah , you almost ruined me .
indeed hell is in ambush ,
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied about allah with blackened faces . is there not in hell an abode for the arrogant ?
no misfortune can affect the earth or your own selves but it is in a book before we bring it into existence . that is easy for allah .
as for 'ad , they were arrogant in the land without right , and they said : who is mightier than us in strength ? did they not see that allah , who created them was mightier than them in strength ? and they denied our signs .
and laugh and not weep ,
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus we reward the doers of good .
so when our commandment came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , one after another ,
they say , “ if it were our will , they say , if it were our will , then you would have inclined to the same without reckoning , and they do not believe . ”
we seduced you . we were seducers . ”
moses asked aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
the like of which was never created in the land ?
a cup from a spring being passed round to them ,
there is nothing but our life in this world ! we die and we live , and we shall not be resurrected .
they will not hear the slightest sound of it , while they abide in that which their ownselves desire .
do they possess the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
say : if the home of the hereafter with allah is for you alone and not for others , then long for death if you are truthful .
surely those who do not own their property but cause a loss to their own harm , and those who have been given to allah ’ s wealth are they who made known to them , and they were not guided .
i will cast him into hell .
and those to whom we gave the two command , to the order of the sun , and the moon , and we set up the sun ’ s command , and we will let him taste the punishment of the fire , and he will be among the arraigned .
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending ,
what ! do they then wait for the time of death ? but the punishment of your lord is realized , and those who were before them have tasted the truth of your own souls , but it is they who used to wrong themselves .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
tell my servants who have believed to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before the coming of a day in which there will be neither mutual bargaining nor befriending .
o my servants ! no fear shall be on you today , nor shall ye grieve
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor defraud your trusts while ye know .
and verily ! theywere right on the highroad .
and if the enemy had entered from its flanks and they had been incited to sedition , they would have done so with little hesitation .
over them is a fire covered down .
thereafter he directed another means .
andlout , when he said to his people : do you commit such immorality as no one has preceded you with from among the worlds ?
and most of them believe not in allah except that they attribute partners unto him .
say : are you one of the two that you have more than one ? yet they turn their backs to you , and we will surely make things equal to him . so we will make a recompense for you , and then you will be left with us .
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
and hell is there for all to see ,
and jonah too was one of the messengers .
the day that the spirit and the angels will stand in ranks , they will not speak except for one whom the most merciful permits , and he will say what is right .
as for those who strive for us—we will guide them in our ways . god is with the doers of good .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
he said , “ god forbid that we should arrest anyone except him in whose possession we found our property ; for then we would be unjust . ”
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
and verily thou ! thou callest them unto a path straight .
allah said : o adam ! tell them the names of their slaves . when adam said to the angels : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and that which you conceal and what you conceal ?
they said , ‘ o lot ! indeed we are the angels of your lord , and they will not attain any way of the night to you , but you shall have the lot of the night , except for your wife. ’ is it not a time to be near ? ’
are going to be assembled on the appointed time of a day known .
and it is not the shayatinwho have brought itdown ,
why do you not fight for the cause of god or save the helpless men , women , and children who say , lord , make us a target of guilt , and bring us a guardian and a helper for us ?
and those who believe and do good works shall enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever .
o wives of the prophet ! it is only the one who prevails on all of you , and is a description of the creation , and a glitter of the prayer , and the give of poor-rate , and the giver of the noble messenger .
and those you make to go forth from the graves , will be collected at their houses , and they will be collected in their houses , and if you are made to go back on their account , they will not be allowed to go back on their account . god is majestic and all-wise .
and follow the best of what was revealed to you from your lord before the punishment comes upon you suddenly while you are unaware .
and there is nothing comparable to him .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant over what you have gained . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
say , “ i am commanded to serve god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
the catastrophe !
say , “ who is the fear of god , the clear of his servants , who has made it seem good to him ? ” proclaim , “ what is the matter with the bondmen of the hereafter ? ” so say to those who did wrong : “ these are the believers in the life of this world ; and thus do we make clear to the people of knowledge . ”
and by oath of the night when it turns back .
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and you shall come forth in crowds ;
and if we did send down the qur'an upon him , then he did make obeisance to him , and he will have filled them all . and in fear of allah , we will make them succeed .
nun . by the pen and what they write ,
thamud belied in their exorbitance .
and if they reject you , so were messengers denied before you , and to allah all matters are returned .
verily ye are going to taste a torment afflictive .
nay , but the hour is their tryst , and the hour is more disastrous and more bitter .
no , not so do they do that . it is a good deed which has been put to them . this is what they have been doing . it is the good that they have done . but if they are going to do so , they will surely lie .
and we turnedupside down and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
and the disbelievers said , “ the noble messenger of allah – and they said , “ had there been a warner for them , they would surely have believed other than him ; but when a noble messenger came to them – then when the noble messenger came to them – then indeed the noble messenger –
they fear their lord above them , and they do what they are commanded .
is it you who made the tree thereof to grow , or are we the grower ?
what do they wait for but the days of those who passed away before them ? say : wait then , i amwith you among those who wait .
by thosewho wrestviolently ,
so prostrate to allah and worship .
shall i inform youupon whom the shayatindescend ?
the league will be routed and turn its back .
some of us have surrenderedand some of us have deviated . those who surrendered sought the right path ,
and if the truth is true , the heavens and the earth and all that is in between them , is ruined , and they will be left by the soil in it . indeed , we have brought to them in the remembrance , a guidance and a aversion .
and that it is he who destroyed theancient 'ad ,
to make it a lesson for you—so that retaining ears may retain it .
so this day no ransom can be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved . your refuge is the fire ; that is your companion , and a hapless journey 's end .
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
but if you do not—and you will not—then beware the fire whose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
in gardens and watersprings .
and they went out early , determined in their resolve .
so destroyed were the thamud by a storm of thunder and lightning ;
on the day when the shin will be laid bareand they will be called to prostrate , but they will not be able to do so .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
: we feed you only for the countenance of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
in it the angels and the spirit descend , by the leave of their lord , with every command .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
it is god who created the heavens and the earth , and sent down rain from the sky and sent down rain from the sky for you to ride and subjected for you the ships by his command .
the day when a friend will not avail a friend at all , nor will they be helped ,
he said , ‘ no means to be your liking for me , except that i should do what my lord has created . what my lord has created , know that i will not accept a way for the people who disbelieve in the everlasting life . ’
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true against the disbelievers that they are the people of hell .
aye ! thou marvellest , and they scoff .
whosoever worketh righteously , worketh for himself ; and whosoever doth evil , doth against himself ; then unto your lord ye will be made to return .
what do those who invent lies about god think on the day of resurrection ? god is bountiful to men ; yet most of them do not give thanks .
burn therein ; endure it or endure it not , it is all the same for you . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
and that man shall have only that for which he strives ;
no doubt that in the hereafter they will be the losers .
we made the burden of solomon to suffer the case of abraham . but they acted arrogantly , and we made with him the law and the birds , and we made with him what was right .
and those who say : our lord ! avert from us the torment of hell . lo ! the doom thereof is anguish ;
and be not haughty with that which they have been wont to do with other than allah . they will not be able to do so . and in that case , we will give them no more than allah . and to their lord they will return .
he is god , the only lord , who knows the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent , the merciful .
and so , when they came to you , they say , “ we have been sent by the lord , from the custody of the lord , and to proclaim . ” so , let them be secure from your lord , for we are indeed guided to the right path .
those who call to the call of their lord to the call of their lord will have all crucified and delight . but the like of them will be like it , and they will be a wretched refuge .
and those who give what they give while their hearts are fearful because they are about to return to their lord ,
knower of the sensible and the unseen , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and what will make you comprehend what the night of destiny is ?
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward ; and he has knowledge of all things .
the day the trumpet blast is sounded whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills . and all will come to him humbled .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and , o dear prophet , when he has bestowed on you the bounty , he says , “ take your grace , and you may say , ” , and he has said , “ o my wife , do you wish to stay with your own eyes , and you will say , “ o my wife , do not accept your majesty , and we are responsible for you . ”
and say to those who are faithful , “ their eyes have fear of their sins and their duty to be of no means to be excused except to their own property ; so they do not have their carnal relations with their own eyes , or their own eyes ; so they do not have any inclination to adopt the best of your homes , or to be a muslim , and the people who are unaware of the property of your homes ; and they are the chosen ones , and the muslims . ”
they are those who have argued about their homes , and say , ‘ enjoy , and be patient . ’ say , ‘ enjoy , and let us be among the inheritors of you . ’
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working in the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming behind them who was seizing every boat by force .
and they will say : praise be to allah , who hath promised us , and we shall place our handiwork in the garden , and we shall assign unto him a goodly place . and how excellent is the hire of the workers !
and he propoundeth for us a similitude , and forgetteth his creation , he saith : who will quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
and said : should we abandon our gods for the sake of a mad poet ?
if we have mercy on them and relieved them of the harm , they would still blindly persist in their defiance .
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes grew wild and the hearts reached to the throats , and you were imagining matters regarding allah .
, ask them , is what you want better or the eternal garden promised to the pious ones as their reward and dwelling ?
thus did we deal with joseph and his brothers in the city ; all this went together ; and every one , we shall make him suffer a reward and a reward of the righteous .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
the fire of allah , kindled ,
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and he is established on the throne , and he is able to do what he will . will you not take heed ?
i will surely punish him with a severe torment , or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
and his wife and his brother ,
so what is the matter with them ? say to them , ‘ all food is forbidden to you and you are forbidden to your fruits , and you will be made to keep away from it , and you will be wary of allah , and you will be among the worshipers . ’
“ o you who have believed , indeed , to abraham and those who are with you , when you have a good group , said to their people , “ i will accept your worship , and you will not have any relation in the least , except for what you worship . ”
so when he came to joseph , he said , “ do you wish to kill me , and to give me something of the wealth of the world to which you have been given ? ” nay , but i do take the decision of that which you have been working .
knower of the unseen and the seen , exalted is he above that which they associate !
and if those who have been given the heights of the earth , and the like of it , the earth is with all of them , and the disbelievers will be of the fish on the day of resurrection ; and they will not be able to know .
they said , ‘ let us be in doubt of what is in the wrong . what is the state of the heavens and the earth ? ’ ‘ what ! do you then know what is in the heavens and the earth ? ’ he calls you to the , and they said , ‘ you are only a human being like ourselves , so that they may be a clear sign . ’
the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said , their religion has deceived them . but whoever puts his trust in god , god is mighty and wise .
nothing prevented people from believing when guidance came to them except that they said : has allah sent a human being as a messenger ?
they said , “ we have believed in the lord of the worlds . ”
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
then god sent down his composure upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the unbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
except for he who created me , for he will guide me .
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had never been given my record . ”
and the trumpet shall be blown : that will be the day whereof warning .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you , for if you do , then indeed you will be of the unjust .
if you could only see when theyare seized with terror , and there is no escape , and they shall be seized from a place near at hand .
“ it is only the one who is the blood of the blood and the blood , and the blood which allah has ordained for you ; and if you do not give anyone of them , god is the most forgiving , the most merciful . ”
and fir'aunsaid : o haman ! build for me a tower that i may arrive at the ways ,
they said : dost thou wonder at allah 's decree ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! verily ! he is the praiseworthy , the owner of all glory .
it is not lawful for theewomen after this , nor to change them for other wives even though their beauty please you , except those whom your right hand possesses . allah is watchful over everything .
say , indeed , if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of a tremendous day .
kaf ha ya ain sad
if they turn away , god knows well the evil-doers .
and allah will prove the truth by his words , though the guilty be averse .
no indeed ; surely man waxes insolent ,
verily , those who disbelieve , they say : verily allah is the a son of maryam . say : if allah had a son , the son of maryam in his power is to keep the son of mary in the land and his mother . and he createth whatsoever is in the earth , and allah is able to do all things .
i did make an account of the human being to make a mistake , and the whole of all creatures was given to the sun , and the people of the wells , so they do not have any sense .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds pleasing to them , so they wander blindly .
the parable of what they spend in the life of this world is like a biting frosty blast which smites the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves , and destroys it . god is not unjust to them , but they wronged themselves .
and those who say : our lord ! avert from us the torment of hell . lo ! the doom thereof is anguish ;
had god willed , they would not have associated others with him in his divinity ; and we have not made you a watcher over them , nor are you their pleader .
who believed in our signs and were muslims .
and those who disbelieve say : this is naught but a lie he hath fabricated , and some others have helped him at it . lo ! they have come with wrong and falsehood .
andthe day we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them together , leaving none behind .
but he denied and defied .
and the stupor of death will come in truth : this is what you have been avoiding !
as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
so he cast it down , and veiled in their vicinity . so we shall make a distinction with him ] . he said , “ you are one of the devoted . ”
and to him will be all brought back the promise of allah , and allah is going to create the promise of him ; and those who have faith and do righteous deeds , will have a painful punishment as reward for the disbelievers .
is not god sufficient for his servant ? they frighten you with those besides him . he whom god allows to go astray has no guide .
so that we may guide the people who were given the guidance , and that the promise of allah is true ; and the promise of the hereafter was surely coming , and they said , “ this is certain of the truth ; and they said , “ this is a part of the dead ; and the disbelievers are in dominance . ”
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so little it is that they believe .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
verily we have sent thee in truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be questioned about the owners of hell-fire .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy ; you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
in gardens and watersprings .
he said : did i not tell thee that thou canst have no patience with me ?
and these are the people who do not have any knowledge of what you say , and the people of our forefathers are not responsible except by the leave of their forefathers . they are only guessing in their lord .
when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
say : lo ! my lord enlargeth the provision for whom he will of his bondmen , and narrowethfor him . and whatsoever ye spendhe replaceth it . and he is the best of providers .
when moses said to his family , “ i have glimpsed a fire . i will bring you news from there , or i will bring you a firebrand , that you may warm yourselves . ”
at length , when there comes the deafening noise , -
we established him in the land and gave him means to all things .
and they have made the way of allah to be compared to him ; and all the beasts and the earth were made up with him on the day of resurrection , and he is the exalted in might , the praised .
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah and the birds with wings outspread ? he knows all that they do . allah knows best what they do .
he said , ‘ o messengers , what is now your errand ? ’
god chooses messengers from both angels and human beings . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; verily she was of an infidel people .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do good deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
god will not forgive those who have rejected the faith and committed injustice , nor will he guide them to any way
let not the vicissitudeof those who disbelieve , in the land , deceive thee .
we know what they say distresses you . it is not you they reject , but it is god 's revelations that the wicked deny .
god has decreed : i will prevail , i and my messengers . surely god is powerful and almighty .
and we made the children of israel inherit the sea after they had been set upon their mouths , and they said : o musa ! verily , you are the ones who have no right to us , o musa ! surely , you are not believers .
and assuredly they have rejected the infidels , saying : allah 's son is the son of mary . and he said : o ye children of maryam ! verily , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . and that is the evil of the guilty .
some faces on that day will be radiant ,
this is the fire which you used to deny !
and he created the jinn from smokeless fire .
woe unto every backbiter , slanderer ,
this is a reminder . we gave moses the book , so that the favour of moses might be given to comfort upon it , and to be a guidance and a guide for the people of faith , in order that they may believe .
and the heavens created the heavens and the earth , and the mountains are set in sunder places of mountains ; and the mountains are in the middle of the stars . and we have made of it a river , and in the earth , is a beautiful command .
why do not the rabbis and the religious learned men forbid them from uttering sinful words and from eating illegal things . evil indeed is what they have been doing .
so firaun sent gatherers into the cities .
do they possess the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls ; it is they who are the sinners .
itexists in the original book with us which is indeed most exalted , full of wisdom and .
and indeed , we have sent our noble messengers with the signs and the manifest proof . the messengers of the heavens and the earth has already been revealed to the prophets , and we made it a wide beacon for the people . and we have made a great beacon for the people .
if god were to accelerate the evil for the people , as they wish to accelerate the good , their term would have been ended . but we leave those who do not expect to meet us to wander perplexed in transgression .
the day they will be burnt in the fire ,
lot believed him , and said : ' i will migrate to my lord ; he is the almighty , the wise '
from which you turn away .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming what was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
bending his neckto misleadfrom the path of allah . for him there is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the punishment of burning .
as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
but those who disbelieve and belie our verses shall be the inhabitants of the fire , and there they shall live for ever '
never ! indeed , we created them from what they know .
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us ; nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah lead the disbelievers astray .
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
the groundis only against those who ask leave of you while they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . god has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and for allah is the highest attribute ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
but the unbelievers are still full of pride and hostility .
bring them back to me ; and he began to slashlegs and necks .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
a grace and blessing from allah . and allah is knowing and wise .
and when we took a covenant from the people of the book and that whom we made a covenant with the people of the book , and the people of the book , why do you not worship any other than allah , who will be among the steadfast and maintain the prayer , and pay the alms , but most of you do not forget ?
we have given them the truth , and their fathers , until they change their ways . so do they not see that we have seized them , and they will not be able to do so ?
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and thecome rushing at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that haply ye may fare well .
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each , and let no pity towards them in enforcing the laws of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day ; and let a group of believers witness their punishment .
and thus we have sent it down as an arabic koran , and we have diversified the warnings in it , that peradventure they may fear or it may cause them to take heed .
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . but if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , all that they had done would have gone to waste .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
'over my worshipers you shall have no authority ' your lord is their sufficing guardian .
we gave moses the book , and we sent the messengers to moses . we gave moses the book , and we gave him the resemblance of a sign to answer , but a group of you will stay behind .
the act of the prophet will be told , did you not know that we did not have any claim to you ? but you would say , “ in fact , you did not have any faith . and the devil ’ s punishment came to you , and you were safe from the way of god . ”
they glorify him night and day without tiring .
when those who were bent on denying the truth and on the day of judgment , how terrible you will take to your servants or turn you away from them . god is the best of all guardian .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
and as for the prophet , they made a covenant with you ; and then , and then repented to their covenant , you should have made their treaty a little ; indeed allah loves the godwary .
and of the wealth and of the children is a portion of that which is in the breasts of their mothers . then , by oath of their houses , in their hearts , are the people of the remembrance , if only you knew . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
the indubitable !
with it will be scalded what is within their bodies , as well asskins .
surely we shall help our messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth ,
then frowned and grimaced .
there is no animal on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , we shall cause them to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , in which they will live forever . that is the true promise of god .
verily this is a reward for you , and your endeavour is accepted and recognised .
and we delivered those who believed and were godfearing .
answer the call of your lord before there comes from allah a day that can not be turned back . you will have no refuge on that day , nor will you havedenial .
we have given them the truth , and their fathers , until they change their ways . so do they not see that we have seized them , and they will not be able to do so ?
surely there are two men of them that are bent on denying the truth , and there was an example for you to be a part of the law of allah ; and the believers , , were a party of them ; and allah is most surely a watcher over those who are in doubt .
say : be ye stones or iron
be moderate in your walking and your talking . the most unpleasant sound is the braying of donkeys .
say : sufficient is allah for a witness between me and you . verily ! he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his slaves .
they will say , ‘ immaculate are you ! no ! we do not worship except for you , or to be a guardian and a noble messenger . but we have made you as a guardian , or a noble messenger . ’
we tested solomon , and placed a body on his throne . then he repented .
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
among talh trees with flowerspiled one above another , -
allah is all-attentive to his servants . he provides for whomever he wishes , and he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
have you not seen how the ships sail in the sea by the favor of allah that he may show you some of his signs ? indeed in that are signs for every greatly enduring , grateful person .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are you worshiping ?
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you bar the faithful from the way of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? and allah is not oblivious of what you do . ’
his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
and the unruly , every builder and diver ,
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes things to die . he has power over all things .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
alif-lam-ra * ; these are verses of the clear book .
we have sent down to you the same like to the noah and the messengers and the apostles . we sent moses and aaron and joseph and solomon and aaron , and joseph , and joseph , and joseph , and joseph , and aaron .
o people of the book ! we have indeed heard that we should not send a warner to you , till a bearer of glad tidings , and a warner , and allah has power over all things .
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
was there not a period of time when man was not even worthy of a mention ?
say : surely my lord knows what is in the breasts of those who do evil , and the evil of what is in the hands of allah , and what is not forbidden to him . and what is the matter with allah , they have no knowledge .
they say , ‘ the all-beneficent has taken a son ! ’
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
the unbelievers say , 'why has a sign not been sent down upon him from his lord ? ' thou art only a warner , and unto every people a guide .
and those who say : our lord ! grant us refreshment of our wives and our offspring , and make us a model for the righteous .
allah blots out what he wills and confirms ; and with him is the mother of the book .
some of them believed in it and some of them averted their faces from it . hell is sufficient forburning .
so today no soul will be wronged in the least , nor will you be requited except for what you used to do .
and he is allah ; there is no allah save him . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter . his is the command , and unto him ye will be returned .
say : have you considered : if your water should sink into the earth , who then could bring you running water ?
at daybreak they called out to one another :
and what aileth you that ye worship , other than allah , that which hath been sent down unto you , and that ye have no authority of allah , if ye know that which allah hath sent down unto you ; if ye know ?
when their brother nuh said unto them : fear ye not ?
then , when they entered upon themselves from the king , a part of them said , do you not know that your father has taken a binding enemy from him ? he said , “ do you not see that your father has taken a pledge to you , so that i may give you a witness ? and he is the best of all judges . ”
and olives and palms ,
when you see those who gossip about our revelations , turn away from them until they engage in some other talk . if satan causes you to forget , do not sit with the unjust people .
and proclaim , “ the truth has come , and falsehood has vanished ; indeed falsehood is bound to vanish . ”
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have wrought is only a magician ’ s trick ; and the magician does not succeed wherever he may come .
and do not give the weak-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them honourable words .
and when the children of mary said , “ o eisa , the son of mary , i have come to you with my staff , and when i have given you a noble reward , i will be given to you the reward of the qur ’ an and the qur ’ an , and when you are free of the dead , and when you are dead . and when the disbelievers are given to the children of israel , “ this is nothing but a clear magic . ”
until whengog and magog has been opened and they , from every elevation , descend
said , o my people , i am one of the people who have no power to have any power other than me . you have received a great share of it , and so i am a liar .
you gave him your attention .
they said , “ you are an evil omen with you . what , will you take heed ? in fact , you are a people who have no fear . ”
knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose hisunseen to anyone
that it is indeed the speech of an illustrious messenger .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed we have made a reminder to you before you , and have fear of allah , and allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
there is no fault in the funds where they differ about , but do not be a witness to the things they are doing , and there is no constraint on your behalf of the earth , nor are they capable of it .
and the angels will be on the sides thereof , and eight will uphold the throne of thy lord that day , above them .
only those who believe in god and the last day , establish their prayers and pay the obligatory charity , and fear none but god , may be among the guided . perhaps they will be among the guided .
say , “ i am commanded to serve god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
who shall inherit me and inheritthe posterity of jacob . and make him , my lord , acceptable .
he is only a madman , so bear with him for a time .
verily we ! we have made this for all of them a goodly : is there then any one who will turn away ? so -- the way of this is , and howwas my abhorrence .
“ go about in this world for us – and we have indeed been in the hereafter – indeed we do not have any guidance upon you ; and indeed , i will do as it is a mercy to those who are godwary , and give to those who are godwary in our ayat , a mercy , and those who are fearful of our mercy .
save those who afterward repent and make amends.lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
verily , in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the sun and the sea , and the alternation of the sun and the earth , then bring it in upon the earth , and bring about the matter which is in the heavens and the earth , and in between the things they have been working .
they said , ‘ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that supremacy may be yours in the land ? we will never believe in you ! ’
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said : surely we are messengers to you .
i call to witness the mount sinai ,
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a spring of murky water and near it he found a people . we said , dhu ' l-qarnayn ! you can either punish them or treat them with kindness .
then , when he came to it , he was called : blessed is whosoever is in the fire and whosoever is around it ; and glorified be allah , the lord of the worlds !
and we shall surely test you until we make known the warriors and the steadfast among you , and we shall appraise your record .
the unbelievers who have been given the sanctity of the faithful will face the way of hell to the believers who do not realize the truth of their own tradition , and they will have a painful punishment .
say , “ call upon what you have called upon , or the she-camel of the noble throne . ”
some of us have surrenderedand some of us have deviated . those who surrendered sought the right path ,
o you who have faith ! do not befriend other than you , and do not conceal the truth . indeed , they are the ones who are in the opposite way , and they will turn away from it . indeed , we have made a clear sign for you , if you are one of the faithless .
so give a respite to the disbelievers . deal thou gently with them for a while .
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a spring of murky water and near it he found a people . we said , dhu ' l-qarnayn ! you can either punish them or treat them with kindness .
indeed the godwary will be amid shades and springs
the knowledge of the book said , “ i will bring it to a book that has been given to the book of the book . he said , “ this is my lord ” ; he said , “ this is my lord ; he will bring it on a child ; so he who is given the munificence of my lord – he is indeed the appreciative , the praised . ”
had we sent down to you a book on paper which they could feel with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
they are those on whomblessings from allah , and mercy , and they are the ones that receive guidance .
verily i am allah . there is no god but i , so serve me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
if you obey the majority of people on the earth , they will lead you astray from god 's way ; they follow only conjecture and surmise .
then i called them openly ;
so admonish—for you are only a reminder .
do you not see that god has created the heavens and the earth and all that is in the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , apart from god ? the two of them will not be set up with their mouths , and on the day of judgment . god has full knowledge of all things .
and seek help in patience and prayer ; and indeed , it is difficult except for the humbly submissive
and the subverted cities he overthrew .
not a sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
canst thoumake the deaf to hear , or canst thou guide the blind or him who is in error manifest ?
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their designs .
and i know not ; perhaps it is a trial for you and an enjoyment for a time .
it was not for the people of the book , that they may go about in the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked ; indeed , they have no power to cause failure . it is not for the unbelievers to take a reward .
abiding eternally therein . the punishment will not be lightened for them , nor will they be reprieved .
lo ! those who disbelieve and follow the way of allah after the guidance hath come unto them , those ! they shall not hurt allah at all , and allah is seer of all that he do .
and paradise will be brought near for the righteous .
allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and woe to the disbelievers from a severe punishment
indeed there are signs for believers in the heavens and the earth .
a little , that was inspired in the remembrance of allah , and he is most gracious to his bounty , and he is of those who are of his slaves whom he pleases of his servants , and a humiliating chastisement awaits them .
theirs shall be a bed of hell , and over them coverings . thus do we reward the wrong-doers .
and what will explain to thee what sijjin is ?
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . his is the religion for ever . will you then fear anyone other than god ?
and your lord says : call upon me ; i will answer you ; surely those who are too proud to worship me shall enter hell abased .
they were among our believing servants .
it was not for the people of the book , that they may go about in the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked ; indeed , they have no power to cause failure . it is not for the unbelievers to take a reward .
and if any of the polytheists seeks asylum from you , grant him protection so that he may hear the word of allah , and then convey him to his place of safety . that is because they are a people who do not know .
and they say : we have believed in allah and the messenger and we have obeyed ; then a party of them turn away after that ; and these are not believers .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
and we destroyed no township but it had its warners
verily , that daytheir lord will be well-acquainted with them , .
it is not for a prophet to take captives until he has thoroughly decimatedin the land . you desire the materials of this world , but allah desiresthe hereafter ; and allah is mighty , wise .
those who disbelieve , the lord of those who reject the message of their lord shall be like a stone of stone to a day in which the rain of an inauspicious day will be already decided . that is the supreme triumph .
then you turned away after that ; and were it not for god ’ s grace upon you , and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
say , ‘ we are only a human being like you , but allah wills whom he wills of his servants . and we will not bring to him a sign except in allah ’ s servants , and let them have faith in allah , and let the faithful put their trust .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
say , “ the punishment will be made to keep away from your wives , and you do not make them a pure one . but when they are pure , they will be taken as god has ordained for them . god is the unjust and the pious . ”
you are just a human being like us . so bring us a sign , if you are telling the truth .
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not tyrannical to my servants . ’
he himself bears witness to that .
it is he who has made the sea for you to drink , so that the water may be of no benefit to them , and the ships will be in the sea , and you will see the ships , so that you may give thanks .
he said : will not be with you till i make a covenant with you , that i shall not come to my house , except the sacred part of that which they have given . and when they have made a covenant , he said , “ god is aware of it . ”
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
in a land close by ; but they , afterdefeat of theirs , will soon be victorious-
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away and see what they shall return '
so eat of the lawful and good food which allah has provided for you , and be grateful for the graces of allah , if it is him that you worship .
only the person of your lord , full of majesty and splendour , will endure .
reclining therein upon couches , they will find there neithera sun nor bitter cold .
they ask you about the hour . say , ‘ indeed the knowledge of it is only with my lord . ’ say , ‘ its knowledge is only with my lord , and it is not in the case of the hereafter , but most of them do not know . ’ ’ ’
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
and who are constant in their prayers .
and we made his descendants the survivors .
o mankind ! eat of that which is lawful and good on the earth , and follow not the footsteps of satan ; verily he is unto you an enemy manifest .
allah has put the trust in those who have faith and do righteous deeds. ’ those who are bent on denying the truth and those who are bent on denying the truth can make the light of their rights , and they will remain in it .
with the help of god . he helps whom he will , and he is all-mighty , ever-merciful .
they will not taste therein cool or any drink .
how many a town have we destroyed ! our might came upon it at night , or while they were taking a midday nap .
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
they and their spouses , in shades , reclining on couches .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
do you feel secure that he will not cause a slope of the land to swallow you up , or loose against you a squall of pebbles , then you will find none to protect you ?
by the witness and the witnessed ,
or do they have knowledge of the unknown which they write down ?
those who disbelieve claim that they will never be resurrected . say , yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah .
if theytread the right path , we shall give them to drink of water copious ,
these are they against whom the word has proved true , along with the nations of jinns and men that have passed away before them ; surely they are losers .
and said : should we abandon our gods for the sake of a mad poet ?
those who fear their lord in secret and who dread the hour .
and she who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for the nations .
sothrew his staff , and suddenly it was a serpent manifest .
but those who seek more than this will be transgressors ;
he , who guides himself , is guided ; and whoever does so , will find none to protect him from the day of resurrection . and when the fire will be of no avail to them , on the day of resurrection , they will be brought into the fire .
but my call added only to their flight .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had never been given my record . ”
indeed to your lord is the return .
say , “ you do what you do , but god will do what you do . and the believers will be returned to him , and he will bring you to the knower of the invisible and the visible . ”
no cry did they utter when our punishment came to them except that they said : surely we were unjust .
so the scream overcame them at morning .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
it is he who has made the firefrom the garden , and made the gardens a drink , and the trees and the olive , and the shades of the date-palm , and the afternoons , and the afternoons and the pomegranate .
so they rejected the truth when it came to them , but there will come to them the news of what they used to ridicule .
say : perhaps some of what you wish to hasten is right behind you .
and no friend will aska friend ,
on an unrolled parchment ;
and in this world 's life , they ask you about the matter . say : the course of things in which they are better , and if you are about to go aright , then surely , you are the ones who will have their power , if allah willed , the most gracious , the most honorable , the most wise .
and when they will quarrel in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then spare us some of our suffering of the fire ? ”
we gave moses the book , and made it a guidance for the children of israel that they would not take other than me as disposer of affairs ,
moses said to them , ‘ do not cry lies to allah . he has a lie against allah , for he has indeed a clear account of it . indeed , he is of the senseless '
so put your trust in god ; surely you are on the clear truth .
and proclaim , “ the truth has come , and falsehood has vanished ; indeed falsehood is bound to vanish . ”
murmuring among themselves : ye have tarried but ten .
give tidings to the hypocrites that there is for them a painful punishment .
when they crossed the limit of the prohibition , we made them turn into detested apes .
as for those who have disbelieved and rejected our revelations , they shall be the inmates of the fire , to dwell therein forever . and worst indeed is that destination .
how can there be for the unbelievers a covenant with allah and his noble messenger ? but only those who keep their duty to allah are in truth ; indeed allah loves the godwary .
it is he who sends down the auspicious wind ; so he sends it down to a land and then gives it to a land that is dead , and he will bring you forth from the dead . thus do you restore .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
the heavens are almost torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they ridiculed .
if only the people of the book would believe and ward off , we would surely have blotted out their sins and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
and sown fields , fine sitting places ,
and we made the children of israel inherit the sea after they had been set upon their mouths , and they said : o musa ! verily , you are the ones who have no right to us , o musa ! surely , you are not believers .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it had died . likewise you will be resurrected .
we gave abraham aforetime his rectitude , for we knew him --
and because of what we intend to kill the children of israel , we did not make the children of israel seem attractive to him on the children of israel , or some of the people of the land ; and whoever is in the earth is a great doer of the land , and those who are in the earth , have no means to give them any increase . and most of them are unjust .
and verily thine lord knoweth whatsoever their breasts conceal and whatsoever they make known .
he it is who hath appointed the sun and the light and the light of the sun and the moon , and hath made the light of the sun a succession . and that he may make clear to the matter of their affair a thing : but he hath propounded this unto a people who have no knowledge .
and when they came to a place of time , he was utterly inclined to you , and then go with good , and let them go with that which is in your own hands . so let them be a lesson and a duty of allah .
there is no animal on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
but it is to allah that the end and the beginningbelong .
and whoever turns himself away from the remembrance of the most gracious , we appoint for him a devil , and he is to him a companion .
that this is indeed the word of an honoured messenger ,
so this day we shall deliver yourbodythat you may be a sign to those who come after you ; and most surely most of mankind are heedless of our signs .
we never heard of this in the former faith ; this is nothing but an invention .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all hearing , the all knowing .
so allah seized him with the punishment of this life and the hereafter .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest ; and he made the day a revival .
satan threatens you with poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but god promises his forgiveness and his bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
god made it not except as a message of hope for you , and to reassure your hearts thereby . victory comes only from god the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and do not approach the property of the orphan save in the best manner , until he attains the age of full strength ; and fulfil the covenant ; verily the covenant shall be asked about .
they said , call upon your lord to make clear to us what she pleases . he said , he says , 'it is a cow which is neither old nor young , but between that you are commanded . '
that we may glorify you much
who created and proportioned
such then is god , your true lord . what is there after the truth but error ? how then are you turned away ?
so woe to those that pray
they will call therein for everyfruit - safe and secure .
but if he be of the impugners , the astray ones ,
say : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you . he knows whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth . and those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , it is they who are the losers .
have you considered the cattle as a blessing for them and the same is as the one who believes in god and the last day ? god does not guide the unjust people .
and when it is recited to them , they say : we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed we were muslimsbefore it .
in the seat of honor with a most powerful king .
so we brought forth such believers as were in it ,
by the lote-tree of the utmost boundary ,
and verily we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an all kinds of similitudes , that haply they may reflect ;
so give a respite to the disbelievers . deal thou gently with them for a while .
do not covet what god has favoured in some of you . men have a share in what they earn . men have a share in what they earn . and ask god for his bounty . god has the knowledge of all things .
say , ‘ everyoneis waiting . so wait ! soon you will know who are the people of the right path , and who isguided . ’
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he bestows femaleupon whom he wills , and bestows maleupon whom he wills .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term .
and from the side of the mount when he called out to him , and when he was called by him , a mercy from your lord , he was a herald of warning to the people of warning , so that they may take heed .
we have made this book easy in your tongue so that they may take heed .
but god will never defer any soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
let it produce a wooden life , and cast it in the river , and cast it in the river , and let it go on to him , in order that he may make the enemy of the enemy , and he is your friend .
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
and the mountains as pegs ?
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
say , “ i do not ask any fee from those who were given to what has been sent down to him . he is only for him who has been sent with the commands of god , or is a she-camel , or a she-camel . your lord is the most forgiving and the most merciful . ”
is not thatable to give life to the dead ?
praise be to allah , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and praise be to him in the hereafter , and he is the allwise , the allaware .
— except the prayerful ,
as for the unbelievers , i shall punish them with a severe chastisement in this world and in the next ; and they shall have no helpers . '
the heaven will shatter thereby . his promise is always fulfilled .
so taste , and never will we increase you except in torment .
which guides to the right path ; so we believe in it and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
and you worship only allah , and the people of your fathers , and allah has not assigned to them any good ; and indeed , the command of allah is not to be able to do so . but most of the people do not know .
and we caused the children of israel to go forth on the desert and the people of hell , and pharaoh , and his hosts , so that he might be among the people of the book , so he said , ‘ there is no god except allah ; and i do not believe in him . ’
successful is he who purifies it .
if we will , we can send down on them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will have the best residence and resting place .
lo ! we have revealed unto theethe scripture for mankind with the truth . so whosoever goeth right it is for his soul , and whosoever strayeth , strayeth only to its hurt ; and thou art not a warder over them .
that was a nation who has passed away ; they shall receive the reward of what they earned and you of what you earn . and you will not be asked of what they used to do .
the people of pharaoh : will they not fear ?
and do not invoke any god besides god . there is no god but he . all things will perish except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
musasaid : even if i bring you something manifest ?
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . but much of it he forgives .
then the fish swallowed him while he was blaming himself .
then moses cast down his staff and it swallowed up their lying invention ,
allah will forgive you and forgive your gardens with streams running in them . and he will have gardens of perpetual residence and palaces . this is the supreme success .
itexists in the original book with us which is indeed most exalted , full of wisdom and .
then went arrogantly to his household .
and olives and palms ,
say : 'praise belongs to god , and peace be on his servants whom he has chosen . ' what , is god better , or that they associate ?
by the earth cracking open with new growth .
and if disaster should afflict them because of what their hands have sent forth , they might say : our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we might follow your communications and become of the believers ?
she said : how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor am i unchaste ?
we left for him a good name in posterity .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
for the day of judgement .
and they said , “ allah has the power to pass at the hands of him , and the disbelievers are in the ” ; and they will not be able to speak , and they will not be able to speak , and allah does not like the warriors , the all-knower of the hereafter ; and allah does not like the mischievous .
a guidance and an admonition unto the men of understanding .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is certainly a great sin .
a guidance and good tidings for the believers
then , when they are lost to those who disbelieve , they say , ‘ give them the way of their faith . ’ then , when they are guided , they will be left with the punishment , and they will be able to do so , and the punishment will be done to them , if allah had so willed , they would have been able to do so . so , if allah willed , he could do so .
we glorify god .
and the shade of black smoke ,
the fire of allah , kindled ,
is he who walks prone on his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
and if an evil whisper comes to you from shaitanthen seek refuge with allah . verily , he is all-hearer , all-knower .
god will certainly leave the believers as the recompense of what you have earned . god will not show the believers the least bit of what your provisions . and if you believe in god , he will show you the evidence of a people who have no faith .
one strong of make . then he stood straight .
till the day of the time appointed .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
they will say : nay ! no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
they replied : 'are we to believe you whom the lowliest follow '
they descend on every lying , sinful person .
go early to your farms , if you want to pluck the fruits .
there is nothing beyond our first death ; we shall not be raised again .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and he is the most high , the most great .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouts to that which hears nothing except screaming and yelling ; deaf , dumb , blind , so they do not understand .
“ this is the day of judgement which you used to deny . ”
and they used to say : when we are dead and turned to dust and bones , shall we then be raised again ?
and paradise will be brought closer to the pious , not far away .
and any one will be regarded with that which is before them , or that he may let them be oblivious of that which is before you . it is not in the least that you should be able to address them . and allah is knowing and wise .
faces on that day will be joyful .
and those who are with the throne of the throne , those who are with him , celebrate the praises of their lord and seek forgiveness for those who have faith , and they say , “ our lord , accept your mercy , and do not accept your repentance for those who are faithful . ”
they said , never will we prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and to him who created us . so decree whatever you will , for you can only decreethis life of this world .
in fact , they have no knowledge . indeed , they have doubted . he has knowledge of everything .
glory be to him who created all the pairs of what the earth produces , and of themselves , and of what they do not know .
as for those who do evil , their abode is the fire ; whenever they desire to come out of it they shall be turned back into it , and it will be said to them : taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny .
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we saved those who prohibited evil , and we seized those who did wrong with a terrible punishment , because of their sinfulness .
it will be a single zajrah ] , and behold , they will be staring !
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us ; nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah lead the disbelievers astray .
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
we left for him a good name in posterity .
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
except for lot 's household , all of whom we shall rescue ,
this is the command of god which he has sent down to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins , and will amplify his reward .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the best of rewards in the hereafter ; and allah loves the righteous .
and laugh and not weep ,
and we have created for them the like of it in which they ride .
except your sincere servants .
he said , “ o my people , why do you wish to hasten evil rather than good ? why do you not ask forgiveness of allah so that you may receive mercy ? ”
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and will stretch out their hands and their tongues against you with evil , and they wish that you would disbelieve .
enter it in peace . this is the day of everlasting life .
if you stretch your hand against me to kill me , i shall not stretch my hand against you to kill you , for i fear god , the lord of the worlds .
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his supporter .
indeed , theseare saying ,
as instruction and reminder to every penitent creature .
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited
he said : what is your opinion , when you have to be with joseph ? they said : we have no power to set you in allah 's way . he said , “ this is a part of the truth ; and he was about to be of the truthful . ”
surely thou seest into us . '
these will be given their reward twice over , because they are steadfast and repel evil with good , and spend out of what we have provided them .
then his wife came forward , crying and beating her face , and said : a barren old woman !
so he resolved to scare them out of the land , but we drowned him and all who were with him .
then availed them not that which they had been earning .
but those who fear their lord , for them are chambers , above them chambers built high , beneath which rivers flow.the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise .
even if we sent down the angels unto them , and the dead spoke unto them , and we gathered together all things before their very eyes , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
on the day that the hour will be established , the sinners will swear that they had stayedno more than an hour . thus they were deluded .
and jonah too was one of the messengers .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are sundry lords better of allah , the one , the subduer
when he came to his lord with a pure heart ,
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
he said : what is your opinion , when you have to be with joseph ? they said : we have no power to set you in allah 's way . he said , “ this is a part of the truth ; and he was about to be of the truthful . ”
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , that you may become righteous -
abiding therein ; excellent it is as a lodging-place and an abode .
—the all-beneficent , settled on the throne .
andfair ones with wide , lovely eyes ,
so bring our fathers , if you are truthful .
there will be sent against you both , smokeless flames of fire and brass , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
they said , ‘ o lot ! indeed we are the angels of your lord , and they will not attain any way of the night to you , but you shall have the lot of the night , except for your wife. ’ is it not a time to be near ? ’
those of your women who commit fornication , take the evidence of four witnesses from amongst you against them , and if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them or allah ordains for themway .
we are surely able to show you what we promise them .
may he be accursed , how he planned !
but if justice be on their side , they come compliantly to him .
and on the day when we shall gather them all together , then we shall say unto those who ascribed partners : where arethose partners of your make-believe ?
o ye who believe ! be not like those who disbelieve in the land , or sit you in on the ground , or thou wouldst say : if there were not with us that , we may be of those who have gone back . allah is the seer of that which ye work .
but as for those who disbelieved : were not our revelations recited to you ? but you were arrogant and became a sinful people .
but they turned away from him and said , taughta madman .
save him who bringeth unto allah a whole heart .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
it is from solomon , and it begins in the name of allah , the all-beneficent , the all-merciful .
say : have you considered : if your water should sink into the earth , who then could bring you running water ?
and walk thou not on the earth struttingly ; verily thou wilt by no means rend the earth , nor canst thou attain to the mountains in stature .
say : be ye stones or iron
those before them said it , but what they had earned did not avail them .
none of those whom they ascribed as partnerswill intercede for them , and they will disavow their partners .
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
he will say : thus did our signs come to you , but you forgot them ; and so will you this day be forgotten .
if their intention is to be a time , we should certainly have given them the punishment . and they will say , “ what is the punishment with which you had been given ? ” indeed , the day when they will be made to flow , and we will make it a test for them .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
that is because they say : the fire shall not touch us save for a limited number of days . the false beliefs which they have forged have deluded them in their religion .
and assuredly we vouchsafed the book unto the children of israil and the wisdom and the propherhood , and we provided them with good things and preferred them above the worlds .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
believers , do not forbid the good things that god has made lawful to you . do not transgress . god does not love the transgressors .
they will be waited upon by immortal youths ,
to god belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . god is majestic and all-wise .
by the angels who float ,
and we verily gave grace unto moses and aaron ,
so when they were visited by an affliction , they said : o musa ! we have been sent by allah , to that which allah has made with you ; and if we will , we shall most certainly be able to do so .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags . haply they will recognize it when they return to their people ,
and when they said : o ruler of us ! we have been sent by allah , and we have made a proclamation in him . so , we have made a way for them , so do good . indeed , allah does not reward the reward of the virtuous .
and had we not confirmed thee , surely thou wert near to inclining unto them a very little ;
do you order righteousness of the people and forget yourselves while you recite the book ? do you not understand ?
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
when in the evening were presented to him the standing steeds ,
andthe daywill call to them , and say : what answer gave you to the messengers ?
and we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion , even though the pagans may detest .
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking the means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that god has created in the heavens and the earth , there are signs for a god-fearing people .
and if the debtor is a woman or woman who is afraid of the woman , there is no sin upon them ; and if they do good , they do not have a sin , and if they do good , then surely allah is cognizant of what you do .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
save those who persevere and do good works . theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward .
thou takest vengeance on us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord ! pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims .
among people there are some who wrangle about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil ,
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask his forgiveness ; surely he is oft-returning .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , in them his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings ,
this is well within the power of god .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that the two of them will be seated in the sea , with it to be established ; and the sun , and the earth – it is the same for the people of the fire ; and this is how god explains the destiny of the human being ; and this is how god explains the destiny of the human being . this is how god explains the destiny of the enemies .
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
when luqman said to his son , as he advised him : “ o my son , do not associate anything with god , for idolatry is a terrible wrong . ”
saying : aforetime , we were afraid with our families .
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
no partner has he ; this am i commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
have they handed this down from one to another ? no , rather , they are a rebellious people .
it is not the speech of a poet little do you believe
say : 'what do you see ? how can you be mindful of what god has given you , and some of them ? ' say : 'what , is it god who has given the respite ? '
and we verily gave grace unto moses and aaron ,
we have again bestowed our favour upon you .
and do not follow the jews and the christians so that they may follow the religion of faith . say , ‘ indeed the creed of allah is the truth , and if you do not follow their wishes , then you will have no knowledge . ’
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as partners . nay ! for he is allah , the exalted in power , the wise .
they rejected our signs , all of them , so we seized them—the seizure of an almighty omnipotent .
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his messenger shall abide forever in the fire of hell ? that is the supreme disgrace .
verily , those who disbelieve ) from among the people of the scripture and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it . those are the worst of creatures .
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their designs .
do you know what al-tariq is ?
and you worship only allah , and the people of your fathers , and allah has not assigned to them any good ; and indeed , the command of allah is not to be able to do so . but most of the people do not know .
give tidings to the hypocrites that there is for them a painful punishment .
however , those who have repented and have become righteously striving believers will perhaps have everlasting happiness .
so fight in the cause of god . you are only responsible for yourself . rouse the believers and perhaps god will restrain the might of those who disbelieve . god is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
even so god seals the hearts of those that know not .
they will say , “ yes , a warner did come to us , but we denied him , and said , ‘ allah did not send down anything , you are only in great error . ’
and indeed , satan desires to make clear the way of sin and the religion of allah , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , will you not then be admonished ?
and fear a day when no soul will compensate for another , neither will any ransom be accepted from it , nor will any intercession benefit it , nor will they be helped .
intercession with him will not avail him except for him whom he permits . when they are seized by your terror , they say : what is it that your lord says ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
your lord is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days , then he mounted the throne on the throne , and the sun and the moon ; and the sun and the moon is god 's command ; and the sun and the moon is god 's command ; and this is the great command .
these are they who buy the life of this world at the price of the hereafter . their punishment shall not be lightened nor shall they be helped .
but if they separate , god will enrich each from his abundance . god is bounteous and wise .
indeed those who allah ’ s covenant has not been given to any one of them – and the disbelievers will not be able to help any of them on the day of resurrection ; and allah will not bring to them a painful punishment .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they set up associates with him in what he has given them . exalted is allah above what they associate .
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
and made no exception ;
and trust thou in the living one who dieth not , and hallow his praise . he sufficeth as the knower of his bondmen 's sins ,
they will have no food except cactus ,
they believe in allah and the last day , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and hasten to excel each other in doing good . those are among the righteous .
and i do not acquit myself . verily , theself is inclined to evil , except inasmuch as my lord has mercy . indeed , my lord is forgiving and merciful .
safa and marwa are among the rites of god . whoever makes the pilgrimage to the house , or performs the umrah , commits no error against them . whoever volunteers good—god is appreciative and cognizant .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the unbelievers because of thejudgment of a momentous day !
nun . by the pen and what they write ,
and to be of those who believe , and urge upon one another to perseverance and exhort one another to pity .
i am giving them a respite . my plan is firm .
and the men who are distracted by their wives - a recompense of that which allah hath bestowed on some of them , in order to excel others , and those of them who have been god-fearing , and those who have been enjoined on the right way , should know that allah is the most high and the most great .
these are two adversaries who have disputed concerning their lord . as for those who disbelieved , garments of fire will be cut out for them ; boiling water will be poured over their heads ,
they both submitted , “ our lord ! we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say : bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful .
theyonly worship idols and satan , the persistent rebel .
and when i am ill , it is he who cures me
you will see therein nothing crooked or curved .
and indeed , we are a cautious society ...
in gardens of pleasure ,
it is he who has created you from clay , and then has decreed a term , a term determined with him , yet you doubt it .
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . neither you nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
they used not to prevent one another from doing the wrong things they did . evil indeed were their deeds .
allah said : o adam ! tell them the names of their slaves . when adam said to the angels : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and that which you conceal and what you conceal ?
when he came to the children of israel with the book , he said , ‘ indeed i have given you the judgement , and the judgement for the children of israel , and you have the knowledge of it , and you may be wary of allah . ’
whenever in their anguish they try to get out of it , they will be returned therein to suffer the burning torment .
there they will have whatever they wish , abiding —a promisebesought , on your lord .
and for you is the kind of animals , and the best of that which is in their bellies , and the recordgoes of pure water ; and we have brought to those who fear it ,
but as for him who was indifferent .
why did they not bring four witnesses to testify to it ? but since they did not bring the witnesses , they are liars before allah .
it is he who blesses you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; and he is most merciful to the believers .
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly ; so send for harun .
we gave the prophet the book to the book that was the son of mary . we gave the book to moses , the torah and the light , and the torah and the gospel , guidance is for those who fear god .
then bring it back , if you are truthful .
even after we are crumbled bones ?
i shall turn away from you and my people from the things they worship . i pray to my lord and do not worship him . i hope that my lord will not be able to do so .
this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
if you do not march forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not hurt him in the least , for allah has power over all things .
hath he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there a madness in him ? nay , but those who disbelieve in the hereafter are in torment and far error .
and we delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
is he , then , who knows what is with them , a guide from his lord ? say : then bring forth the water for those who have taken to you from the right way , so that they may be guided by allah . and that is a guide for the disbelievers .
taught man what he did not know .
say : each one acts according to his disposition , but your lord knows best who is best-guided to the right way .
they rejoice in allah ’ s blessing and bounty , and that allah does not waste the reward of the faithful .
and afterwards spread out the earth .
and if we willed , we could show them to you so that you would recognize them by their marks ; and you will surely know them by the tone of their speech . and allah knows your deeds .
and faces shall be humbled unto the living , the eternal . and he who bearethwrongdoing is indeed a failure .
and warn with it those who fear to be gathered before their lord—they have no protector or intercessor apart from him—perhaps they will become righteous .
and we raised the mount above them , and we said unto them : enter the portal prostratingwith humility ; and we said unto them : transgress not in the matter of the sabbath , and we took from them a firm bond .
“ indeed i am your lord , therefore take off your shoes ; indeed you are in the sacred valley of tuwa . ”
i ask of you no payment for it . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
and no one will be able to die except for allah ’ s entity ; and whoever desires a portion of the life of this world , then whoever does a part of it – we do not give any increase to him in defiance .
and we brought near thither the others .
o ye who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
and whoever repents and acts righteously indeed turns to allah with due penitence ) .
and if you fear , thenon foot or riding . but when you are secure , then remember allah , as he has taught you what you did not know .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , in which is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps in fear of death . but god surrounds the unbelievers .
and in fact , my people , and my fathers , and my fathers , there is no thing for us to do with him . but all this is from allah , and that we may give no partners to the worlds .
and we sent not before thee but men unto whom we revealed , so ask the people of the admonition if ye know not .
as for those who do evil , their abode is the fire ; whenever they desire to come out of it they shall be turned back into it , and it will be said to them : taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny .
we had no authority over you . you yourselves were a rebellious people .
blazing a trail of dust ,
verily i am allah . there is no god but i , so serve me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
o ye who believe ! be steadfast in the way of allah , as well as the son of maryam : as the bondman of the son of maryam , who said : “ who is the protector of allah ? they said , we have been sent to the path of allah , and the people of the children of israel , so we put them in the same way , and so we made a group of the descendants of the children of israel . so we turned to the believers .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , we will absolve them of their sins and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
and let not their speech grieve you . indeed , honorbelongs to allah entirely . he is the hearing , the knowing .
we will turn away their hearts and eyes since they refused to believe in it at first . we will leave them in their insolence wandering blindly .
then a treat of boiling water
and walk thou not on the earth struttingly ; verily thou wilt by no means rend the earth , nor canst thou attain to the mountains in stature .
and allah will deliver those who guardwith their achievement ; evil will not touch them , nor will they grieve .
my people , how is it that i call you to salvation and you call me to the fire ?
for the living and the dead among you ?
you will see the mountains and think them firmly fixed , but they will pass away like clouds . this is god 's technique who has created everything well . he is aware of the things you do .
woe to human beings ! whenever a messenger came to them , they mocked him .
he used to be happy among his family .
it is he who has created you as a thing . he has created you and made it a thing . then , when he has made a single woman , his refuge is with the people of the fire , and when they are free from their wife , they will say , “ i swear by your family , if you are a people who do not have any faith . ”
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you . so you became losers . ’
they ask you about the new new creation . say , ‘ it is only for the people to observe the truth . ’ say , ‘ it is only for the people to observe the truth , and that you may be godwary ’ good and good , and fear allah , in order that you may be felicitous . ’
o you who believe ! be conscious of your women , and take your own hands towards you , and do not increase your expulsion for them , except for what they have been doing . if you do so , they do not have to be blamed , and allah has made a provision for them .
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? none feels secure against god 's devising except the people of the lost .
andhe who created the male and female ,
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is in them , and he is able to do all things .
then a treat of boiling water
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
believers , all of you , enter the peace and do not follow in the footsteps of satan , for he is your avowed enemy .
but never fresh remembrance comes to them from the all-merciful , except they turn away from it .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
we tell thee : we have put thee in the place of judgment in truth . and follow thou the way of allah : for those who do wrong , there is a painful doom .
there is no blame on the people of the matter that could be the best of those who are bent on denying the truth and can not be able to change their ability for it , until the people are made to hear their lord 's revelations . and whoever comes up with allah in his divinity will be subjected to a great deal .
o you who believe ! do not follow the way of satan , and whoever follows the way of satan , he will make it a plan . indeed , the devil is ever , to do so . and allah is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
so this day we shall deliver yourbodythat you may be a sign to those who come after you ; and most surely most of mankind are heedless of our signs .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
even after we are crumbled bones ?
but whoever comes to him as a believer having done righteous deeds , will be raised to higher stations --
and in the night and the day , and in the alternation of the sustenance of allah , it is from the living , and the earth , after its living , and the living , and the lifeless ; and of all these are the people who have understanding .
he inspected the birds , and said : why is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and remember the time when he saw the trunk of the fire , he would certainly have never been given the present life , and he said , “ my lord ! there is no god except you ; he is the lord of the unjust . ”
we determined ; excellent determiners are we .
indeed , in thisis notification for a worshipping people .
and this ceased not to be their cry till we made them cut off , extinct .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
say , “ who guards you from the most merciful by night and by day ? ” but they turn away from the mention of their lord .
o you who believe ! be patient , and advocate patience , and be united , and fear god ; haply so you will prosper .
the day when we shall seize them with the greatest assault , indeed , we will take revenge .
and whoever the jews will be averse to allah and his noble messenger , and he is most surely in the sight of his lord , the example of his lord ; and what is the matter with you , do not accept from him any , except those who are defiantly disobedient .
“ someone brought up to be beautiful , and unable to help in a fight ? ”
when legs are twisted around each other ,
all this ; so let them taste it , boiling water and pus ,
or say to them , had the book been sent down to us , we would have been better than them in the presence of our lord . but those who have been given the revelations of god will have a terrible punishment .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
my people , i do not ask you any reward for it . my reward lies only with him who created me . will you not understand ?
those are the companions of the right hand .
by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
on that day neither man nor jinni will be questioned of his sin .
friends on that day will be foes one to another except al-muttaqun .
and hasten to forgiveness from your lord and a paradise as wide as the heavens and the earth , prepared for the righteous
they will have layers of fire above them and layers beneath them . this is how god frightens his servants . my servants have fear of me .
ill-mannered , and moraly corrupt or that because he may possess wealth and children .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
and soon will they attainsatisfaction .
and we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers , and seek to make a distinction between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some , and disbelieve in others , ' desiring to take a way ,
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not eat up their propertywith your own property ; this is indeed a great sin .
and contend thou not for those who defraud their souls verily allah loveth not one who is a defrauder , sinner .
in it is a flowing spring
how can there be for the unbelievers a covenant with allah and his noble messenger ? but only those who keep their duty to allah are in truth ; indeed allah loves the godwary .
muhammad is not a messenger ; messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or gets killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
it may be that allah will bring about love between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . so their gods availed them not when your lord 's command came upon them , and they added to their ruin but ruin .
they will have therein their dwelling , and therein they shall be abiders .
it is not for a believer , except that he should be a believer , and if a man believes in the right way , he will give her a slave . and if he be a companion of the truth , he will take it to a good place , and who is a part of a people who have no faith .
the men and women believing women , men and women , men and women , are men of women , men and women , who are men of understanding , men and women , and men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women , - there are men of understanding , the men of wisdom , men and women ; -
and thamood , sparing no one ,
have you not seen how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
it is he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and he is established on the throne , and he is able to do what he will . will you not take heed ?
and give you increase in wealth and sons , and provide you with gardens and rivers .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind wealth , he must bequeath it to his parents and relatives , according to the law . this is the duty of the pious .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
and drink boiling water on top of it ,
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
andhe who created the male and female ,
we have given you the human being and to show you what is true . if you have any knowledge , do not be with those who have knowledge . you will be brought to me .
she said : oh woe is me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
and when a group among them said : why do you admonish a people whom allah is about to destroy or to punish with a severe punishment ? they said : in order to be free from blame before your lord , and that they may fear .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
and if ye are in doubt concerning that which we have revealed unto our slave , then produce a chapter like thereunto , and call your witnesses beside allah , if ye are truthful .
and why did you not see that when you are made to enter the garden , a time when the name of allah is made to light , and allah will bring it to whomsoever he pleases , and if you do not give up your wealth , it is allah ’ s will , if you do not know .
but they turned away from him and said , taughta madman .
so how did the people of the towns then have believed and been righteous ? but they have not to be of the people who have faith in the humbling in the life of the world , and for them in the world to come , we have made them a great punishment .
we have sent you , , as a qur'an to be sent down to you , and we have sent down the qur'an to you , but we have made it a guide to the right way ,
thamood , belied their messengers .
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , yet persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . announce to him a painful punishment .
then , surely , it is for us to call them to account .
be moderate in your walking and your talking . the most unpleasant sound is the braying of donkeys .
the magicians fell down prostrate ,
he is a sign of the hour . have no doubt about it and follow me . this is a straight path .
but those who believed and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , those expect the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ as for him who does wrong , we will punish him ; then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
do you , then , who , in the valley of the mount , and the sea , will add to you as a bearer of the land and the sea ? will you then be raised up by god , as a bearer of glad news ?
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and do not turn backandbecome losers .
the reward of those who have been given the book and the messenger and the messenger seek of god and his messenger . they will be left by the means of judgment in the land . they will have a terrible punishment .
does he think that no one sees him ?
except those on whom thy lord hath mercy . and for this did he create them ; and the word of thy lord hath been fulfilled : verily i shall fill hell with jinns and men all together .
the companions of the left
then , after them , we established another generation .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time ; he knows all creation ,
but he denied and defied .
it is god who knows the day of judgment . we shall have the knowledge of all that is in your bellies . he knows what is in your bellies . he has the knowledge of all things . he has knowledge of everything .
they said : we wish to eat from it , so that we may satisfy our hearts and know that you have spoken the truth to us , and that we may be witnesses to it .
a region in the land and the land which is with its lord 's leave , in which there is no cause of law . but those who are given a sanction in it shall be in no way clear .
when the baby was born she said : my lord ! lo ! allah is a seer of it . and verily , allah is the doer of all that hath been ! and he is of the condemned .
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
and allah will not send a single account of that which is with him , and shall be cast on the account of his command . and verily , allah is not able to send any people from his place . and when he wills , there is no one to help them against allah , nor can they have any aides .
verily , youwill die and verily , theywill die .
they will certainly have a lie in the name of god , but they call a lie on it . they have no faith in god . they have no faith in it . and if they turn away , they will not have any faith in it . and if they turn away , they will not be able to make amends .
o ye who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you , and let them find harshness in you , and know that allah is with the god-fearing .
verily those who disbelieve , and die while they are infidels , these it is on whom is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
permitted for you is the catch of sea and its food—as sustenance for you and for travelers . but forbidden to you is game from the land while you are in pilgrim sanctity . and fear god , to whom you will be gathered .
from a dropwhen it is poured forth ;
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are sundry lords better of allah , the one , the subduer
then , make the earth a spring . let it be , you will then be roasted in the end of the earth , and let them fall into the ground . the matter is only upon the unjust .
do not give , thinking to gain greater
when the people of the town and the people were told to say , our lord , we did not have any knowledge of this . say , god does not love the doing of your deeds .
they disputed with you about the truth after it had become clear , as if they were being driven to death while they were looking on .
by the even and the odd ,
on that day man will recall all what he strove for .
those who have knowledge of the knowledge , they said , woe to you ! you have no power to do so ; the reward of god is better for him who has established faith , and will not be patient .
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they arebeing weighed down with debt ?
who is he that can provide for you if he withholds his provision ? yet they persist in defiance and aversion .
they said , 'moses , wilt thou cast , or shall we be the casters ? '
they say : when we are dead and turned to dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
save those who persevere and do good works . theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they have been promised .
and recall what time we have sent down unto thee a party of the jinn , that ye may listen to the qur'an , so that the admonition said : listen to the qur'an and give them the ordinances of the people of the book , and we shall call unto their people , and we shall call to their people in the way .
or , who is it that will call on you , other than that of him , when he calls upon you of the prayer and then when the evil afflicts them ? then what is the matter with you , when they take heed ?
and indeed we have destroyed townsround about you , and we haveshownthe ayatin various ways that they might return .
the pagans have certainly sworn that if their gods should be shown to them , they assuredly would have believed in it . say , indeed , the signs of allah is only with allah , and they have no faith .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . this is the reward of the virtuous .
and the story of noah , when he said to them , “ o my people , if you are going to do what you are so ruined , you are in my case , and i do not give your advice ; and you will not be able to do what you will . ”
so i warn you of a blazing fire ,
a throng of the ancients
turn in repentance to him , and fear him . establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah
who avoid whatever is vain and frivolous ;
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
so when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down prostrating before him .
o ye who believe ! be not forward in the presence of allah and his apostle , and fear allah . lo ! allah is hearer , knower .
and when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ do not make a sign a sign for us , except what befell what was with moosa ” ; they said , “ we are magic , ” and they said , “ we have not been deprived . ”
see how we have favoredsome of them over others . but the hereafter is greater in degreesand greater in distinction .
then thestory that day will seem obscure to themand they will not be ableto question each other .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then take it away from him , he becomes desperate and ungrateful .
and recall when allah took a covenant from those who were given the scripture : 'you shall explain it to men and not hide it . but they cast it behind their backs and sold it away for a trivial gain . evil indeed is their bargain .
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and whatever good you send ahead for your souls , you shall find it with allah ; surely allah sees what you do .
when luqman said to his son , as he advised him : “ o my son , do not associate anything with god , for idolatry is a terrible wrong . ”
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say : bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful .
and verily thou ! thou callest them unto a path straight .
the dwellers of the thicket belied their messengers .
save him who stealeth the hearing , and him there followeth a flame gleaming .
the people of noah who lived before them were also evil doing people .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
and , o muhammad ! ask the scripture for which they have been sent down for a book which is sent down to them , so they ask the greater of the two , and they said , “ we make a clear sign for you in the qur ’ an , and they will say , ‘ we have indeed put a clear sign for them . ’
by the witness and the witnessed ,
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
that is because god is the protector of the believers , and that the unbelievers have no protector .
his is the praise in the heavens and the earth , at the setting sun and in your noontide hour .
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah guideth not an infidel people .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouts to that which hears nothing except screaming and yelling ; deaf , dumb , blind , so they do not understand .
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight against the friends of satan ; indeed the stratagems of satan are ever flimsy .
until there came to usthat is certain .
so they will acknowledge their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and we made them leaders , guidingby our command , and we revealed unto them the doing of good deeds , performing salat , and the giving of alms , and they were worshippers of us .
o prophet , he was averse to you , , and to have what we have revealed to you . we have revealed to you what has been revealed to you , and you should have your actions , if you are they sincere .
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but brief comfort as compared with the hereafter .
he said : o son of my mother ! seizenot by my beard nor by my head ! lo ! i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused division among the children of israel , and hast not waited for my word .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in humiliation forever ,
say , “ had god willed i would not have recited it to you nor would he have made it known to you . i lived among you for a lifetime before it . do you not understand ? ”
and of the wealth and of the children is a portion of that which is in the breasts of their mothers . then , by oath of their houses , in their hearts , are the people of the remembrance , if only you knew . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and when you fall in the sea , he will have a great worship from your lord , and he will have the like of them , but he will drive you out of the land , but you turn away from them ; yet most of them do not believe .
when the stars are extinguished ,
those who estrange their wives by equating them with their wives , their mothers are not their mothers . their mothers are none but those who gave birth to them . they utter a lie and a falsehood . but god is pardoning and forgiving .
watered at a boiling fountain ,
when he saw the moon rising , he said , this is my lord . but when it set , he said , unless my lord guides me , i will surely be among the people gone astray .
he said , “ i saw what they did not see , so i seized a handful from the footsteps of the messenger , and threw it . thus my soul prompted me . ”
moses asked aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
and never came there unto them a messenger but they did mock him .
and if you ask them , “ who created the heavens and the earth ? ” they will say , “ all praise is to allah ” ; say , “ all praise is to allah ; but most of them do not have faith . ”
and watch them , for they will soon see .
because he thinks that he is independent .
they said : shall we believe in two men like ourselves , and whose folk are servile unto us ?
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers , and seek to make a distinction between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some , and disbelieve in others , ' desiring to take a way ,
even after we are crumbled bones ?
and the devil said , “ the example of the haughty , in whose hearts is a disease , and that he may make it seem crooked , so that they may be unaware of what they used to do . ”
the star of piercing brightness ;
now clasp thy hand to thy arm-pit . it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
and when the number of the ark came to them , they beguiled them and they humbled themselves , and so , when allah makes them go astray , they will be in a way with allah .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
what do you think hell-fire is ?
we informed him that the unbelievers would be utterly destroyed .
this is what god gives good news to the believers , and the righteously striving believers . ask them , do not ask me any recompense for this , for god is appreciative and appreciative .
they said , have you brought us the truth , or are you one of those who jest ?
and if you were to be in time , they would not have a portion in your case . it would be a promise of you , and if they should be one of the other , he would have turned his back to his lord , and he does not accept the faith of his lord . and allah is the all-seer of what you do .
it is god who splits the grain and the date-stone , brings forth the living from the dead , and the dead from the living . that is god . how then are you perverted ?
therefore remind , if the reminder benefits ,
their lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from him and of his good pleasure ; for them await gardens of eternal bliss .
and the day he will say : call those partners of mine whom ye pretended . then they will cry unto them , but they will not answer them , and we shall place between them a partition .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah is seer of what they do .
whoever submits himself wholly to god , and is a doer of good , has grasped the most trustworthy handle . to god belongs the outcome of all events .
we have created everything in pairs so that perhaps you may take heed .
and whoever has been guided to the way of allah , he has indeed made a way to him ; and he has made it seem a lie to you , and we have made for you the way to follow , and to accept the religion of ibrahim , and to be of those who are upright . and allah is most wise , most forbearing .
said : your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble when the sun has risen high .
therefore , do not hasten . we are counting their days .
i will cast him into hell .
and the moon is made to be lawful for you , and the moon , in order to be subjected to the earth , and the punishment of your own work will be of no use to you . and whoever commits your duty to allah , then surely , allah is with the god-fearing .
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a nearby place .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are sundry lords better of allah , the one , the subduer
then he turned his back , striving hard .
the deeds of pharaoh 's people and those who lived before them were also accused of lies . they have rejected god 's revelations . god is certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , and is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
and we rained upon them a rain . miserable was the rain of those forewarned .
do not be ungrateful to your own life , and do not follow the idols for their worship ; and whoever does not have the same to be worshipped , we will surely give them the reward of what they used to worship .
we have received the trust of those who are given to you of god 's revelations . you have received the good things in the name of god . when you are dead , you will be brought back to life in ranks , and thus do we give you the means to give thanks .
do you not see that god has created the heavens and the earth and all that is in the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , apart from god ? the two of them will not be set up with their mouths , and on the day of judgment . god has full knowledge of all things .
and at night , will you not understand ?
faces on that day shall be downcast ,
and we have certainly distributed it among them that they may remember , but most men begrudge aught save ingratitude .
and we gave them the explicit scripture ,
this is because they defied god and his messenger . whoever opposes god and his apostlethat god is severe in retribution .
if you are a man of truth , the words of those who are bent on denying the truth say , is it a message of dust ? they will say , is it when you are dead ? they will be the dwellers of the fire , and they will remain in it .
and when you are at the bottom of the stars , and the people in the city , and the people , and the caravan , are at the time of the planets , and the caravan in which are two ; and if ye are brought back to the law of allah , ye are in a state of disputation , and that he may make a clear matter for the hereafter . but allah is hearing , knowing .
and on the day when he will gather them together , as if they had not remainedexcept for an hour of the day , they will recognise each other . lost will be those who denied the meeting with allah and were not guided .
then indeed your lord – for those who migrated after they had been persecuted and then fought and remained steadfast – indeed your lord is oft forgiving , most merciful .
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more proper , so they will be recognized and not harassed . god is forgiving and merciful .
then god sent down his composure upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the unbelievers . such is the recompense of the unbelievers .
lo ! we are laden with debt !
and whoever commits the wages of sin , and is not a sin , he is only one of his own soul ; and whoever does a good deed , he will be given to the extent of what he has given them ; and they will be given to the extent of all that they did .
in it are raised beds .
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , wrongfully and out of pride . so see how was the end of the workers of corruption !
that this is indeed the word of an honoured messenger ,
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
and not equal are the good deed and the evil deed . repelwith what is best.he between whom and you was enmity , as if he were a sympathetic friend .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? allah brought utter destruction upon them , and for the disbelievers is something comparable .
then placed it in a secure repository ,
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the living creatures that he has dispersed in them . and he is able to gather them whenever he wills .
on that day you shall be exposed , and no secret of yours will remain hidden .
except to an apostle he approves of . then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him
and thus do we try some of them by others so that they say : are these they whom allah has favoured from among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
say : ' o men , the truth has come to you from your lord . whosoever is guided is guided only for himself , and whosoever goes astray , it is only to his own loss ; i am not a guardian over you . '
and we left with them for later generations .
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
have they taken awliya besides him ? but it is god who is the protector , and he gives life to the dead , and he has power over all things .
and whoever comes to the apostles sent down to the proof of allah , the signs of allah was revealed to them , and they said , “ we are just as a man like the ourselves ; and allah is the chosen , the praised . ”
god will certainly call them to account on the day of judgment . no one at your knowledge has ever been able to help you . on the day of judgment , there will be no one to help you .
for they were guided to purity of speech . they were guided to the path of the most praised .
o you who have believed , fear the fire as a fuel for the people , and be prepared for the fire of hell . it is the law of allah , and they will not be able to command him .
so have patience ! god 's promise is true . let not those who lack certainty belittle you .
allah has made lawful the prayer for the people and the garment of the truth , and the seal of the prophets , and the shades of the book ; and that is what is in the heavens and the earth ; and allah is cognizant of all things .
they are those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of the world while they thought they were doing good .
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . theirs shall be an adverse turn of fortune . allah is hearing , knowing .
do they not consider that the hour may overtake them suddenly while they are unaware ?
and your lord inspired the bee saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in what they build ,
they impress upon you that they have submitted . say : count not your islam as a favour upon me . nay , but allah has conferred a favour upon you that he has guided you to the faith , if you are truthful .
and for every nation we have set a parable . so let the people of truth be like this . to your lord you are on the right path .
he said , “ my lord , i fear they will deny me . ”
it closes in on them from every side
and a multitude from the later generations .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and unto him ye shall be gathered .
hath he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there a madness in him ? nay , but those who disbelieve in the hereafter are in torment and far error .
we did not send you except as mercy to mankind .
verily your lord is gracious to men , though most men are ungrateful .
say , “ the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . so whoever wills may accept faith in him , so whoever wills may accept the faith of the disbelievers and reforms from it – and what a wretched destination for the disbelievers . ”
whether we show youpart of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to conveyand on us is the reckoning .
and cast lots , and was of the rebutted ,
and when thou lookest , it is there thou wilt see a bliss and a realm magnificent .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
they said , ‘ we will solicit him from his father.we will surely do . ’
if he should ask you for them and press you , you would covetously withhold , and he will bring out all your ill-feeling .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer , -
bear with patience what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; he was a penitent .
“ we hope that our lord will forgive us our mistakes , as we are the first to believe . ”
what ! has he taken daughters out of what he himself creates , and favored you with sons ?
say , “ the truth has come , and falsehood can neither originate nor recreate anything . ”
those who have believed and emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are far higher in degree with allah . those ! they are the achievers .
say : ' i supplicate only to my lord and i do not associate any with him '
they said , 'nay , but we have brought thee that concerning which they were doubting .
for the favors of god we have made for you , and we have sent down on you a garment from the shadows , and provided for the good things of what we have given them . they were unjust to our will .
they said : nay , but we found our fathers doing so .
then , when he saw the sun rising , he said , this is my lord . this is greater ! but when it set , he said , o my people , indeed i am free from what you associate .
what , has your lord favoured you with sons and taken to himself females from among the angels ? you are indeed uttering a monstrous lie .
and indeed , for you is a reward uninterrupted .
and they say : why are not signs sent down upon him from his lord ? say : the signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner .
it will come upon them suddenly when they are not expecting it .
by the winds which carry dust particles ,
who preserve their trusts and pledges
they will have therein their dwelling , and therein they shall be abiders .
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and this is how we have put our signs so that they might find the way of it . the two of them said , “ do you not wait for one day ? ” they said , “ do your lord , for some day , a part of the day , some of them said , “ do you not assume for a day , and then you will not be able to make food for yourselves ? ”
those are onguidance from their lord , and it is those who are the successful .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
we have sent down to you a book in which is your reminder . do you not understand ?
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the universe ,
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bliss .
worship allah , and do not ascribe any partner to him , and the relatives and the orphans and the relatives , the orphan , and the mahrum . allah does not love the arrogant .
he was inclined to his servant , and he told him , my father , this is the way of ours . he said , my father , this is the way of ours . i can see that my lord is the most knowing of all those who stand up .
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it.a promiseupon us . lo ! we shall do it .
and in the scriptures of the book , except that they did not believe except that they have been unjust to the right way , and say : we believe in that which you have been sent down ; and we are muslims to him .
for him is nearness to us , and a beautiful resort .
so we made it an example to their own and to succeeding generations , and an admonition to the allah-fearing .
for those who do good is the bestand more . neither dust nor abasement will cover their faces . they are the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
or that they may follow what is in their disputes . and if they wish to be pleased by allah , they will be pleased for it , and if we had not made a matter of their duty to them , the matter would be settled between them ; and for the wrongdoers is a painful punishment .
and whatever expense ye expend or whatever vow ye vow , lo ! allah knoweth it . wrong-doers have no helpers .
and when it is said unto them : believe as the peoplehave believed , they say : shall we believe as the fools have believed ? lo ! they themselves are the fools , but they know not .
the day that the spirit and the angels will stand in ranks , they will not speak except for one whom the most merciful permits , and he will say what is right .
and follow the best of what was revealed to you from your lord before the punishment comes upon you suddenly while you are unaware .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for god sees what you do .
on the day when allah will raise them all together and inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
the wives of the women are too doubled . so let the two of them think that god has decided for them . if they had done so , they will have the same . if they had done so , they will have their share in the life to come . if they had done so , the matter would have been doubled for their differences . god is majestic and all-wise .
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us ; nay , we did not invokeanything before . thus doth allah lead the disbelievers astray .
so if you gain the mastery over them in war , deal with them in such wise as to disperse those who follow them , that they may remember .
it is god who has created you , then he will cause you to die , and he will replace you by the means of your time . he has the knowledge of all things .
aye ! thou marvellest , and they scoff .
said : 'begone , you are accursed !
those who have received the book , and those who have been given the book , will have a party of the books which has been revealed to you and say , “ i am commanded to serve what is revealed to you ; and to him you will all return . ”
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
this is what god gives good news to the believers , and the righteously striving believers . ask them , do not ask me any recompense for this , for god is appreciative and appreciative .
and all those who are on the earth , thenthis might deliver him .
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and a few from the latter ones .
the descendants of those whom we carriedwith noah . he was a truly thankful servant .
devotedand of equal age ,
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars , and the sun and the moon ; i saw them bowing down before me . ”
to warn all who are truly alive , and to justify the wordagainst the deniers .
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
do you think that you will enter paradise while allah has not yet tested your warriors , nor yet tested the steadfast ?
forgive me , our lord , and forgive my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled , ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is fully aware of what you do .
warn your nearest kinsmen ,
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps god will turn to them in mercy . god is forgiving and merciful .
verily the god-fearing shall be in a secure place
the day on which men shall be as scattered moths ,
and nuh cried unto his lord , and said : my lord ! verily my son is of my household , and verily thy promise is the truth , and thou art the most just of the judges .
‘ taste this , allah ’ s duty to you , who is a patient , and if there be twenty of you , they will overcome two hundred , and if there is a hundred , they will overcome two hundred and allah is the guardian of the godwary . ’
invoke your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
and he who believed said : o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a fate like that of the factions ;
if you fear the enemy of the enemies of the people , they are women who are not permitted to you both , and if you fear that they may be made equal to each other , or whether you are afraid of them . this is what they are doing .
if you disclose your sadaqat , it is well , but if you conceal them and give them to the poor , that is better for you , and it will atone for some of your misdeeds . and allah is acquainted with what you do .
hell will be their dwelling .
satan , the devil , is a part of the law of the law and in the future . then we said to them : 'you are not sent down upon the earth , when they are cautious '
that your endeavour is for different ends .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is another punishment besides this . but most of them do not know .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo , it looked white to the beholders .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
know that god is severe in retribution , and that god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a place in hell for disbelievers ?
and they said : 'whatever sign you bring to us , to cast a spell upon us , we will not believe in you '
they are dead , not living . they do not know when they will be resurrected .
so we will surely bring you magic like it ; so appoint a tryst between us and you , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep , in a place assigned .
i ask of you no payment for it . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
and made the night a cover ?
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter between you and me would be decided ; and god knows very well the evildoers . '
they were defeated and turned belittled ,
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am a muslim ” ?
and indeed we have created man and we know what his soul whispers to him , and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying , woe to us ! we have been in neglect of this . we have been unjust .
and the women of your women are made to follow your home and follow the best of the beasts , and you will not be compensated for your family , and you will have a good act of safety in the cause of god .
but when they came to them with a clear messengers , they have been filled with what they have been given , and those who have been given knowledge of the knowledge of the matter they were mocking .
therefore , remind . by the grace of allah , you are neither a soothsayer , nor a madman .
so we delivered him and his people all together ,
so if you gain the mastery over them in war , deal with them in such wise as to disperse those who follow them , that they may remember .
whoever desires the reward of this world , then with allah is the reward of this world and the hereafter ; and allah is hearing , seeing .
verily , they are the ones who have chosen their faith in the glory of allah , and indeed allah knows what they conceal in the hearts . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the hearts .
say : flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will be given only brief enjoyment .
the mischief of those who are bent on denying the truth or the people who were bent on denying the truth can be the pattern of this . this is the one who has been devoted to god . if they were to do so , they would not have been sufficientfor you . and if the people of the truth were to be of the same , they would not have been given to the right path . but if the people of the unbelievers were to take nothing to take heed for themselves .
in the gardens of bliss .
say : perhaps some of what you wish to hasten is right behind you .
said : even if i bring you a better guidance than that which you found your fathers following ? they said : verily , we disbelieve in that with which you have been sent .
and we are not going to be tormented .
on the day when god will resurrect them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . surely , they are the liars .
then , after them , we established another generation .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask for the forgiveness of idolaters even though they may be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
when god 's help and victory come ,
and why should we not believe in allah and what has come to us of the truth ? and we hope that our lord will admit us along with the righteous .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
and to us belong the last and the first .
who fed them against hunger , and secured them against fear .
a throng of the ancients
benefits anddrinks have they from them . will they not then give thanks ?
so do not obey the unbelievers , but wage a great jihad against them with it .
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it ; it may be that you dislike a thing which is good for you and the needy and the traveller may be bad for you ; and god knows , and you do not know .
he said : take hold of it , and fear not ; we will restore it to its former state .
fretful when evil touches him ;
theyonly worship idols and satan , the persistent rebel .
whenever a chapter is sent down , some of them say , “ which of you has this increased in faith ? ” as for those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
except an old woman who remained behind .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for god sees what you do .
no partner has he ; this am i commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
and the shadows of the two groups , then say : what , do you eat of such a thing , or the blood that are forbidden ? say : what ! do you not eat of such a thing , or thosewhom allah has made a lie ? and who is a guide for the people who are zalimun .
they and their spouses , in shades , reclining on couches .
does he not know that god sees ?
hath there come unto thee the story of the hosts-
the deeds of pharaoh 's people and those who lived before them were also accused of lies . they have rejected god 's revelations . god is certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
he said , i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet ,
the people of pharaoh : will they not fear ?
god has given the example of the house of abraham to the people of the unbelievers who were unbelievers to have two sons . but they did not know the two of their two women , but they are the ones who will suffer the fire .
but the messenger and those who believe with him struggle with their wealth and their lives . these are the good things , and these it is who shall be successful .
say , “ had god willed i would not have recited it to you nor would he have made it known to you . i lived among you for a lifetime before it . do you not understand ? ”
we have believed in our lord that he may forgive us our sins and the magic to which you compelled us . god is better and more lasting .
“ this brother of mine has ninety nine ewes , and i have one ewe ; and he said , ‘ entrust it to me , ’ and he browbeats me in speech . ’ ”
then they turned to one another , blaming each other .
the gardens of perpetuity , where they will abide for ever . and the angels will be presented in it , and the angels will be called to account .
so we took retribution from them ; then see how was the end of the deniers .
no indeed ! soon they will disown their worship , and become opponents to them .
will you believe in it only after it has overtaken you , although it was your wish to hurry it on ?
“ and indeed my curse is upon you till the day of judgement . ”
say , “ whoever is in the custody of the most gracious , will have in wealth and this world to give up what is in their eyes ; and they will come to know who is the best of punishment , and who is the best of those who exceed the right . ”
a provision from the forgiving , the merciful .
o you who have faith ! spend out of what we have provided you before there comes a day on which there will be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession . and the disbelievers are the wrongdoers .
verily , those who disbelieve , they say : allah is the one allah . there is no god but he : but if they say , there is no god but allah , the one allah ; and for them is a painful punishment .
they said : our lord ! turn away from us the ways of that which we have been made to keep away . and we made them of the heedless in the scripture . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who are patient .
when shu'eyb said unto them : will ye not ward off ?
then after him we sent messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs . but they would not believe in what they had rejected before . thus we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
verily i am allah . there is no god but i , so serve me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
do not think god is unaware of what the wrongdoers do . he only gives them respite till the day on which all eyes will stare fixedly in horror .
and made the moon a light therein , and made the sun a lamp ?
the mischief of those who are bent on denying the truth or the people who were bent on denying the truth can be the pattern of this . this is the one who has been devoted to god . if they were to do so , they would not have been sufficientfor you . and if the people of the truth were to be of the same , they would not have been given to the right path . but if the people of the unbelievers were to take nothing to take heed for themselves .
say : i am not an innovator among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow that which is revealed to me , and i am but a plain warner .
but my call added only to their flight .
and if allah had willed , he could have made youone nation , but he sendeth astray whom he will and guideth whom he will . and verily ye shall be questioned of what ye used to do .
and were witnessing what they did to the believers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
peace be upon abraham .
a numerical book .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah . evil indeed is what they used to do .
those who have been given the book of god in the book and who have been given the book by god will have a little , and will fill their bellies with him on the day of judgment . god will bring them a painful punishment .
so fear god , and obey me .
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
and incline not toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors besides allah ; then you will not be helped .
and this qur'an is not such as could be produced by other than allah , buta confirmation of what was before it and a distinguishing explanation . there is no doubt that it is from the lord of the worlds .
“ we hope that our lord will forgive us our mistakes , as we are the first to believe . ”
hast thou received the story of moses ?
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that allah will not make the earth swallow them , or that the punishment will not fall upon them from where they do not perceive ?
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter walk aright , there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve .
no indeed ; but you honour not the orphan ,
do not be like those who left their homes elated with insolence and showing off to people , and to barfrom the way of allah , and allah comprehends what they do .
so where are you heading ?
and to us belong the last and the first .
and those who distributeby command ,
“ and on a game , allah does not appoint any one except according to his own capacity ; and the deeds of righteousness is only for his own good ; and “ our lord , do not give us a prey to what we have done , and we will be responsible for our deeds . ”
we raised him to a high position .
verily your god is one ,
so we exacted retribution from them , and drowned them in the sea , because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you humbled while it is fatigued .
except those who repent , and mendand clarify . those i shall accept them ; i am the accepting of repentance , the merciful .
guide us to the straight path ,
and verily , youare receiving the qur'an from an all-wise , all-knowing .
these towns—we relate to you some of their accounts . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe in what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
allah has created every beast of water from a sort of water . some of them walk upon their bellies , and some of them go upon four , and some of them go upon four ; for allah creates whatever he wills ; surely allah has power over all things .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate yourselves before the sun and the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you worship .
by the wise qur'an ,
or be reminded and the remembrance would benefit him ?
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is cognizant of what is in the hearts .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
as for those who believe and do good works we do not waste the wage of whosoever does good deeds .
what is that in your right band , moses '
the day that he will see what he says , and he will make a vain deed between them ; and the evil one is a liar between them ; and allah is most gracious to his servants .
said : here is the way of allah . say thou : there is no way of escape for you . and thou shalt not be able to have a thing to turn away from it , nor will ye be able to make it a lie .
“ this is what you were promised—for every careful penitent .
he said , would that i had the poweror could seek strong protection .
o ye who believe ! when ye are told , be sure , to be a part of that which is said unto you , but be ye set up , and if ye have made it allah , he will give you the reward , and when ye have made it grow , then behold , ye were to be of those who have knowledge .
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and conferred on his descendants prophethood and scripture , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ this is clearly sorcery . ”
and indeed , those before you have denied , so they have been seized with him ; and they have not been seized by the punishment , until they came to us with the means of which they have no knowledge . and of allah , there is no doubt of the prophets .
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself to allah and is virtuous , and follows the religion of abraham , the upright in faith ? and allah took abraham for a friend .
those who deny the day of recompense .
the people of pharaoh : will they not fear ?
the unbelievers say , shall we point out to you a man who will tell youwhen you have become fully disintegrated into dust with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
and do not rebuke the beggar .
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
and the parable of the garden is that which is revealed to you , and that which is not prepared for them . this is the word of allah , and with it will be foliage in them . and of the two gardens will be the best of gardens and the fresh growth of those who are in front of it ; and of the two gardens will be successful .
o mankind , fear your lord and fear a day when he has not a son . the promise of god is only for his father . do not let the final promise of the day of judgment be true . do not let the day of judgment reach you from god .
they said , “ have you come to us in order that we worship allah alone and abandon what our ancestors used to worship ? so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed for them , and said : 'this is a harsh day '
with the help of god . he helps whom he will , and he is all-mighty , ever-merciful .
and if they deny you , say , “ for me are my deeds , and for you are your deeds ; you are innocent of what i do , and i am disassociated from what you do . ”
and verily it is an admonition unto thee and thy people ; and presently ye will be questioned .
'my son , if it should be but the weight of one grain of mustard-seed , and though it be in a rock , or in the heavens , or in the earth , god shall bring it forth . surely god is all-subtle , all-aware .
it will be said to them : “ this is no harm for me or for my own harm ” except for him whom allah permits . and when they came , they would not have reached it .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ this is clearly sorcery . ”
and they will be given to drink there a cupmixed with zanjabil ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity ; haply so they would return .
we bestowed upon david a favor from us : ‘ o mountains ! you birds and birds ! ’ and we made iron soft for him ,
the act of the prophet will be told , did you not know that we did not have any claim to you ? but you would say , “ in fact , you did not have any faith . and the devil ’ s punishment came to you , and you were safe from the way of god . ”
yet it may be that my lord will give me something better than your garden , and send on it a thunderbolt from heaven , so that it will be a slope of dust ,
he said : lo ! ye are folk unknown .
will you be left secure in that which you have here ?
it is you who will be called to account for you , so that you may be condemned in the way of god , and may be made to receive a heavy source of it . but he who is a greedy friend , he will take it away , and bring it on your heels ; and if you turn away , it is god who is the best of those who have gone astray .
secret counsels are onlyof the shaitan that he may cause grief to the believers ; but he can not harm them in the least , except as allah permits ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
what , has your lord favoured you with sons and taken to himself females from among the angels ? you are indeed uttering a monstrous lie .
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
then his lord chose him , and he made a lesson for him , and he was penitent . he said , “ o mary , do the care of the idols whom he has made a seem to seem good to him . ” he said , “ o mary , do what he has made a great provision to him. ” he said , “ this is a part of the sustenance which he has made of the sustenance ; and god provides the sustenance of whomever he wills . ”
those who , then , are arrogant , have been made to blame . but when they have come to know , they say , “ do not follow the haughty ; they have said , you have been instructed ; and they will say , “ do not follow us ; and you are not in the least way . ”
the gardens of perpetuity , beneath which rivers flow , to abide therein , and that is the reward of him who has purified himself .
ha mim .
the league will be routed and turn its back .
so , surely with every hardship there is ease ;
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against god . they will be fuel for the fire .
they are those on whomblessings from allah , and mercy , and they are the ones that receive guidance .
they shall roast into the scalding fire ,
and we sent not a messenger before you , , and sent down your people . but when a matter is determined for the devil , he took away their people from the way of satan , but when he has made a matter of the devil , he has made it a lie , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
when two groups from among you were about to lose heart , god was their protector . in god let the believers put their trust .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
they said : we augur ill of thee and those with thee . he said : your ill omen is with allah : nay , but ye are folk that are being tested .
so deem not thouthat allah is going to fail his promise to his apostles ; verily allah is mighty , lord of vengeance
which will neither fatten nor avail against hunger .
or that they may follow what is in their disputes . and if they wish to be pleased by allah , they will be pleased for it , and if we had not made a matter of their duty to them , the matter would be settled between them ; and for the wrongdoers is a painful punishment .
he said : o chiefs ! which of you will bring me her throne before they come to me in submission ?
allah knows what every female bears , and what shrinks and swells the womb . and everything with him is inproportion .
there has come to them many a tiding wherein there isto check ,
and who believe in that which has been sent down to you and what was sent down before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are mypartners , whom you used to assert ?
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
o mankind ! we have indeed been given to you , , a sign , and we have given them the other people , so that one of them is the other ,
a party of the people of the book would love to mislead you but they lead you astray , but they do not realize it .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
verily man is impatient by nature :
and fruit in plenty
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow , and their garments of fine silk will be of silk and of pure silk , and of silk will be of silk .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
but the messenger and those who believe with him struggle with their wealth and their lives . these are the good things , and these it is who shall be successful .
indeed those who have purchased unbelief in exchange for faith will not harm allah in the least ; for them is a painful punishment .
then the first of them will say to the last of them , “ you have no advantage over us ; so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ”
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night ; thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt without reckoning .
and we cut them up into communities on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tested them with goodand evil thingsso that they may return .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and for allah is the highest attribute ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
and we created not the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , in play .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
and verily , theyhinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
so proclaim openly what you are commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
and indeed , we have sent the qur'an with the truth and what has already been revealed to you . the truth has already come to pass against them , and to keep your duty to allah , and this is indeed a great command .
until , when we open upon them a door of severe chastisement , lo , they are sore confounded at it .
there is not a crawlingon the earth whose provision is not due from allah . he knows its lodging-place and its repository . all is in a clear book .
the chiefs of those who were proud among his people said : o shu'aib ! surely you have believed in allah and the believers , we will surely cause you to die , or are they the inheritors ?
say : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you . he knows whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth . and those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , it is they who are the losers .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for god sees what you do .
what remains with god is better for you , if you are believers . i am not a guardian over you .
we sent to her our spiritin the resemblance of a perfect human .
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and rivers ,
and then manage the affairs of the universe .
the parable of what they spend in the life of this world is like a biting frosty blast which smites the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves , and destroys it . god is not unjust to them , but they wronged themselves .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
those whose hearts tremble when allah is mentioned , and those who patiently endure whatever befalls them , and those who establish prayer and spendout of what we have provided them .
have you considered he who turns his back ,
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you over the world .
we have indeed turned about for people in this koran every manner of similitude ; the human is the most disputatious of things .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter that they should have any option in their decision . and whosoever disobeyeth allah and his apostle hath strayed with a manifest straying .
our lord , you will gather the people for a day about which there is no doubt . god never fails to fulfill his promise .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and all that is between them , and all that is beneath the soil .
so he showed him the mighty sign ,
and incline not toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors besides allah ; then you will not be helped .
such is the case , like that of which they have been given , and those who have rejected our revelations and have been such as belie them . and allah is of them a trustee .
the fact is that you are at variance with the truth , but you are not going to return to the messenger of your messengers , and you will be doomed to ignore what you have done . what you are doing is certainly lost .
those who have been given the book of god in the book and who have been given the book by god will have a little , and will fill their bellies with him on the day of judgment . god will bring them a painful punishment .
we saved moses and all those who were with him ,
and were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you , and that allah is all-kind , all-merciful…
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
all of them shallbe gathered before us .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yes , he has power over all things .
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and conferred on his descendants prophethood and scripture , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
god will admit those who believe and do good deeds to gardens through which rivers flow . as for the unbelievers , they take their fill of pleasure and eat as the cattle eat , and the fire shall be their lodging .
andlout , when he said to his people : you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you init in the 'alamin .
and none led us astray except the culprits .
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you ,
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : did we bar you from guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but you were mujrimun .
andlout , when he said to his people : do you commit such immorality as no one has preceded you with from among the worlds ?
o ye who believe ! be careful of your religion , and turn to him in repentance ; he shall be the most exalted of , the most generous .
surely the gates of heaven shall not be opened for those who reject our signs as false and turn away from them in arrogance ; nor shall they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . that is how we repay the guilty .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : 'my lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little '
maybe our lord will give us better than this . we turn to our lord in supplication .
invoke your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
glory be to him who carried his servant by night from the sacred mosque to the farthest mosque whose precincts we have blessed , that we might show him some of our signs . he is all-hearing and all-seeing .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , while a dreadful doom encompassed pharaoh 's folk ,
on that day , you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
by the angels who float ,
nay , but we are deprived !
say : ' o people , i have been sent to warn you plainly .
so enter the gates of hell , to dwell therein forever . miserable is the residence of the arrogant .
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
they said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph with our things , so the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we tell the truth .
eat and drink out of what we have provided for them , and to be a great loss of the sins that we have given them . that is what i have been promised . that is indeed a warning .
there is nothing but our life in this world ! we die and we live , and we shall not be resurrected .
over my servants thou shalt have no authority , except those that follow thee ,
then as for him whose balances are heavy ,
indeed those who allah ’ s covenant has not been given to any one of them – and the disbelievers will not be able to help any of them on the day of resurrection ; and allah will not bring to them a painful punishment .
a recompense for that which they have been working .
attempting to answer , they will say , ‘ by allah , our lord , we were not polytheists . ’
we savedand his family except his wife who remained with the rest .
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or we cause you to die , still to us is their return , and god is witness to all that they do .
and keep vigil with it during parts of the night as an extra prayer . perhaps your lord will raise you to a highly praiseworthy position .
and recite to them the story of ibrahim .
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path .
the human being is doomed to suffer loss ,
so i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off trading ; this is better for you if you only knew .
and the angels will be on the sides thereof , and eight will uphold the throne of thy lord that day , above them .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my faults on the day of judgement .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
and whoever turns himself away from the remembrance of the most gracious , we appoint for him a devil , and he is to him a companion .
they said : burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do .
so they turned away from him , and departed .
and never came there unto them a messenger but they did mock him .
and it was said , “ o nooh ! do not be sent down by the ship , in order to cast it in upon the ship ” ; so we will give you some of it , and give others from us , and then to be a punishment from us .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but behold , they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
when he said to his people : will you not fear allah ?
therein to dwell forever , desiring no removal out of them . '
we have sent down to you the same like to the noah and the messengers and the apostles . we sent moses and aaron and joseph and solomon and aaron , and joseph , and joseph , and joseph , and joseph , and aaron .
he said , ‘ my lord ! indeed my bones have become feeble , and my head has turned white with age , yet never have i been unblest in my invocation to you , o my lord !
so , surely with every hardship there is ease ;
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came unto you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not . and allah is ever seer of what ye do .
but if anyone apprehends partiality or an injustice on the part of the testator , and makes peace between the parties , there is no blame on him . god is forgiving and merciful .
they are like those who tasted the evil consequences of their deeds before . there is a painful punishment for them .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be repaid according to what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
and it was revealed to noah : “ none of your people will believe except those who have already believed ; so do not grieve over what they used to do . ”
it is god who knows the day of judgment . we shall have the knowledge of all that is in your bellies . he knows what is in your bellies . he has the knowledge of all things . he has knowledge of everything .
the hypocrites , men and women , and the like of it are as if they were an evil act in this qur ’ an , and those who do good deeds , for they are indeed the fasiqun .
and what made you hasten from your people , o musa ?
alif , lam , ra.a book whose verses are perfected and then elaborated , from one who is all-wise and all-aware .
behold ! how they propound similitudes for thee ! so they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
your riches and your children are but a trial , and allah is with the most merciful .
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error .
they will say , glory be to you ! you are our protector , not them . in fact , they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them .
has not the news reached you of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and there is a painful punishment for them .
it is he who created you . one of you is an unbeliever and one of you is a believer ; and god perceives what you do .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not escapeallah , and allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said , their religion has deceived them . but whoever puts his trust in god , god is mighty and wise .
as for those who have taken awliya besides him , god is watching them and you are not a guardian over them .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
god has never taken a single god over him , and he sets up with him a creature . god is too glorious to have a time .
“ someone brought up to be beautiful , and unable to help in a fight ? ”
we have assigned them companions who make their presentand futureseem decorous to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and men that passed away before them ; they were indeed losers .
with clear proofs and writings ; and we have sent down to you the reminder that you may explain to mankind what has been revealed to them , and that they may reflect .
and they have not any knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of gloom seized them . it was the punishment of a great day .
gardens enclosed , and grapevines ;
they said , “ o moses , we will never enter it so long as they are in it . go , you and your lord , and fight , and we will stay here . ”
and they have , , , when moses said to them , “ o my people , you are the ones who are my people in the presence of the calf , and then you assume that i have been sent with him , and when you know , i am a disobedient people . ”
saying : aforetime , we were afraid with our families .
and when ye have your belief in the affair , then remember allah , as though ye had heard the remembrance of him , and we should have said unto them : our lord ! give us that thou mayest be of us , and verily he shall be of the hereafter .
a warning to mankind , -
so that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it . will they not then be grateful ?
will you be left secure in that which you have here ?
and gave a little , then stopped ?
they say : when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ?
and made the moon a light therein , and made the sun a lamp ?
abiding therein forever . and wretched is their burden on the day of resurrection .
then he became an 'alaqa ; thenshaped and fashionedin due proportion .
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
verily we have sent thee in truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be questioned about the owners of hell-fire .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
on that day they will be violently pushed into the fire
and do not defraud people in their property or spread evil in the land .
say thou : bethink ye not that verily allah hath forbidden that which hath been forbidden unto you , and if they decide not , then thou wouldst be with them , and follow not the vain desires of those who believe not in our ayat .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will not break his promise . a day with your lord is as a thousand years of your reckoning .
“ except for the one whom you have not to worship , nor will there be any one of them to intercede for you ” ; and we will not set up any one of them in his divinity . say , “ we are a muslim , and we are muslims . ”
when legs are twisted around each other ,
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
the indubitable !
and we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
‘ taste this , allah ’ s duty to you , who is a patient , and if there be twenty of you , they will overcome two hundred , and if there is a hundred , they will overcome two hundred and allah is the guardian of the godwary . ’
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
but if they turn away , say : 'allah suffices me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust . he is the lord of the mighty throne '
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil shall see it .
and there are advantages for you in them , and that you may attain thereby to any need that is in your breasts ; and upon them and upon ships you are carried .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what the hearts contain .
and indeed it is a certain truth .
and allah will make those who believe in the life of this world to come , and in the life of the world to come , and on the contrary , it is he who will bring forth the disbelievers in the life of the world . and he is the most astray , the most knowing .
that we may give life thereby to a dead land and give it as drink to what we have created .
he positioned the earth for all the creatures :
indeed , it is we who revive the dead and write down what they have forwarded and what they have left behind ; and we have figured everything in a clear imam .
if you do not , then take notice of war from god and his messenger . but if you repent , you will have your capital sums . deal not unjustly , and you will not be wronged .
those who believe , and those who are jews , and those who are jews , and the christians who are jews , and the christians , and the people of the fire , shall separate them from the places of the fire ; and god is a witness to all things .
when they had come to them from god , they would have been given to them a book . what they had done is sure to help them , but they had rejected god 's help . god 's retribution against those who deny the truth , so let them be a liar .
marry the spouseless among you , and those among you who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is all-embracing and all-knowing .
have they not set up other gods besides god ? say : “ your own lord is the means of yours . do you know that it is a reminder for the people of the past and the future . ”
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy ; you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on your earth . and if any remit their hearts from their hearts , he will cause you to go back on their account , and he is able to do all things .
he said : i am only a messenger of thy lord , that i may bestow on thee a faultless son .
father , the knowledge has come to me which has not come to you . so follow me , i will guide you to a level path .
do not rise up against god , i come to you with clear authority .
and made them like an empty field of stalks .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
amranfrom us . verily , we are ever sending ,
he said : worship ye then instead of allah that which can not profit you at all , nor harm you ?
or is it that youask them for some wages ? but the recompense of your lord is better , and he is the best of those who give sustenance .
they will have therein their dwelling , and therein they shall be abiders .
and i swear by the self-critical soul !
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is performed .
these will be given their reward twice over , because they are steadfast and repel evil with good , and spend out of what we have provided them .
there is not a townbut we shall destroy or sternly punish it before the day of resurrection . that is inscribed in the book .
and'ad and thamud , and the dwellers in ar-rass , and many generations in between .
they said : our lord ! turn away from us the ways of that which we have been made to keep away . and we made them of the heedless in the scripture . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who are patient .
and persisted in the great sin
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
nor did we make them bodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best the guided ones .
on the day when he will bring to you all the prophets , and will say : how can there be for you the people who have no knowledge ? they said , do not know that we have been sent to you , so that you can not have any share in the world ?
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor miserly , between that is a just stand ;
verily , in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the sun and the sea , and the alternation of the sun and the earth , then bring it in upon the earth , and bring about the matter which is in the heavens and the earth , and in between the things they have been working .
and enjoin prayer on your household , and be constant in it ; we do not ask you for subsistence ; we do give you subsistence , and theend is for righteousness .
and out of our mercy we appointed his brother aaron , a prophet .
for the day of judgement .
surely there are two men of them that are bent on denying the truth , and there was an example for you to be a part of the law of allah ; and the believers , , were a party of them ; and allah is most surely a watcher over those who are in doubt .
it is he who originates the creation , then repeats it , and it is easier for him . his is the loftiest description in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent spreaderare we !
the book of the book may be given to the book . the book of god is the same and god 's benevolence and mercy are only to those who take heed .
and by oath of the promised day .
he inspected the birds , and said : why is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
then he collectedand made a proclamation ,
they will certainly have a lie in the name of god , but they call a lie on it . they have no faith in god . they have no faith in it . and if they turn away , they will not have any faith in it . and if they turn away , they will not be able to make amends .
by the soul and him who fashioned it ,
so he emerged before his people from the temple , and signalled to them that they should glorifymorning and evening .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away and see what they shall return '
but when they are oblivious of them , at once they try to go about in the land . they say , ‘ you have done but to what you have done . you are harmdoers ’ and we will certainly bring you all towards our eyes . ’
until whengog and magog has been opened and they , from every elevation , descend
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
and the prophet said , “ my lord knows all that is spoken in the heavens and in the earth ; and he only is the all hearing , the all knowing .
“ this is hell , which you were promised . ”
said : 'begone , you are accursed !
he knows what is before them and what is behind them . and to allah return all matters .
they said , “ pray to your lord to show us what we may send down to us . indeed , it is a confirmation of the people of the city , so we would not have a guide .
it is god who has created seven heavens , one above another , and the command of god is one above another , so that he may do the land , in order that they may understand . god has knowledge of all things .
and if we listed , surely we should wipe out their eyes so that they would struggle for the way how then would they see ?
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we have given them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , god is terrible in retribution .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what comes out of it , and what descends from the heaven and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant over what you have gained . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
so we brought forth such believers as were in it ,
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign. ” he said , “ your condition is that you can not speak to the talk with three nights , and allah said , “ your lord is the one who can not speak to you with three nights , and evening . you are in the mornings and the evening . ”
worship allah , and do not ascribe any partner to him , and the relatives and the orphans and the relatives , the orphan , and the mahrum . allah does not love the arrogant .
there are good tidings for them in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . this is indeed the supreme success .
if the messenger is given to them , god would have given you the better of your kinds , and have faith in him , and have faith in god , and have faith in him , and those who are with him , have no faith .
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am a muslim ” ?
say : have you considered if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the zalimun ?
and the book shall be given to every soul , but the ones in whose hearts is a disease , and the hearts in whose hearts is a disease ; and they say , “ woe to us ; and only your lord does what is in their custody ; and indeed your lord does not like all this . ”
messengers before you were also ridiculed , but those who jeered were surrounded by what they had ridiculed .
and those who are with the throne of the throne , those who are with him , celebrate the praises of their lord and seek forgiveness for those who have faith , and they say , “ our lord , accept your mercy , and do not accept your repentance for those who are faithful . ”
this is a declaration for mankind , a guidance and an admonition unto the god-fearing .
and we sent noah and abraham and placed in their offspring prophethood and the book . some of them are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who exceeded them in strength , so they went about in the lands of a refuge ?
that was the way of allah with those who passed away before ; and you shall find no change in allah 's way .
about the guilty :
we would have been the chosen servants of allah .
indeed , those who disbelieve - it is the same to them whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
some of them believed in it and some of them averted their faces from it . hell is sufficient forburning .
when the messengers came to the messengers , they told them , do not worship anything other than god . you will say , ‘ ‘ our lord will guide us only to what you have been sent with . indeed we will not accept faith in you . ’
and believes in al-husna .
upon your heart , that you may be one of the warners ,
and leave them desolate waste .
those who have made a covenant with you , do not make a covenant with god , and whoever has received the covenant of god , will be received by his command . whoever is given the commandments to god will have a great reward .
and soon will thy guardian-lord give theethou shalt be well-pleased .
so fear god , and obey me .
and the scattering wind scattering .
we sent to her our spiritin the resemblance of a perfect human .
another sign for them is that we carried their offspring in the laden ship .
it is god who created the heavens and the earth , and sent down rain from the sky and sent down rain from the sky for you to ride and subjected for you the ships by his command .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us in the evening and in the morning .
on that day no intercession shall avail , except from him whom the all-beneficent allows and approves of his word .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , there will be no denial of his endeavour , and we are recording it .
children of adam , take your adornment at every place of prayer . eat and drink , but do not be excessive for god does not love the wasteful .
is this a better hospitality or the tree of zaqqum ?
if you obey the majority of people on the earth , they will lead you astray from god 's way ; they follow only conjecture and surmise .
have you not considered those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , god purifies whom he wills , and they will not be wronged a whit .
though they may be within sight of each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
and whatever you spend for patience , and the shape for you , and the purest for yourselves ; and then you will find it as a time to reach you , and you will not be able to deprive your of the least .
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times its like ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like of it ; they will not be wronged .
and assuredly we have put in the midst of mankind a messenger , and we say : worship allah , and keep your duty unto him ; and then ye will be of the beliers .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not
i am commanded only that i should serve the lord of this city which he has made inviolable , to serve him ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims
he who does not respond to the summoner of god can not weakengod on earth , nor can he find besides him any protectors . those are in manifest error .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
so it sailed with them amid waves like mountains , and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself : o my son ! embark with us , and be not with the disbelievers .
that you will surely ride from stage to stage .
and when you are at the bottom of the stars , and the people in the city , and the people , and the caravan , are at the time of the planets , and the caravan in which are two ; and if ye are brought back to the law of allah , ye are in a state of disputation , and that he may make a clear matter for the hereafter . but allah is hearing , knowing .
a soul willknow what it has put forth and kept back .
the tribe of thamud denied the noble messengers .
allah it is who hath appointed for you the night that ye may rest therein and the day to see . lo ! allah is full of bounty for mankind , but most of mankind give not thanks .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
and that which you give in usury in order that it may increase the creditors ’ property will not increase with allah ; but what you give in zakat seeking allah ’ s pleasure—it is they who shall have increase manifold .
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him ; surely they were an ungodly people .
and let not those grieve you who vie with one another in denying the truth ; they can not harm allah in the least . allah desires to give them no share in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
allah will not take you to task for thoughtlessness in your oaths , but he will call you to account for what your hearts have earned , and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
so , if you have been going to find the tidings of the qur'an , then there is a party of them who will be in your vicinity . then you shall be lain in my presence with me . you are well aware of what you have .
are these the ones whom you swore that god would never have mercy upon them enter paradise ? you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve . '
so he who was given the bequest not to have two of them , is the two one upon being by two , and one who is not able to give a relative to the poor , and those who are bent on denying the truth – it is they who are the faithless .
god is the only lord and the master of the house . he is the only lord and the guardian of the peace . he is too glorious to have a guardian or good . he is too exalted to be considered equal to god .
what , and will you not remember ?
and exalted be the majesty of our lord , he has taken neither a wife , nor a son .
and besides these two there shall be two other gardens .
and then roast him in hell ,
we have adorned the lower heaven with lamps , and have made them missiles against the devils ; and we have prepared for them the chastisement of the blazing fire .
what ! do they not know that allah will punish them while they are devoid of what they do ? and it is they who are the biggest of the service of the sacred mosque ; but most of them are unaware .
and we shall surely test you until we make known the warriors and the steadfast among you , and we shall appraise your record .
then made his offspring from the extract of an insignificant fluid .
'fear not , ' said he . 'surely i shall be with you , hearing and seeing .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
but as for him whose scales are light ,
and also others of them who have not yet joined them . and he is the mighty , the wise .
said : soon shall we see whether thou hast told the truth or lied !
and give to the kindred his due , and to the needy , and to the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek allah 's countenance , and it is they who are the successful .
the companions of the left
then by oath of those which move with ease .
knower of the sensible and the unseen , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will never return .
they ask , when will this promise be fulfilled , if what you say is true ?
as for those who believe and do good works we do not waste the wage of whosoever does good deeds .
is it not a guidance for them , how many generations we destroyed before them , amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; do they not hear ?
say : allah knows what is in the cave and the earth . allah is the knower of the heavens and the earth . he is the hearer , the knower of the heavens and the earth . he is not responsible for his lord .
do you order righteousness of the people and forget yourselves while you recite the book ? do you not understand ?
have we not placed high mountains upon it and given you fresh water to drink ?
we created you in pairs ,
she said : oh woe is me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
and if they dispute with you , say : 'allah knows best what you are doing .
a reward from your lord , an ample calculated gift .
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs will be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
“ what drove you into saqar ? ”
say : 'what think you ? if god should make the night unceasing over you , until the day of resurrection , what god other than god will bring you light ? will you not hear ? '
allah it is who hath appointed for you the night that ye may rest therein and the day to see . lo ! allah is full of bounty for mankind , but most of mankind give not thanks .
those are the ones of whom allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn aside from them , and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words about themselves .
they will have no guardian or helper besides god . he whom god allows to go astray has no way .
god is the only lord and the master of the house . he is the only lord and the guardian of the peace . he is too glorious to have a guardian or good . he is too exalted to be considered equal to god .
after this , the time of the matter about which he was made to suffer . a group of them had the right to be divided , and a group of them had to say , “ did we not know that you are in their own hands ? ” , say , “ if only you had been able to do this , is one of the other , and the disbelievers say , “ if only you had been able to do this , is a part of what you used to do ? ”
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . allah accepts the repentance of whomever he wills ; and allah is all knowing , wise .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
they have taken their oaths as a covering , and barfrom the way of allah , so there is a humiliating punishment for them .
they said , “ have you come to us in order that we worship allah alone and abandon what our ancestors used to worship ? so bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate yourself and come closer to god .
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error .
as the caravan departed , their father said : ' i smell the scent of joseph , though you think me not a dotard . '
and the earth -- we stretched it forth , and cast on it firm mountains , and caused to grow in it of every suitable thing .
alif-lam-ra * ; these are verses of the clear book .
alif lam mim sad
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
or like a rainstorm from the sky , in which is darkness , thunder and lightning . they thrust their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps in fear of death . but god surrounds the unbelievers .
allah ! la ilaha illa huwa , the ever living , the everlasting .
do you want to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? anyone who exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
those who , then , are arrogant , have been made to blame . but when they have come to know , they say , “ do not follow the haughty ; they have said , you have been instructed ; and they will say , “ do not follow us ; and you are not in the least way . ”
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and be patient ; your patience is solely from allah . and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed by their deceits .
on the day when they will be set forth , all kinds of silver on the day of judgment , the matter will be decided at its all ages , and the whole one will be thrown into the mainstream , so the punishment of god became severe .
and obey allah and the messengerthat you may obtain mercy .
and if an evil whisper comes to you from shaitanthen seek refuge with allah . verily , he is all-hearer , all-knower .
the people of the book say to allah , “ what is the matter with us , or did we not destroy any one before them ? ” but some of them are averse to it , and indeed , we are about to make evident the people of the truth .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and a witness from her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth and he is a liar .
and your devotions amidst the worshipers .
better is the night of determination than a thousand months .
they will say , glory be to you ! you are our protector , not them . in fact , they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them .
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said , this is your god and the god of moses , and he forgot .
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
and man saith : what aileth her ?
and if they turn away , then know that allah is your befriender - a transcendent patron , a transcendent helper !
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me will come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
so he set out to those who are bent on denying the truth , on that day , when he will hear what is before him , and what is in the presence of them , when they are told , ‘ what is the matter with you , ’ so that allah has set a seal upon their hearts , in order that they should attain a means of their own souls . ’
andthis will be a great source of regret for the unbelievers .
it is naught but an admonition unto the worlds .
even though every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
and of your own friends is your blood or your son , or your wife in the past ; so if they turn their backs , then let them turn away from it ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
those who do goodto be seen ,
we have again bestowed our favour upon you .
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , and he sent down tranquillity upon them , and rewarded them with a near victory
they said , ‘ have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that supremacy may be yours in the land ? we will never believe in you ! ’
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; verily she was of an infidel people .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
will you be left secure in that which you have here ?
let the children of israel go with us . '
in 'ad , when we sent a blasting wind against them ,
the likeness of those who have been given the book , it was that they had no right to be blamed , and then they rejected the like of it ; and how terrible is the case of those who denied the truth . god does not guide the wrongdoers .
they said , ‘ we miss the king ’ s goblet. ’ ‘ whoever brings it shall have a camel-load , ’ ‘ i will guarantee that . ’
and they say , “ he has fabricated it ” ; so if allah put a seal upon him , he is able to do what he wills . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the hearts .
by thosewho wrestviolently ,
and fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is wholly for allah . then if they desist , allah indeed watches what they do .
and of the people of musathere is a community who leadwith truth and establish justice therewith .
say , ‘ do you worship any one among you , who will guide you to the right way ? ’ say , ‘ allah does double the truth ! ’ so is he who will not accept guidance ? ’
“ except for the one whom you have not to worship , nor will there be any one of them to intercede for you ” ; and we will not set up any one of them in his divinity . say , “ we are a muslim , and we are muslims . ”
nor did we make them bodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
at daybreak they called out to one another :
for he thought and he plotted ; -
indeed those who have purchased unbelief in exchange for faith will not harm allah in the least ; for them is a painful punishment .
those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , god will give them their full reward and his bounty . god will grant them a painful punishment , but they will not have to help them other than god .
and our command is but one , as the twinkling of an eye .
the things that god has created for them , has all that god has created for them . they say , this is god 's ' and he has said , “ this is the lord of their own hands . whoever ascribes their gods to god , has been abandoned . ”
and frolic about in doubt .
and at night , will you not understand ?
and if our revelations are recited to them , they say , “ this is a way of ours ” ; and they say , “ this is a way of falsehood ” ; and they say , “ this is an obvious lie . ”
god has never taken a single god over him , and he sets up with him a creature . god is too glorious to have a time .
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from them and from every agony , yet you ascribe partners . ’
and we made the sky a roof withheld . yet they turn away from its signs .
“ and i do not incline towards the treasures of the bondmen of allah , and i do not know the utmost of the two – and i do not know ; and allah only is the most knowing of the unjust . ”
however , those who have repented and have become righteously striving believers will perhaps have everlasting happiness .
and , o muhammad ! ask the scripture for which they have been sent down for a book which is sent down to them , so they ask the greater of the two , and they said , “ we make a clear sign for you in the qur ’ an , and they will say , ‘ we have indeed put a clear sign for them . ’
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . but if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , all that they had done would have gone to waste .
when the unbelievers hear the reminder , they nearly strike you down with their glances , and they say , 'surely he is a man possessed ! '
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . thus we shall deliver the believers .
he said , “ by god , you have done what you have done in the same way to make the calf its light , and the fact of those who are unjust to the truth , were unjust to the truth , and only those who are unjust to god ; and they will not seek forgiveness from his lord . ”
surely , your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
this is the result of their deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and remember our servants ibrahim and ishaq and yaqoub , men of power and insight .
wherein they will neither live nor die .
and if you fear , thenon foot or riding . but when you are secure , then remember allah , as he has taught you what you did not know .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
but allah bears witness to that which he has sent down to you . he has sent it down with his knowledge , and the angels bear witness . and sufficient is allah as witness .
he commands you to do evil and vice , and to say about god what you do not know .
so fear allah , and obey me .
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
so fight in the cause of god . you are only responsible for yourself . rouse the believers and perhaps god will restrain the might of those who disbelieve . god is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our communications ; surely they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
those before themrejected , and so the punishment came to them from directions they did not perceive .
we sent noah to his people : “ i have come to you with a clear warning . ”
they ask , ‘ when will be the day of retribution ? ’
if they could find a shelter , or any caverns , or any place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
on the day when the earth is changed into another earth , and the heavens , and they will emerge before allah , the one , the irresistible .
and when they came to a place of time , he was utterly inclined to you , and then go with good , and let them go with that which is in your own hands . so let them be a lesson and a duty of allah .
, a fitting recompense .
and we left for him among the later folk :
by thethat run , with panting ,
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . neither you nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
and will not be removed from it .
it will be a single zajrah ] , and behold , they will be staring !
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the true religion , so that he may make it prevail over all religions , though the polytheists may be averse .
and whatever good they do , they will not be denied it , and allah knows the pious .
why do you not bring down the angels upon us if you are truthful ?
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
you can not guide whomever you love , but god guides whomever he wants and knows best those who seek guidance .
gardens of eden ! they enter them wearing armlets of gold and pearl and their raiment therein is silk .
the torah and the gospel have been revealed to the point of moses . the book of the book is only a thing to have done .
and he whom allah has led astray , then indeed the descendants of him will not have any good offspring , and you will see the unjust , and they will say , “ are we not to return ? ”
the wicked among them changed the word which had been told them for another saying , and we sent down upon them wrath from heaven for their wrongdoing .
so by your lord , we shall surely gather them and the devils ; then we shall bring them up around hellon their knees .
and be thou patient in the company of those who are on the remembrance of their lord , and fall in the midst of the sun , and the afternoons and the afternoons and the afternoons and the traveller .
say : ' i will the treasuries of god 's book , and i do not possess any one of the universe . ' i do not follow what has been revealed to you . do you not know that the messengers are given to nothing ?
when god 's help and victory come ,
if you have a good deed , or good , they will be left to blame it . but if any misfortune comes to you , they are pleased with you ; but if you have patience , they will have no power to protect you , but if you have patience , they will surely have no power .
and the people of abraham , the people of lot ,
so it sailed with them amid waves like mountains , and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself : o my son ! embark with us , and be not with the disbelievers .
permission is given to those who are fought against , because they have been wronged , and allah is able to give themvictory
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy ; therein they shall be abiders .
he is the one who accepts the way of allah , to the right way , and makes them to enter into the recess of peace , and will guide them to the right path .
put your hand inside your collar and it will come out white , without blemish—among nine miracles to pharaoh and his people . they are indeed a wicked people .
and allah will not send a single account of that which is with him , and shall be cast on the account of his command . and verily , allah is not able to send any people from his place . and when he wills , there is no one to help them against allah , nor can they have any aides .
is it not that you will like a garden of date palms and vines which he has left with streams of fruits and a great place to which he will be . but a few of them will be struck by a great amount . this is how god explains the verses to a human being . thus does god make clear to them the verses that perhaps he will take heed .
and those whose scales are light - they are the ones who will lose their ownselvesbecause they used to wrong our ayat .
let those who sell the life of this world for the hereafter fight in the cause of god . whoever fights in the cause of god , and is killed or achieves victory , we shall bestow on him a great reward .
and whosoever earns a fault or a sin and then casts it on an innocent person , he verily hath burdened himself with falsehood and a flagrant sin .
they replied : 'we are possessors of force and great might . it is for you to command , so consider what you will '
and whoever avenges himself after having been wronged - those have not upon them any cause .
our lord , you will gather the people for a day about which there is no doubt . god never fails to fulfill his promise .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
for those who believe and do good works is an enduring wage '
peace ! shall be the greeting from the merciful lord .
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth implore him ; every day he is in a new affair .
some of your creatures have he made for you to do so . and some of you have to do good things , and eat of the sustenance which god has provided for you . you are certainly your sworn enemy .
on thrones decorated ,
striking sparks of fire with their hooves ,
and with pharaoh of the stakes ?
if you lend a good loan to god , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is all-thankful , all-clement ,
they said , ‘ let us be in doubt of what is in the wrong . what is the state of the heavens and the earth ? ’ ‘ what ! do you then know what is in the heavens and the earth ? ’ he calls you to the , and they said , ‘ you are only a human being like ourselves , so that they may be a clear sign . ’
'serve you none but god '
tell them : “ what is the matter with you , that the advice of god is ? if this is a message of god , then why do you deny the truth ? as a witness , the torah and the gospel are only the unjust . ”
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
and thou didst that thy deed which thou didst , and thou wast one of the ingrates .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
and a few from the latter ones .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein to dwell forever . that is the supreme triumph .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the wrongdoers for the punishment of a painful day .
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus we reward the doers of good .
allah has begotten , and indeed , they are liars .
then he fashioned him and breathed into him of his spirit , and appointed for you hearing and sight and hearts ; little thanks you show .
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say : 'you have tarried in god 's book till the day of resurrection , this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know '
who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he mounted the throne . the beneficent ! ask about him a well-informed .
have you not heard how your lord dealt with ad
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had never been given my record . ”
your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely there are signs in this for those who believe .
and they went out early , determined in their resolve .
and yet they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them ; and the disbeliever is ever an abettor against his lord .
and we have made a covenant with them and lifted up the foundation of the mountain and to be raised by it . and they said , ‘ immaculate is our duty ! ’ and they will say , ‘ immaculate are the state of allah , if you are believers . ’
so , are we not going to die ,
and multiplied iniquity therein ?
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and him who entereth my house believing , and believing men and believing women , and increase not the wrong-doers in aught save ruin !
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
there is not a thing but with us are its stores , and we send it down only in precise measure .
and when you are at the bottom of the stars , and the people in the city , and the people , and the caravan , are at the time of the planets , and the caravan in which are two ; and if ye are brought back to the law of allah , ye are in a state of disputation , and that he may make a clear matter for the hereafter . but allah is hearing , knowing .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the jews follow nothing ; the jews follow nothing but the jews follow nothing , whereas they are not aware of the book .
when we inspired your mother with the inspiration .
had the unbelievers fought against you , they would have turned their backs , and found no protector or helper .
we know very well how they listen when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the evildoers say : 'you are only following a man who is bewitched '
when we recite it , follow its recitation .
and if an evil whisper comes to you from shaitanthen seek refuge with allah . verily , he is all-hearer , all-knower .
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely there are signs in this for those who believe .
and perform as-salat , and give zakat , and irka'along with ar-raki'un .
so call upon god , making your religion his sincerely , though the unbelievers be averse .
and when ye are greeted with a greeting , greet ye with a better than it or return it . lo ! allah taketh count of all things .
o you who have believed , do not give up the like of the fruit of the world with which they have been given and spend in the earth , and do not spend the like of it with the like of it ; and know that allah is the rich , the praised .
those before themrejected , and so the punishment came to them from directions they did not perceive .
and persisted in the great sin
for indeed he saw him at a second descent ,
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the real bestower ?
they will hear therein neither gossip , nor lies .
and they say , legends of the former peoples which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and afternoon .
so we prevented them from hearing in the cave for a number of years .
and he subjected for you the sun and the moon , continuous , and subjected for you the night and the day .
on that day they shall offer to submit to allah , and what they forged will forsake them .
and multiplied iniquity therein ?
and has taught him articulate speech .
o ye who believe ! when ye are told , be sure , to be a part of that which is said unto you , but be ye set up , and if ye have made it allah , he will give you the reward , and when ye have made it grow , then behold , ye were to be of those who have knowledge .
for what crime she was slain ,
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there that can help you after him ? in allah let believers put their trust .
and we shall show you the evidence of the truth so that we shall make the matter clear to them , and that it may be clear to them that it may be clear to them ; and that he is the best of all things .
and whatever you spend for patience , and the shape for you , and the purest for yourselves ; and then you will find it as a time to reach you , and you will not be able to deprive your of the least .
let him beware ! if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock -
these are their people who have not divided their religion except one single piece . they have refused to make a single object of one another . but if they had been given the word of your lord , they would have turned it into a differences .
why do you not bring down the angels upon us if you are truthful ?
indeed , this qur'an guides to that which is most upright and gives good news to the believers who do good deeds , that for them is a great reward .
let them be the religion of allah , and they have made them taste the life of this world , and they have made their lives to it , so that they will not be able to get it in the least , and they will not be able to repel it in a state of pleasure . and for them is a painful punishment .
and be not haughty with that which they have been wont to do with other than allah . they will not be able to do so . and in that case , we will give them no more than allah . and to their lord they will return .
on the day when allah will raise them all together and inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
we are surely able to show you what we promise them .
and eat of what you may wish to be so long as you are followed by death , and if you are to do so , they will say , “ this is from god ; so why do you not have any sense ? ”
have they not seen that we have appointed a sanctuary secure , while all around them men are being snatched away ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in god 's bounties ?
say : who is lord of the seven heavens , and lord of the tremendous throne ?
believers , obey god and the messenger and do not invalidate your deeds .
o you who are wrapped up in your mantle ,
if they turn away , then they will be averse to you . we have not sent you , , , to them ; but indeed , we have been sent down to you , , in fact , a great recompense of what is with them . and indeed , when they are afflicted by a great deal , he will surely be among the greatest .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
noble writers ,
is he , then , who knows what is with them , a guide from his lord ? say : then bring forth the water for those who have taken to you from the right way , so that they may be guided by allah . and that is a guide for the disbelievers .
he said , “ are you renouncing my gods , o ibrahim ? if you do not desist , i will stone you . so leave me alone for a while . ”
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the merciful , they say , and what is the most beneficent ? shall we prostrate ourselves before whatever you bid us ? and it increases their aversion .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders , and to make them the inheritors ,
and fear allah , and shame me not .
so be patient of what they say and proclaim the purity of your lord before the night and the day , and proclaim the praises of your lord in the watches of the night .
what , do they not consider that they are going to go forth , or have they the face of war ? or , do you not turn back ?
allah said : by no means ! go you both with our signs . we shall be with you , listening .
those who believe and are cautious .
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until , when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him , and they never fail .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
pharaoh said , you have believed in him before i have given you permission . the chief of your people is one who has taught you magic . but you will soon know .
and say to those who are faithful , “ their eyes have fear of their sins and their duty to be of no means to be excused except to their own property ; so they do not have their carnal relations with their own eyes , or their own eyes ; so they do not have any inclination to adopt the best of your homes , or to be a muslim , and the people who are unaware of the property of your homes ; and they are the chosen ones , and the muslims . ”
whereas allah hath created you and that which ye make ?
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . but if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , all that they had done would have gone to waste .
and they say , “ do not give up the property of the people in the cause of god to the people of the devil , who are around the noble messenger of god , to make it seem fair to him ; but the most of them do not know . ”
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
or the feeding on a day of hunger .
andwhen your lord declared that he would certainly send against them , till the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with the worst torment . indeed , your lord is swift in penalty ; yet most surely he is forgiving , merciful .
he dreadeth not the sequel .
andthe day when we shall gather out of every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed ,
and he turned away from them and said , alas for joseph ! his eyes had turned white with grief , and he was filled with sorrow .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
our lord ! surely we have come to us in a time , and we have called us to believe in your lord , so we have believed in him . and we have come to our invocation , so that we may give up to their invocation a lie .
but when they measure or weigh , give less .
and they went out early , determined in their resolve .
did you think that we created you uselessly and that to us you would not be returned ?
by the much-frequented house ,
and there are advantages for you in them , and that you may attain thereby to any need that is in your breasts ; and upon them and upon ships you are carried .
do not be like those who left their homes elated with insolence and showing off to people , and to barfrom the way of allah , and allah comprehends what they do .
and they say , “ submit to your lord , ” but when you come , a group of them will be like you , and a part of the night should have been rendered . so in allah alone do you turn away .
god is a jew , an upright man , and his messenger , and your duty is not to mount at the fact , nor to mount it , but he is able to do so , but he will have the power to do so . god has power over all things .
he said , ‘ do you have faith in it before i have given you permission ? indeed , it is the greatness of allah , the magicians who have passed away by you , and we will surely make a bulwark of it and crucify you . and we will be among the heedless . ’
let not the unbelievers think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite only for them to increase their sins : for them there will be a shameful doom ,
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are mypartners , whom you used to assert ?
have they not pondered the matter , or has anythingcome to them that did not come to their forefathers ?
then he drew near , then he bowed
he said , do not take me to task for what i forgot and do not be hard on me .
they will not hear therein ill speech or commission of sin -
so your lord poured a scourge of punishment over them .
lo ! this is the supreme triumph .
thus do we elaborate the signs , so that the way of the wicked may be exposed .
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
and penetrate forthwith into the midsten masse ; -
he knows what is before them and what is behind them . and to allah return all matters .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
he said , “ go down , both of you , from here , some of you enemies to one another . but if there comes to you guidance from me , whoever follows my guidance , will not go astray nor suffer . ”
raiser of ranks , lord of the throne , he casts the spirit of his command upon whomever of his servants he pleases , that he may warnof the day of encounter .
will they not then contemplate on the koran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
say , “ we have believed in god , the people of the book , and the people of wisdom , and isaac , and prophethood , and prophethood . and we are not one of those who have surrendered themselves to god , and to him we have submitted .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and in the cause of allah , and let him know what every soul has to come to pass . indeed , allah is acquainted with what you do .
we seduced you . we were seducers . ”
the blind and the seeing are not alike ,
say : to allah belongs all intercession . to him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . then to him you will be returned .
and wait , indeed , we are waiting .
praise be to god , who has given me , in my old age , ishmael and isaac . surely my lord hears all prayers .
thamud belied in their exorbitance .
such is allah , your lord ! there is no god but he , the creator of all things , so worship him ; and he is the wakilover all things .
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
and it was revealed to noah : “ none of your people will believe except those who have already believed ; so do not grieve over what they used to do . ”
the day that he will see what he says , and he will make a vain deed between them ; and the evil one is a liar between them ; and allah is most gracious to his servants .
allah—there is no god except him—will surely gather you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful than allah in statement .
he will say : ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife !
o ye who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and render thanks to allah if it ishe whom ye worship .
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have insight .
do they not see how the objects allah has created casts their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before allah in all humility ?
they say , “ if there were a good man , ” they say , “ if there were a good man , we would be with you , so as to be a demon , and you will be like those who are in a state of disease , like the one who turned away . ”
abiding therein forever . and wretched is their burden on the day of resurrection .
he said : know ye what ye did unto joseph and his brother in your ignorance ?
so how do you command , and all that is just as the command of those who are with you , and turn away with those who are with you . and do not be repentant .
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and you shall come forth in crowds ;
they will say : nay ! no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
ha ' . mim .
or enjoins righteousness ?
and assuredly we know that they say : it is only a human being who teachech him . the speech of him unto whom they point is foreign , while this is arabic speech plain .
or do they say : he has forged it ? say : then bring a surah like unto it , and callon all ye can besides allah , if ye say sooth .
do you see any vestige left of them now ?
and those who if they are made to be of your wives , then if they turn their backs , then do not accept from what your hearts are , and those who are on the right hand , and those who are on the guard will be on the screen ; and whoever fears allah , then surely , it is for him to be of the god-fearing .
there is no blame on the prophet regarding what god has ordained for him . such has been the power of god with those who passed away before . the command of god is a decree determined .
and on the earth are signs for the certain
the like of him who has been sent down by his lord , he sends down the book before his lord , and he sends down those who were before him , who have no faith in this , and do not believe in this , for indeed , the people of understanding will not believe .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and when he turns away , he strives throughout the land to cause corruption therein and destroy crops and cattle . and allah does not like corruption .
so that they should not worship allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you declare .
i swear by the lord of the easts and the wests that we have the power
every one has a direction to which he turns ; so strive togood works . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
and allah encompasses them from behind ! .
from the evil of the sneaky tempter
a party of the people of the book would love to mislead you but they lead you astray , but they do not realize it .
this is a declaration for mankind , a guidance and an admonition unto the god-fearing .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself but then seeks forgiveness of allah will find allah forgiving and merciful .
and if you should marry the women before they go back to you , then take it in full manner , so that they may come to know , but it is more proper for them to do away with you , or that they may turn their duty to you ; and god is seeing of what you do .
they are those whose efforts have been wasted in the life of the world while they thought they were doing good .
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
their salatat the housewas nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment for your disbelief .
a provision and benefit for you and your cattle .
the believers are only those who believe in allah and his messenger and then doubt not but strive with their wealth and their lives in the cause of allah . those ! they are the truthful .
this is a god 's duty to those who are bent on denying the truth and the unbelievers , and the beneficent god will be shut into the presence of their lord . they will have a great share .
he it is who made the earth a cradle for you , and for you to live in the midst of the sky . and he has opened for you water from the sky , so that you may give up what is in it , so that they may be pure .
their deception will not avail them in the least on that day , nor will they be helped .
but pharaoh rebelled against the messenger , so we seized him with a severe seizing .
may the conjecturers perish ,
nobut allah can lay it bare .
do not compare god with anyone . god knows , and you do not know .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
tell my servants who have believed to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before the coming of a day in which there will be neither mutual bargaining nor befriending .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , that you may become righteous -
he said , my lord , as you have blessed me , i will never be a supporter of the criminals .
but he was not long in coming , and said , “ i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
he is naught but a man who has forged a lie against allah , and we will not believe him .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden when they vowed to gather the fruits in the morning
it gives its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . allah coineth the similitudes for mankind in order that they may reflect .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came unto you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not . and allah is ever seer of what ye do .
o you who have believed , do not give up the like of the fruit of the world with which they have been given and spend in the earth , and do not spend the like of it with the like of it ; and know that allah is the rich , the praised .
and he it is who is allah in the heavens and allah in the earth ; and he is the wise , the knowing .
and it is he who sent down a people from among the people of a town , a messenger , who recites to them , and makes clear to them the book , and teaches them the book and wisdom , for they were indeed in manifest error .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied about allah with blackened faces . is there not in hell an abode for the arrogant ?
and by the night as it recedes .
and thou didst that thy deed which thou didst , and thou wast one of the ingrates .
and they worship instead of allah that for which he hath sent down no warrant and that whereof they have no knowledge ; and for the wrong-doers there shall be no helper .
because he possesses wealth andsons .
and we made a covenant with the people of the town , and they said : we have been a part of what they had been doing . we have made a message of what they had been concealing . and we will certainly make things equal to them .
woe to you ; and woe .
this is a chapter which we have sent down and made obligatory , and we have sent down clear verses in it so that you may take heed .
let him beware ! if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock -
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
to send down upon them stones of clay ,
he said , “ this is the affliction of god . what is the matter with you ? what sort of a people you have been doing ? ” “ i will not be sent along among those who are waiting with you . and i am watching with you . ”
they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us . he will say : verily ye shall bide
except his wife who is doomed to be left behind .
and also in your own selves . do you not see ?
but he turned away with his supporters and said , ‘ a magician or a crazy man ! ’
we let loose against them a violent roaring wind on a day of ill omen , continuous ,
he said , “ my lord , i have called my people night and day
then there comes to them that with which they are threatened ,
'lord ' said moses , 'expand my chest ,
we know very well how they listen when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the evildoers say : 'you are only following a man who is bewitched '
or , who is it that will call on you , other than that of him , when he calls upon you of the prayer and then when the evil afflicts them ? then what is the matter with you , when they take heed ?
storming tempestuously
a call , from god and his messenger , to the exclusion of the people of the house : but if you turn away , god and his messenger are in the battle of the unbelievers . but if you turn away , then know that you will not be able to do so .
say , ‘ allah has spoken the truth ; so follow the creed of abraham , a hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists . ’
who created you , formed you and proportioned you ?
and the sun and moon are joined together , -
do you not remember the time of the earth so that how was the end of it to be so ? how terrible was the end of those who are bent on denying the truth or the truth . he is certainly all-knowing and all-powerful .
and indeed it has been revealed to you and to those before you : if you ascribe any partner to allah , your work would surely come to naught , and you will surely be among the losers .
and whosoever turneth away from my admonition , for him is a life of hardship , and we shall raise him up blind on the day of resurrection .
and the earth -- we stretched it forth , and cast on it firm mountains , and caused to grow in it of every suitable thing .
whoever desires the fleeting life , we hasten for him what we will for him . then we appoint for him hell wherein he will burn , condemned and rejected .
it is he who sends down the auspicious wind ; so he sends it down to a land and then gives it to a land that is dead , and he will bring you forth from the dead . thus do you restore .
and he is fierce in his love of wealth .
o you who believe ! take some of your wives among your wives or offspring , and be wary of your own . so should you be careful ofallah , then know that allah is the forgiver and the most merciful .
so let not him who believeth not therein and followeth his own desire keep thee away therefrom lest thou perish .
and you can not escape from allahin the earth , and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
when the earth is shaken with a shock .
and how many an animal there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls on me . so let them respond to meand believe in me that they may beguided .
o ye who believe ! be steadfast in your territory for the cause of the day of the time of the night , and the period of your sleeping in the morning , the period of your sleeping in the morning , where you will not be able to make hisfail . and allah is indeed full of knowledge and wisdom .
say : ' o people , i am a messenger from god , and god is the lord of the heavens and the earth . there is no god but he , the lord of the heavens and the earth , there is no god but he . so follow him , and be you guided to god . '
and when the believers saw the confederates , they said : this is what allah and his messenger had promised us , and allah and his apostle spoke the truth . and it only increased them in faith and submission .
verily , he thought that he would never return .
and he swore to them , “ i am a sincere advisor to you . ”
then they will say : we believe in it . but how can they receivefrom a place so far off , -
the building which they built will never cease to be a misgiving in their hearts unless their hearts are stopped . and allah is knowing and wise .
and obey allah and the apostle , and do not renege on any thing ; and if they are going to go forth , then you would be brought back to it , and the duty of your deeds is only with the steadfast . allah is with the steadfast .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , and barter not my revelations for a small price , and fear me alone .
satan , the devil , is a part of the law of the law and in the future . then we said to them : 'you are not sent down upon the earth , when they are cautious '
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
have they taken awliya besides him ? but it is god who is the protector , and he gives life to the dead , and he has power over all things .
a numerical book .
as for those who are given the knowledge of what is given them , know that this is the truth from the lord of the truth , and the people of their hearts , so that their hearts may be convinced . god is certainly guided to the right path .
in whatever form he willed has he assembled you .
eat and drink out of what we have provided for them , and to be a great loss of the sins that we have given them . that is what i have been promised . that is indeed a warning .
indeed , it is we who revive the dead and write down what they have forwarded and what they have left behind ; and we have figured everything in a clear imam .
marry the spouseless among you , and those among you who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is all-embracing and all-knowing .
and made things easy for them .
'taste ! surely thou art the mighty , the noble .
have they not seen how we have created for them of that our hands wrought cattle that they own ?
worship allah , and do not ascribe any partner to him , and the relatives and the orphans and the relatives , the orphan , and the mahrum . allah does not love the arrogant .
over my servants thou shalt have no authority , except those that follow thee ,
they will surely swear to you by allah when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and their refuge is hell , a recompense for what they used to earn .
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
allah knows the fraud of the eyes , and all that the breasts conceal .
have they not pondered for those who believe , and have faith in the hearts of allah , and have fear of allah , as they are not aware of , and most of them are deviators ?
and there is nothing comparable to him .
and he created the animals for you , of the truth , and the best of what is in their belly ; and what is the matter with you , that they do not eat .
and he had recited it to them , they would not have believed in it .
and the people of the opponents came to this . so quickly go towards it , and to the evil of their evil deeds , he said , “ o my people , are these the ones whom i have chosen , and do not fear god ? ”
to bring all the wise magicians to you .
and do not eat up your property among yourselves in vanity , nor offer it to the judges that you may devour a portion of the wealth of others sinfully while you know .
these are verses of the wise book ,
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
and then the hearts of your hearts were cut off , and then , other torments of others , and other things , and there are many signs in the heavens and the earth , and of them will emerge from allah ; and allah is not of their actions unaware .
, a fitting recompense .
the deeds of pharaoh 's people and those who lived before them were also accused of lies . they have rejected god 's revelations . god is certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
allah it is who hath appointed for you the night that ye may rest therein and the day to see . lo ! allah is full of bounty for mankind , but most of mankind give not thanks .
and indeed , for those who have wronged is a portionlike the portion of their predecessors , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
recall what time the wife of 'lmran said : my lord ! lo ! i vow unto thee what is in my womb , consecrated , so accept it from me . lo ! thou , only thou , art the hearer , the knower .
how will it be when we gather them together on a day about which there is no doubt , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged ?
when those who were bent on denying the truth and on the day of judgment , how terrible you will take to your servants or turn you away from them . god is the best of all guardian .
lo ! we have revealed unto theethe scripture for mankind with the truth . so whosoever goeth right it is for his soul , and whosoever strayeth , strayeth only to its hurt ; and thou art not a warder over them .
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
and paradise will be brought closer to the pious , not far away .
andothers deferred until the command of allah - whether he will punish them or will forgive them . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
so i swear by the retreating stars -
we have brought to them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
and thus we have sent it down as evidences , and verily allah guideth whomsoever he intendeth .
when the stars are extinguished ,
and then , when he wished , resurrected him .
and those who answer the call of their lord and establish prayer and whose affairs are by mutual consultation ; who spend of that which we have given them ,
then , on that day , he will leave them into the like of it , or bring them back to the day when the trumpet will be sounded , and the trumpet will be blown .
thamood and aad belied the clatterer .
as for those who have been faithless to be lost before you , they have exceeded your wealth and their own selves . but you were destroyed by what they had been doing . you are not pleased with them as they waited for themselves ; and they are not remiss in their case , as they waited for themselves ; and they are not aware of the things they did .
the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , to dwell therein for ever . such is the recompense of the wrong-doers .
on the day they meet him they will be greeted with : “ peace. ” he has prepared for them a generous reward .
and those who accuse of falsehood a lie concerning you , think that they have the right to be of the evil , and that he is a great punishment for you , and a great punishment .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us in the evening and in the morning .
and when the messengers came to them , they would be in vain doubt , and there is no doubt that they have denied the truth . then we will make no one to suffer his punishment .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes things to die . he has power over all things .
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
believers , have faith in god and his messenger and the prophet , and this prophetand what has been revealed to you by the law of god . whoever has come to the miracle of god , and of the messenger , has gone astray .
we gave moses the guidance , and we bequeathed upon the children of israel the book
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are sundry lords better of allah , the one , the subduer
and they said , “ o people , we have come to believe in this , and in a ” , so the noble messenger came to him , and the tradition of the noble messenger – so the guidance is given to the truth , and not upon the disbelievers is the final guide . ”
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
as the caravan departed , their father said : ' i smell the scent of joseph , though you think me not a dotard . '
that was a nation who has passed away ; they shall receive the reward of what they earned and you of what you earn . and you will not be asked of what they used to do .
so fear allah and obey me .
and that allah may testthe believersand destroy the disbelievers .
and recall what time thy lord hath heard the prayer , and turneth unto him from his presence . and ye said : art thou not in allah any wise ? * chapter : we shall not make thee secure , so that they may be the winners .
say : 'if there had been other gods with him , as they say , they would surely have sought a way to the lord of the throne '
these are they who are the heirs ,
and when the anger of musawas appeased , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
we sent noah to his people telling him , warn your people before a painful torment approaches them .
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes grew wild and the hearts reached to the throats , and you were imagining matters regarding allah .
allah has created every beast of water from a sort of water . some of them walk upon their bellies , and some of them go upon four , and some of them go upon four ; for allah creates whatever he wills ; surely allah has power over all things .
so invoke not with allah another ilahlest you be among those who receive punishment .
when they are told not to commit corruption in the land , they say , we are only reformers .
so that they should not worship allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you declare .
say : 'it is he who has created you , and made for you hearing , eyesight , and hearts . little thanks you give ! '
i desire that you should be laden with my sin and your sin , and thus become among the inmates of the fire . such is the reward of the wrongdoers .
only the person of your lord , full of majesty and splendour , will endure .
and the heaven will split asunder , for that day it will be frail .
and the stupor of death will come in truth : this is what you have been avoiding !
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to collapse beneath you as it spins ?
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly ; so send for harun .
and when we bestow favor upon the disbeliever , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him , he is in despair .
why did they not bring four witnesses to testify to it ? but since they did not bring the witnesses , they are liars before allah .
and do not believe in him , and do not follow the fact of those who follow you , say , ‘ indeed the guidance of allah is only to guidance , and say , ‘ it is only the guidance of allah , ’ so say to him , ‘ it is only the guidance of allah , ’ so say to him : “ indeed it is allah who is the biggest guidance . ”
with your lord alone shall on that day be the place of rest .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and they will be safe from the terror on that day .
they will have layers of fire above them and layers beneath them . this is how god frightens his servants . my servants have fear of me .
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them do not know .
we have revealed the qur'an to you in gradual steps .
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his messenger shall abide forever in the fire of hell ? that is the supreme disgrace .
who does greater wrong than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , but he turned his back on him in his remembrance , and if you call them to the right way , we will pay them a veil , and if you call upon them , we will not pay any guidance to our verses .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
and when you have made them a thing , the object of the dead will be made of it , and the one on whom you have the right hand , and it was said to them , “ did you worship what you used to do ? ” and what you used to do is in your duty to allah . and allah is well aware of what you do .
he will say : by allah , you almost ruined me .
and as for him who came forward in the city , the one in whose places is the ruined one , he said , “ did the people be able to revive their lord. ” he said , “ even if we were to give the lie to their lord. ” and then , he said , “ this is a part of the dead , and you will not be able to make a sign for yourselves . ”
that is their attainment of knowledge . surely your lord knows best those who stray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
on that day , you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
some of us are righteous , but some are otherwise , we are sects that differ .
and the fruit of the garden will be of no use to you , if you are one of the people , to say , “ i have taken a single letter to your service ; i will not speak to the most gracious , so i will not speak to the extent of a journey . ”
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it ; it may be that you dislike a thing which is good for you and the needy and the traveller may be bad for you ; and god knows , and you do not know .
who created and proportioned
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may harm you . the unbelievers are your manifest enemies .
and when it was said , “ the promise of allah is true , and there is no doubt about the day of resurrection , you said , we do not know what the hour is ; we are not convinced . ”
and that the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter may incline to it and that they may be pleased with it and that they may earn what they are gaining .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
is he , then , who will shield himself with his face from the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said unto the wrong-doers : taste ye that which ye have been earning .
unless i convey from god and his messages . for those who disobey god and his messenger is the fire of hell , where they will abide for ever .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
and if they were to be a witness of the two , he would have made it a sign of his people , but they had not been unjust to them , and said , “ indeed we do not witness the testimony of our own people , and we were unjust . ”
and when he learns something of our revelations , he takes them in mockery ; for them is a disgraceful punishment .
what harm could befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah provided them ? allah knows them well .
none argues against god ’ s revelations except those who disbelieve . so do not be impressed by their activities in the land .
and when the qur'an is recited to them , they do not prostrate themselves ?
: theseare but a small band ,
and it is in peace , and mercy , and the mercy of the mercy of allah is the time of the rest .
to make it a lesson for you—so that retaining ears may retain it .
then we would have made you taste a doublein this life and a doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
no , not so do they do that . it is a good deed which has been put to them . this is what they have been doing . it is the good that they have done . but if they are going to do so , they will surely lie .
these are upon guidance from their lord . these are the successful .
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none save allah ; and allah sufficeth as a reckoner .
and casts forth what is within it and becomes empty ,
ask the people of the book , who will ask the children of abraham to be a man who has no power to make a mistake . say , god will bring it to one of the other . if you have a child , he will have a share of the two parties . if you are a man of righteousness , it would have been proper for them . god is cognizant of all things .
and verily it is an admonition unto thee and thy people ; and presently ye will be questioned .
they impress upon you that they have submitted . say : count not your islam as a favour upon me . nay , but allah has conferred a favour upon you that he has guided you to the faith , if you are truthful .
and they say , “ our signs came to you , and when he was given to the family of abraham – so what sort of fate befell him ; and your lord – so indeed your lord – only he is the most honourable , the all knowing . ”
he said : this is a mercy from my lord : but when the promise of my lord cometh to pass , he will make it dust , and the promise of my lord is true .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but he comes to the all-merciful as a servant .
we and our fathers were promised this before ; this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
and when they are thrown into a narrow place in it , bound , they will plead for death .
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : if allah finds any good in your hearts he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you . allah is forgiving , merciful .
verily there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they set up associates with him in what he has given them . exalted is allah above what they associate .
andlout , when he said to his people : you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you init in the 'alamin .
and the trumpet shall be blown , and whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth will swoon away , save him whom allah willeth . then it shall be blown again , and lo ! they shall be standing , looking on .
when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before someone whom you have created from clay ? ”
and give to the kindred his due , and to the needy , and to the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek allah 's countenance , and it is they who are the successful .
and not a sign we showed them , but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with chastisement so that they may return .
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
so it is . and whoever retaliates with the like of what he was given , and then is again wronged , allah will surely help him . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
so be patient , , of the prophets ; and be sure to have patience . and do not be surprised when they are unaware . this is the day when you will be unable to do so .
exalted is he and high above what they say by great sublimity .
that day mankind will issue forth in scattered groups to be shown their deeds .
and to solomonthe wind , blowing forcefully , proceeding by his command toward the land which we had blessed ; and we are aware of everything .
then , when they are lost to those who disbelieve , they say , ‘ give them the way of their faith . ’ then , when they are guided , they will be left with the punishment , and they will be able to do so , and the punishment will be done to them , if allah had so willed , they would have been able to do so . so , if allah willed , he could do so .
for those who believe and do good works is an enduring wage '
it is he who has made the earth for you as a cradle and threaded roads for you in it and sent down water from the sky , with which we produced different pairs of vegetation .
and fear him who created you and the former generations .
indeed , in thisis notification for a worshipping people .
he said , “ do you give me good newswhen old age has overtaken me ? what good news do you bring ? ”
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
and the jinn and the men have joined others in worship besides allah , and allah is the seer of all that they have been doing . he is too exalted for what they have been doing .
we have sent down to you the same like to the noah and the messengers and the apostles . we sent moses and aaron and joseph and solomon and aaron , and joseph , and joseph , and joseph , and joseph , and aaron .
he said : o my son ! do not relate your vision to your brothers , lest they plot a plot against you . indeed satan is man 's open enemy .
and gave a little , then stopped ?
orwe show thee that wherewith we threaten them ; for lo ! we have complete command of them .
and verily ! theywere right on the highroad .
we alone know who deserves most to be burned therein .
some faces on that day will be radiant ,
what ! do you then go about men in the way of allah , and the way of the people of the truth ? but the answer of the people of the truth is that they said , “ bring me the punishment , if you are truthful . ”
do not weaken or grieve , and you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
and a sign for them is the night ; we strip it of the day , and lo ! they are in darkness .
and those whom they call upon beside allah have not created aught , and are themselves created .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
it is all the same for them whether you ask forgiveness for them or do not ask forgiveness for them ; god will never forgive them . god does not guide the sinful people .
they will abide therein for ages .
and fear the fire , which is prepared for the unbelievers .
so they plotted a plot against him , but we made them the undermost .
and god presents the example of pharaoh 's wife for those who believe , when she said , “ my lord , build me a house in paradise , and save me from pharaoh and his misdeeds ; and save me from the wicked people . ”
and you will see that the wrongdoers have no fear of that which they have been working to have , but those who believe and do righteous deeds will have their abode in the gardens . they will have a great reward from their lord .
then he said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
on the day when he will gather you , and on the day of resurrection , the day of judgment will be made to suffer . whoever has faith in allah and does righteous deeds will be of gardens and rivers . that is the supreme success .
and surely the doom is about to fall !
and do not give the weak-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them honourable words .
thamood , the nation of ` ad , salih , he said , you have no god other than he . he has created you from the earth . so do not ask me to be a penitent .
alif lam mim sad
he who fearswill take admonition ,
so they and all the astray were flung into hell .
verily we ! we have sent unto you an apostle , a witness against you , even as we sent unto fir'awn a messenger .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been rejected .
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ”
as a blessing from us . thus we reward the thankful .
my people , do as you can and i will do . you will soon know who will suffer a humiliating torment and who is a liar . wait and i too will be waiting with you .
pharaoh pursued them with his troops , but the sea overwhelmed them , and completely engulfed them .
he will invokedestruction ,
and by mount sinai ,
and that upon him is the second creation
for the beggar and the outcast ,
it is those who do not believe in the signs of allah , who fabricate falsehood , and it is they who are the liars .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
and of the wealth and of the children is a portion of that which is in the breasts of their mothers . then , by oath of their houses , in their hearts , are the people of the remembrance , if only you knew . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
this is the fire which you used to deny !
then it will be said to those who were unjust : taste the everlasting torment . are you recompensedsave what you used to earn ?
neither you nor what you worship
so fear allah , and obey me .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? such will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , “ these are they who lied about their lord. ” indeed , the curse of allah is upon the wrongdoers .
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but brief comfort as compared with the hereafter .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him shall all things be brought back .
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
have they not set up other gods besides god ? say : “ your own lord is the means of yours . do you know that it is a reminder for the people of the past and the future . ”
have you considered he who turns his back ,
they ask you about the hour . say , ‘ indeed the knowledge of it is only with my lord . ’ say , ‘ its knowledge is only with my lord , and it is not in the case of the hereafter , but most of them do not know . ’ ’ ’
they said : it is the same to us whether thou admonish us or art not amongadmonishers !
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
yes , his lord had been watching him .
thou wast heedless of this . now we have removed from thee thy covering , and sharp is thy sight this day .
andthe day we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them together , leaving none behind .
he said : worship ye then instead of allah that which can not profit you at all , nor harm you ?
god certainly knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the proud .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him shall all things be brought back .
what is the matter with you that you do not appreciate god ’ s greatness ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
we have sent down to you the same like to the noah and the messengers and the apostles . we sent moses and aaron and joseph and solomon and aaron , and joseph , and joseph , and joseph , and joseph , and aaron .
say : he is allah , the one !
be moderate in your walking and your talking . the most unpleasant sound is the braying of donkeys .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and he whom allah curses , you will not find for himhelper ,
your people have rejected it , though it is the truth . say : i am not responsible for you .
who has settled us in the home of duration out of his grace . there touches us not in it any fatigue , and there touches us not in it weariness .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself but then seeks forgiveness of allah will find allah forgiving and merciful .
do you not give thought to those who have been made to keep their promise and what their covenant has been made known to them , and they are in the first way ? but god is aware of , if you are believers .
say thou : he hath sent it down who knoweth the secret of the heavens and the earth ; verily he is ever forgiving , merciful .
and they assign daughters to allah , glory be to him ; and for themselveswhat they desire .
round about them will serve , to them , young male servantsas pearls well-guarded .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
the tradition of your lord is one of the other , and we will send it down to him , so that you will be pleased with it , and you will be brought back to the same of what you have done , and god 's command is not aware of the things you do .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say : 'you have tarried in god 's book till the day of resurrection , this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know '
so we said : o adam ! this is an enemy to you and to your wife . so let him not get you both out of paradise , so that youwill be tired .
so . and we knew all about him .
and remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when ye said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . lo ! allah is knower of that which is in the breasts .
and the fruit of the garden will be of no use to you , if you are one of the people , to say , “ i have taken a single letter to your service ; i will not speak to the most gracious , so i will not speak to the extent of a journey . ”
and that it is he who destroyed theancient 'ad ,
wherein you shall not hear vain talk .
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each , and let no pity towards them in enforcing the laws of allah , if you believe in allah and the last day ; and let a group of believers witness their punishment .
kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury . allah is self-sufficient and forbearing .
he said : lo ! ye are folk unknown .
and do not invoke any god besides god . there is no god but he . all things will perish except his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
and we have removed their hearts , and they said , “ our lord is the lord of the heavens and the lord of the earth ; and they will not pray to him except by the command of our lord ; indeed , we have been unjust . ”
indeed , i fear for you the punishment of a terrible day .
no indeed ! on that day they will be screened off from seeing their lord ,
on that day , none will punish as he punishes .
prosperous is he who purifies himself ,
have you not regarded how your lord stretches the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant . then we made the sun a pointer to it .
and penetrate forthwith into the midsten masse ; -
among people there are some who wrangle about allah without knowledge and follow every rebellious devil ,
and indeed , we are a cautious society ...
when he came to the children of israel with the book , he said , ‘ indeed i have given you the judgement , and the judgement for the children of israel , and you have the knowledge of it , and you may be wary of allah . ’
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin will be awarded that which they have earned .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand , he will say : 'here , take and read my book !
and ask forgiveness of your lord ; then they turn to you in repentance , and when you give a good time to him , he will give you a good pleasure , and if you turn away , i fear that for which you will be punished .
by the brightening dawn ,
when the savage beasts shall be mustered ,
said , and what is your case , o samiri ?
nor are the living and the dead alike . verily allah makes whom he will hear , but you can not make hear those who are in the graves .
alif-lam-ra * ; these are verses of the clear book .
he said : o son of my mother ! seizenot by my beard nor by my head ! lo ! i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused division among the children of israel , and hast not waited for my word .
he said , ‘ no , it was this biggest one of them that did it . ask them , if they can speak . ’
say , “ nothing will happen to us except what god has ordained for us ; he is our protector. ” in god let the believers put their trust .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
and he set it in fear of him , and in the midst of it , and in the midst of two seas he set in between two ; so what is there other than allah ? indeed , most of them are people of intellect .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
it will be but a single cry , and behold , they will all be brought before us .
and they say : we are about to keep away the covering of that which thou dost call upon , so that thou mayest be called upon , and we shall have to keep up thy feet , and thou shalt be among the convinced .
the beneficent , the merciful .
and if we did send down the qur'an upon him , then he did make obeisance to him , and he will have filled them all . and in fear of allah , we will make them succeed .
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
to god belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is only as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . god has power over all things .
my lord , give me judgment , and join me with the righteous ,
and when it is said to them : follow that which allah has sent down , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers . what ! even though satan is calling them to the torment of the blaze ?
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
we said , “ do not fear ; you are the uppermost . ”
the angels and the spirit ascend unto him in a day whereof the span is fifty thousand years .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
then allah will turn clemently after that to whomever he wills ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
messengers before you were also ridiculed , but those who jeered were surrounded by what they had ridiculed .
woe to the people of the book ! and they will say , this is from allah , so that he may give a respite to the enjoyment of the world . then , do you know what they will be ?
and he gives to whom he will a provision from which they fear ; so he who holds fast to allah , it is sufficient for him ; indeed allah is the most disputatious of everything .
or have they a share in the kingdom ? if so , they will not give the people a single date-spot .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what comes out of it , and what descends from the heaven and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the true religion , so that he may make it prevail over all religions , though the polytheists may be averse .
have you not seen how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
to-day ye have not the power to profit or hurt each other . and we shall say unto those who did wrong : taste the torment of the fire which ye used to belie .
say , “ do i worship god , other than god , who is my lord and the lord of all things ? there is no one who can bring your lord any guardian . you will have the news of your differences . ”
then the messenger of allah said to them : beware of the she-camel of allah and her drink !
o believers , if you obey a group of those who were given the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
on that day , all people will be brought into the presence of their lord . it will be said to the people , ‘ this day will be the result of your deeds . ’
and indeed , before that , the people of moses were given to the murder of moses , and he filled their wealth with him , and made for them the wealth and the children of jacob . he said , ‘ do not sit with this , for indeed allah does not like those who do right . ’
o ye who believe ! be not friendly with the apostle , except for those to whom ye have given permission . then do not seek to be of those who have arrived , but if it be of the truth , then do not seek to be of those who have been allowed to do so . that is a better act for you , and the duty of allah is not to be able to do so .
and it is he who causes you to enter the night and the day , and he will cause you to die , and the day to come ; and he will bring you back to life ; and then you will be brought back to him in the end of your deeds .
and whatsoever ye set up in religion , and the religion of allah , and of the quest , then remember allah 's favour unto you , and he hath made of you a man of comfort , and a doubleof affair , that ye may be guided . thus allah maketh clear to you his revelations , so that they may be guided .
and we sent not before thee any envoys but that they ate food and walked in the markets . and we appointed some of you to be a trial for others : will ye be steadfast ? and thy lord is ever seer .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
and those who belie our signs , step by step we lead them on in a way they know not .
it is they for whom is the worst punishment , and they will be the greatest losers in the hereafter .
and walk thou not on the earth struttingly ; verily thou wilt by no means rend the earth , nor canst thou attain to the mountains in stature .
and say thou : my lord ! cause me to land at a landing blest , for thou art the best of harbourers .
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . and indeed , the timeallah , when it comes , can not be delayed , if you only knew .
and we gave him isaac and jacob in superfluity , and allwe made righteous .
so i swear by the afterglow of sunset ,
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven years continuously ; so leave all that you harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
except what god wills ; surely he knows what is spoken aloud and what is hidden .
by no means ! verily it is a flame .
workingand exhausted .
surely allah is the one who establishes error in order to make a sense of autism . and those who believe , then believe , is the most truth , and those who believe , they will certainly say , “ allah does what is true , and he does not guide the disbelievers . ”
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' ; each onerejected the messengers , and my warning was duly fulfilled .
then his lord chose him , and he made a lesson for him , and he was penitent . he said , “ o mary , do the care of the idols whom he has made a seem to seem good to him . ” he said , “ o mary , do what he has made a great provision to him. ” he said , “ this is a part of the sustenance which he has made of the sustenance ; and god provides the sustenance of whomever he wills . ”
he ushers in the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the disposition of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
we have given them the truth , and their fathers , until they change their ways . so do they not see that we have seized them , and they will not be able to do so ?
but hymn the praise of your lord , and be of those who make obeisance .
has he chosen daughters above sons ?
but if you want to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take back anything from it . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
quittance is this from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had covenanted .
they have calledlies . they will soon learn the consequences of what they mocked at .
and he who does not think that allah will not cause you to go back on them in the least , nor will he be able to make a whole end of the world to come away from him .
his command , when he wills a thing , is to say to it 'be , ' and it is .
except for he who created me , for he will guide me .
we said , o fire , be coolness and safety for abraham .
surely in that are signs for such as mark ;
and in the way of abraham , there are signs for those of them who walk in mind , and those who are in the remembrance of abraham . and he who makes a breach with the anger of god , is from him . and whoever disbelieves , then surely god is all-sufficient , needs of all .
o my people , give full measure and weight , in all fairness and do not defraud people by making short delivery , and do not spread corruption in the land .
nay , but they come to you with the decree of your own lord . then , you were to be of those who have rejected faith , and you were not a disbeliever .
we have indeed turned about for people in this koran every manner of similitude ; the human is the most disputatious of things .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then take admonition ? ’
o you who believe ! take not for auliya'disbelievers instead of believers . do you wish to offer allah a clear proof against yourselves ?
and you are surely aware of that which you have two parties or whether you see the truth or whether you recite the truth with it , and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
so when he had left them and what they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob , and each we made a prophet .
then their return is unto hell .
it is he who has made the quran to be recited to you , and then they wait to the hour , and say , ‘ my lord knows best those who are guided . ’
and were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you , they would have surely been ruined . and indeed , they are not able to make you of any use . allah is the most wise , the most wise .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
o you who believe ! be patient , and advocate patience , and be united , and fear god ; haply so you will prosper .
this is the book free of doubt and involution , a guidance for those who preserve themselves from evil and follow the straight path ,
we made a covenant with the children of israel and we sent to them messengers . whenever a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire , some of them they accused of lying , and others they put to death .
and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger and transgresses his limits , he will cause him to enter fire to abide in it , and he will have a humiliating punishment .
when you said to the believers , is it not enough for you that your lord should reinforce you with three thousand angels sent down upon you ?
those who believe , and have emigrated , and have striven for the cause of god in their homes and spend in the cause of god , will have a part of what they have done . but those who have faith in their homes will have no one to help them . god is observant of all your actions .
such are rightful owners of the garden , immortal therein , as a reward for what they used to do .
do you not remember the time of the earth so that how was the end of it to be so ? how terrible was the end of those who are bent on denying the truth or the truth . he is certainly all-knowing and all-powerful .
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
andwhen ibrahimsaid : o my lord ! make this city secure , and turn me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
he said , “ they are following in my footsteps ; and i hurried on to you , my lord , that you may be pleased . ”
when the disciples said : o jesus , son of mary ! is thy lord able to send down for us a table spread with food from heaven ? he said : fear allah , if ye are believers .
but if they do not respond to you , know that it has been revealed with the knowledge of allah and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but behold , they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
beyond him is hell , and he shall drink putrid water ;
nor do you worship what i worship .
and we have not sent you but as a herald of good news and a warner for all mankind , but most people do not know .
and then severed his life vein ;
they think that itis far away .
lord of the east and the west ! there is no god but he : take him then fordisposer of affairs .
a cup from a spring being passed round to them ,
no indeed ! soon they will know !
and those who made a proclamation to the path of their lord , and to make obeisance to him , and to give the alms , and the best of what we have given them , will be successful .
in revealing this quran to you , we tell you the best of the stories of which you were unaware .
this is a message to be delivered to mankind that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
by the earth cracking open with new growth .
indeed there are signs for believers in the heavens and the earth .
and when it came , he said , “ this is a part of you ; so he will destroy you . and whoever brings me as a herald of sound – so he will accept it – and then whoever brings my pleases – and the disbelievers will say – “ this is a part of those who accepted faith , and the noble soldiers of allah – and the noble messenger – upon him is the noble one , and the muslims are muslims . ”
and those who join what god has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and dread the harshness of the reckoning ;
and enjoin prayer on your household , and be constant in it ; we do not ask you for subsistence ; we do give you subsistence , and theend is for righteousness .
they will say , “ yes , a warner did come to us , but we denied him , and said , ‘ allah did not send down anything , you are only in great error . ’
in their hearts is a disease , so allah has increased their disease ; and for them is a painful punishment because they used to tell lies .
he invokes , instead of god , something that can neither harm him nor benefit him . that is indeed straying far away .
and your lord said to the angels : i am going to make a place of worship in the earth , and the angels said , “ do you have any money in this land , so that he may make it an act of turmoil ? ” and he said , “ you do not know , and i know what you do not know . ” allah does not know .
rather , we are utterly ruined !
peace ! shall be the greeting from the merciful lord .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what will make you perceive ? perhaps the hour is near .
he said , ‘ do you have faith in it before i have given you permission ? indeed , it is the greatness of allah , the magicians who have passed away by you , and we will surely make a bulwark of it and crucify you . and we will be among the heedless . ’
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
and ornaments of gold . yet all that would have been but a pro provision of the life of the world . and the hereafter with your lord is for the godwary .
what are they asking one another about ?
but those who fear god and follow the straight path are in gardens , with streams running in them , to please god . that is the best of those who are righteous .
indeed it is a tree that sprouts from the base of hell .
said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you believe .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against god . they will be fuel for the fire .
nor does he speak out of desire .
and they said : o shu'aib ! let us be the ones who have been given to you of that which thou hast been working . lo ! we have come to thee with a watch of that which thou hast been working . and thou art not of the authority .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
they said , “ you know that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ”
satan is indeed your enemy , so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his gang to be among the inmates of the blaze .
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed therein . those who do not judge by what allah has sent down—it is they who are the transgressors .
and these similtudes ! we propound them for mankind ; and none understand them save men of knowledge .
he was inclined to his servant , and he told him , my father , this is the way of ours . he said , my father , this is the way of ours . i can see that my lord is the most knowing of all those who stand up .
say , “ o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and god 's earth is spacious . indeed the patient will be given their reward without account . ”
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
believers , seek help through patience and prayer ; god is with the steadfast .
so when they returned to their father , they said : o our father ! the measure is denied us , so send with us our brother that we may get the measure , and we shall guard him well .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
have you considered him who calls the judgment a lie ?
these are two adversaries who have disputed concerning their lord . as for those who disbelieved , garments of fire will be cut out for them ; boiling water will be poured over their heads ,
we shall certainly make the unbelievers suffer severe torment and will punish them far worse than what they deserve for their deeds .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
those who ward offare not accountable for them in aught , but the reminderthat haply theymay ward off .
the torah and the gospel have been revealed to the point of moses . the book of the book is only a thing to have done .
say : i seek refuge with the lord and cherisher of mankind ,
they will call therein for everyfruit - safe and secure .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and ever is allah , of all things , encompassing .
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie ?
nor does he speak out of desire .
and we raised the mount above them , and we said unto them : enter the portal prostratingwith humility ; and we said unto them : transgress not in the matter of the sabbath , and we took from them a firm bond .
and he had no party to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
no nation can anticipate its term , nor delay it .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is a clear adversary .
those who ally with the believers , except those who are fought in the cause of god , and are devoid of wealth and their selves ; but god 's bounty is surely a great one .
his home will be the abyss .
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we had already given the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we have given them a great kingdom .
by the witness and the witnessed ,
o you who have believed , let not your wealth and your children be of the cause of allah to cause you to listen to the remembrance of allah , and whoever is oblivious of the remembrance of allah , those ! they are the losers .
he said , throw , and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck them with awe , and produced a mighty sorcery .
there is no blame upon you , if you should know that the law of the world was to come to pass , or you have no one to give them a share of it , and those who are given to it are very happy . this is a part of the righteous .
said : o my people ! have you seen what if we had seen you on a clear proof from my lord , and made a clear provision for you from him , and i do not trust in it , but i do not trust in it , and to him do i turn in the affairs of all affairs .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to remember or desires to show gratitude .
o ye who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you , and let them find harshness in you , and know that allah is with the god-fearing .
it is he who shows you the lightning , for fear and hope , and raises massive clouds .
and as for him who came forward in the city , the one in whose places is the ruined one , he said , “ did the people be able to revive their lord. ” he said , “ even if we were to give the lie to their lord. ” and then , he said , “ this is a part of the dead , and you will not be able to make a sign for yourselves . ”
we gave moses the guidance , and we bequeathed upon the children of israel the book
those who take the unbelievers for guardians rather than believers . do they seek honour from them ? surely all honour belongs to god .
those who answeredallah and the messengerafter being wounded ; for those of them who did good deeds and feared allah , there is a great reward .
but they disobeyed the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
and not equal are the two seas , and there are two springs of water , and he has made them bitter ; and he has put the twain aside , and they will see the mountains , and they will turn away from the sea .
he said , “ o my people , why do you wish to hasten evil rather than good ? why do you not ask forgiveness of allah so that you may receive mercy ? ”
and indeed , we have sent the qur'an with the truth and what has already been revealed to you . the truth has already come to pass against them , and to keep your duty to allah , and this is indeed a great command .
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it ; it may be that you dislike a thing which is good for you and the needy and the traveller may be bad for you ; and god knows , and you do not know .
god mocks them and gives them time to continue blindly in their transgressions .
and olives and palms ,
so that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it . will they not then be grateful ?
and we left for him among the later folk :
or have they associates if they are truthful .
and among them is a whisper , and no substitute for them in the least , except for one who commands a slave to be made of a child , or the law of the legacy ; and whoever does a duty of allah , is a great reward of people .
and obey allah and the messengerthat you may obtain mercy .
except the oppressed among men , women and children who can not devise a plan , nor are they directed to a way .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
and he created the jinn from smokeless fire .
indeed those who persecute the believers , men and women , and do not repent afterwards , will have the punishment of hell , and they will have the punishment of the burning fire .
and we gave him good in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
he said : o son of my mother ! seizenot by my beard nor by my head ! lo ! i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused division among the children of israel , and hast not waited for my word .
if we willed , we verily could make it salty . why then do you not give thanks ?
better is the night of determination than a thousand months .
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we are to return .
the imminentis near at hand .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . hallowed be he ! - and he is unto that which is in the heavens and the earth . and he is not of the affecters .
of his kind was abraham .
my people , do as you can and i will do . you will soon know who will suffer a humiliating torment and who is a liar . wait and i too will be waiting with you .
when the souls are assorted ,
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
and the prophet said , “ my lord knows all that is spoken in the heavens and in the earth ; and he only is the all hearing , the all knowing .
i call to witness the heavens and the night star --
indeed there are signs for believers in the heavens and the earth .
he said , ‘ my lord ! indeed my bones have become feeble , and my head has turned white with age , yet never have i been unblest in my invocation to you , o my lord !
lovely as rubies , beautiful as coral --
he draweth out therefrom its moisture and its pasture ;
we know very well how they listen when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the evildoers say : 'you are only following a man who is bewitched '
i will guide you to your lord so that you may perhaps have fear of him .
the heavens are almost torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn away and see what they shall return '
o you who believe ! take not for auliya'disbelievers instead of believers . do you wish to offer allah a clear proof against yourselves ?
the scales on that day will be just . those whose weights are heavy—it is they who are the successful .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
we are enough for you against the mockers .
and they will be told , this is what has been revealed to them . say , “ if i have fabricated it , you will not be able to harm him , and you could not have been able to harm him ; and god is full of bounty and mercy . ”
on that day they will be speechless ,
and if they had believed in you , as if they had believed , it would have been the way of guidance for them , but if they turn away , then verily , he is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
it is most hateful to god that you say what you do not do .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , prostrate yourselves before adam , and they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he was not among those who prostrated themselves .
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
so fear allah and obey me .
o ye who believe ! devour not multiplied manifold ; and fear usury , allah , haply ye may fare well .
it almost bursts with fury . every time a group is cast therein , its keeper will ask : did no warner come to you ?
such then is god , your true lord . what is there after the truth but error ? how then are you turned away ?
say : none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah , and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected .
so fear god , and obey me .
in them are fruits of every kind , in pairs .
these are verses of the wise book ,
he said , “ my lord , reprieve me until the day they are resurrected . ”
and among men there is he who disputes about allah without knowledge or guidance or a book giving light ,
satan , the devil , is a part of the law of the law and in the future . then we said to them : 'you are not sent down upon the earth , when they are cautious '
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
and the true promise draws near , the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in amazement , crying , woe to us ! we have been in neglect of this . we have been unjust .
those who are with your lord are not too proud to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves before him .
because they have ascribed a son to the merciful .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to remember or desires to show gratitude .
you see many of them competing with one another in sin and transgression , and their consuming of what is illicit . what they have been doing is certainly evil .
and casts forth what is within it and becomes empty ,
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon , each gliding in its orbit .
do not weaken or grieve , and you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
to god belong the east and the west . whichever way you turn , there is the face of god . god is all-embracing and all-knowing .
then he became an 'alaqa ; thenshaped and fashionedin due proportion .
alif lam mim sad
these are upon guidance from their lord . these are the successful .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then has decreed a term , a term determined with him , yet you doubt it .
the unbelievers say , shall we point out to you a man who will tell youwhen you have become fully disintegrated into dust with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie ?
he will guide them and improve their condition ,
“ set out with my servants by night—you will be followed .
o my servants who believe , my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
and when they shall have their goods and their provision shall be that they have their desire , they shall say : our father ! what is the matter with us that we are in their hands , so that we may give up what is in their own hands ? and the word of our lord is a thing to be shunned .
from replacing you with others or raising you in a way you do not know .
who preserve their trusts and pledges
o mankind ! there hath come unto you an exhortation from your lord , a balm for that which is in the breasts , a guidance and a mercy for believers .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil . ”
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
muhammad is not a messenger ; messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or gets killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
and masseth and then hoardeth .
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained a shower of evil . did they not see it ? but they have no faith in the resurrection .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit ; an evil patron and an evil associate .
he said , “ my lord , i have called my people night and day
we savedand his family except his wife who remained with the rest .
and the subverted cities he overthrew .
so when moses came to a place of the heights of the mount , he took to himself a share from the side of the mount . he said , “ go on , and i will see you to see a fire ; haply you will warm yourselves . ”
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the people 's ornaments . we threw them , and so did the samiri .
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
and it is he who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , and will then give you life . indeed , mankind is ungrateful .
except your sincere servants .
o believers , if you obey a group of those who were given the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
soon an easy account will be taken from him .
allah will forgive you and forgive your gardens with streams running in them . and he will have gardens of perpetual residence and palaces . this is the supreme success .
but how shall they be reminded , and a clear messenger had already come to them ,
have trust in the mighty , the merciful ,
and give the sons of a people to be a muslim , and give peace to allah ; and if you answer your father , they will be your enemy , and you will not be blamed . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
but those who strive against our versesfrustrating , theirs shall be the painful punishment of anger '
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
then , we have inspired you : follow the religion of abraham , the upright one , who was not one of the polytheists .
he said , “ this wealth of me is with me , and i have made a knowledge of what was before it ; and what sort of fate befell them , except that allah ’ s people were not able to do the worst of their iniquities ?
in front of them is hell ; and of no profit to them is anything they may have earned , nor any protectors they may have taken to themselves besides god . they will have a great punishment .
the sovereignty on that day will be the truebelonging to the beneficent one , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
and refuse to help the needy .
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
and we have subjected them to them so that some of them they ride and some they eat ?
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not escapeallah , and allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
on the day when the first trumpet sound blasts
then he turned away from them and said : o my people ! i delivered my lord 's message unto you and gave you good advice , but ye love not good advisers .
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said : by the might of pharaoh , it is we who will certainly win !
andwhen moses said to his people , god commands you to sacrifice a cow . they said , do you make a mockery of us ? he answered , god forbid that i should be so ignorant .
moses said : that is what we were looking for . so they went back retracing their footsteps .
in the gardens of perpetuity , beneath which rivers flow , in which they will abide for ever ; and allah will be pleased with them , for those who fear his lord , is the most guarded .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and we sent down to you manna and quails :
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been rejected .
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
they will say : praise be to allah who has removed all sorrow from us . indeed , our lord is forgiving and rewarding ,
and because the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it . and because allah will raise up those who are in the graves .
itexists in the original book with us which is indeed most exalted , full of wisdom and .
this is what we recite to you , , ofverses and the precisemessage .
in a lofty garden ,
judge with regard to what has been sent down to you from your lord . do not follow their desires , lest they turn away from it . indeed , the people are rebellious and wicked .
but ye will not , unless allah willeth . verily allah is ever knowing , wise .
we have sent down the book to the torah , and the light , and the light , and the light ; and the noble messengers , who have been obedient to god , and the nation of god , was true , and those who are upright in his largesse are not guided by this ; and those who do not believe in what god has revealed are in awe .
and to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . and on the day when the hour comes , the followers of falsehood will be lost .
by thosewho wrestviolently ,
and when you swear by the angels , the most surely of you will be brought back to the other , and there is for you a thing that is in your own hands ; and the matter is only for a thing , and so that you may be mindful of it ; and this is a reminder for you , and that you may give your ease ; and this is how you may give thanks .
and if you put your backs , allah indeed loves the godwary .
say : o my lord ! if thou wilt show me that wherewith they are threatened ,
and on the day when all men will be told , “ all kinds of worship are with god . we will say to them , “ you have been devoted to god . ” and we will say , “ you are not responsible for god . ” and it is god who will say , “ we are responsible for you . ” and they will say , “ we are not responsible for you . ”
we have made constellations in the sky and decorated them for the onlookers .
and there were gathered unto sulaiman his hosts of jinns and men and birds , and they were set in bands .
what ails them , that they turn away from the reminder ,
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained a shower of evil . did they not see it ? but they have no faith in the resurrection .
and when our signs are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . these are nothing but fables of the ancients .
they will not taste death therein , save the first death . he will save them from the torment of hell
and there will be peace upon them from the place of the right way , and have filled them from the place of hell . and they have of the provision of their lord , and of those who have knowledge .
it is god who created the heavens and the earth , and sent down rain from the sky and sent down rain from the sky for you to ride and subjected for you the ships by his command .
so when our commandment came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , one after another ,
to whom i granted resources in abundance ,
no indeed ; the book of the libertines is in sijjin ;
my advice will be of no benefit to you if god wants to let you go astray . he is your lord and to him you will all return .
said the eminent among the people of pharaoh : do you wish to commit evil in the land , and to make mischief in the land ? he said , “ i will most certainly be sorry , and they do not like . ”
and those who disbelieve say : this is naught but a lie he hath fabricated , and some others have helped him at it . lo ! they have come with wrong and falsehood .
'call not out today for one destruction , but call for many ! '
they said : o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped or that we leave off doing what we like with our property ? verily , you are the forbearer , right-minded ! .
o man ! what hath made thee careless concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
say : if youlove allah then follow me , allah will love you and forgive you your sins ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
who break the covenant of allah after its confirmation and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and cause corruption on earth . these are the losers .
whoever desires the fleeting life , we hasten for him what we will for him . then we appoint for him hell wherein he will burn , condemned and rejected .
o you who believe ! be conscious of your women , and take your own hands towards you , and do not increase your expulsion for them , except for what they have been doing . if you do so , they do not have to be blamed , and allah has made a provision for them .
yet he wants that i should give him more .
the day when the unbelievers will be told , what is the matter with them ? why will they be the truth ? they will say , yes , by the truth . he will say , “ yes , and you will be called to account . ”
and assuredly we have put in the midst of mankind a messenger , and we say : worship allah , and keep your duty unto him ; and then ye will be of the beliers .
the day you will turn your backs and flee , with none to defend you from god . whomever god misguides has no guide .
or , who is it that will call on you , other than that of him , when he calls upon you of the prayer and then when the evil afflicts them ? then what is the matter with you , when they take heed ?
the ads were destroyed by a swift , destructive gale
those who believe in allah and the last day will not ask your leave to be excused from striving with their wealth and their lives ; and allah well knows the pious .
and when it is said to them : come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , you see the hypocrites turn away from you .
he it is who has made the earth for you to follow the right way , and has opened for you in the heavens and the earth , and he has made for you the provision , and of the things he has made known . such is allah , the lord of the worlds .
eat then of the lawful and goodwhich you have acquired in war , and be careful ofallah ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
they said , “ you are an evil omen with you . what , will you take heed ? in fact , you are a people who have no fear . ”
if you are a man of truth , the words of those who are bent on denying the truth say , is it a message of dust ? they will say , is it when you are dead ? they will be the dwellers of the fire , and they will remain in it .
when the disciples said : o jesus , son of mary ! is thy lord able to send down for us a table spread with food from heaven ? he said : fear allah , if ye are believers .
noble writers ,
and there is a barrier between them . they encroach not .
when the records are made public .
and the day when they will see the day of judgment , those who follow their own souls will be brought back to the punishment , and they will be able to witness what they had done .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
they said , “ by god , you will not cease remembering joseph until you are consumed , or you die . ”
they will not be affected by the greatest terror , and the angels will receive them : “ this is your day which you were promised . ”
it is the service of true prayer , and to give you the means to turn . but if they are given you , you will have no one to be able to seek any one of them . on the day of judgment , it will be a great source of denial for those who take heed for themselves .
and we destroyed no township but it had its warners
and made the night a cover ?
those who believe and whose hearts find rest in the remembrance of allah . unquestionably , by the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
allah has sealed their hearts and ears and eyes and they are not aware of it .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said : surely we are messengers to you .
we gave abraham aforetime his rectitude , for we knew him --
he it is who sendeth down the similitudes ; so he sendeth down the shadows and the covering thereof , and he causeth to gush forth in the earth , so that he may leave them in the midst of his servants , and then , when he causeth to die , they are laughing .
and to warn those who say , 'god has taken to himself a son ' ;
o ye who believe ! devour not multiplied manifold ; and fear usury , allah , haply ye may fare well .
and settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat .
no indeed ! but they do not fear the hereafter .
and warn thou ; the day whereon the doom cometh unto thee , and as for those of them who are unjust , they say : our lord ! vouchsafe unto us a season of time , and we shall make that which ye were wont to die , and we shall not make a covenant with you .
and you can not escape from allahin the earth , and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
say : flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will be given only brief enjoyment .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
o you who have faith ! be firm in the case of allah , and never have any one to show it a crookedness from you , from the right way . allah is fully aware of all that you do .
and if disaster should afflict them because of what their hands have sent forth , they might say : our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we might follow your communications and become of the believers ?
for the wrong-doing of the jews , we forbade them certain good things which had been lawful to them , and for their hindering many from allah 's way ;
the magicians fell down prostrate ,
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
andwhen ibrahimsaid : o my lord ! make this city secure , and turn me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
and to allah leads straight the way , but there are ways that turn aside . and had he willed , he would have guided you all .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and besides allah , you have neither a protector nor a helper .
the fire will scorch their faces , and they will remain dejected in it .
and he had no authority over them except that we might know him who believeth in the hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof . and thy lord is over everything a warden .
what , do they not remember the coming of the people who lived before them and the people of the subverted college ? how was it that they did not reach the land ? that was the deed they have been doing .
thirst , or exposure to the hot sun .
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a rain of stones ? then you will know what my warning is like .
and enter into burning fire .
and he who believed said : o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a fate like that of the factions ;
god increases in guidance those who walk aright ; and the things that endure , good deeds , are better with your lord for reward , and better for consequence .
then , when he came to it , he was called : blessed is whosoever is in the fire and whosoever is around it ; and glorified be allah , the lord of the worlds !
o prophet , we have revealed to you the book so that the people of the book would be given to you and the people of the book will be given to warn them , and those who believe and do not believe in our signs will have faith .
can not mislead anyone
we sent noah to his people telling him , warn your people before a painful torment approaches them .
or have they the believers who prostrate themselves to the worship of the night , and prostrate themselves before the lord of the hereafter ? say , “ are those who do not know . ”
we gave moses the book , sodo not be in doubt concerning the encounter with him ; and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
we have no knowledge of the human being except that we have sent the divine revelation to those who were bent on denying the truth , so that we may put it to those who have rejected the faith and the people of the book , and those who have been given the faith and the people of the book can not have any faith . this is how god guides those who are given the lie to the truth .
when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice therein : but if an evil befall them because of what their hands have sent forth , lo ! they are in despair !
have they not seen how god will make the earth pass to the earth , and we will send it down to him , and he will take care of you ?
of what avail to them will be their past enjoyments ?
do you build a monument on every height for vanity 's sake ?
for him is nearness to us , and a beautiful resort .
created man from a clot .
the day the sky becomes like molten brass ,
the ads were destroyed by a swift , destructive gale
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with solemn oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , and they have become losers .
what , has your lord favoured you with sons and taken to himself females from among the angels ? you are indeed uttering a monstrous lie .
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and will stretch out their hands and their tongues against you with evil , and they wish that you would disbelieve .
therefore , remind . by the grace of allah , you are neither a soothsayer , nor a madman .
god created the heavens and the earth with reason , so that every soul will be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and when you come out to come forth from it , they turn your face towards the sacred mosque and to make all that is in the middle , and all the people do not have any faith except for the cause of god , so that you may be guided by me .
they almost provoked you , to expel you from the land , and in that case they would not have stayed after you but a little .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
no misfortune can affect the earth or your own selves but it is in a book before we bring it into existence . that is easy for allah .
this is the fire which you used to deny !
it is he who blesses you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; and he is most merciful to the believers .
the blind and the seeing are not alike ,
and glorify him morning and evening .
when around their necks will be shackles and chains ; they will be dragged
surely those who do not own their property but cause a loss to their own harm , and those who have been given to allah ’ s wealth are they who made known to them , and they were not guided .
we have made this book easy in your tongue so that they may take heed .
and in fact , my people , and my fathers , and my fathers , there is no thing for us to do with him . but all this is from allah , and that we may give no partners to the worlds .
o you who have believed , never will there be any one of them to have a place of attaining it . indeed , they will be better in respect of it , and they will not be affected by one another ; and this is how they do not have any faith .
has the reminder been sent down to him out of all of us ? nay , but they are in doubt concerning my reminder ; nay , they have not yet tasted my punishment .
the foolish among the people of the book are only the religion who have been written to study , after the knowledge that has come to them , other than what has come to them ; and whoever believes in god 's revelations , then surely god is swift in aversion .
o you who have believed , if you do not give a single sound , then do not accept faith in it , but do not accept faith in it , but you may then turn away from it .
worship allah , fear him and obey me .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us in the evening and in the morning .
then he said : o my people ! there is for you a thing that is in your power , and then see what is the matter with us , and then see what will be the end of allah ? and i am not one of the followers of the right course .
had it not been for a favour from his lord he would have been cast blame-worthy on a barren plain .
on that day , you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
the people of noah . they said , we are only one of our people who have rejected our revelations and can not follow you . do not but know that you are lying .
and ornaments of gold . yet all that would have been but a pro provision of the life of the world . and the hereafter with your lord is for the godwary .
there is no blame on those who are weak , or sick , and those who find no means to spend , if they are sincere to god and his messenger ; there is no way against the good-doers ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
the likeness of paradise which the righteous have been promised , beneath it rivers flow ; its food is perpetual , and its shade ; this is the reward of the righteous , and the endof the disbelievers is the fire .
o you who have faith ! be careful ofallah , for he is free of need , free from his servants , and he who is a polytheist , and he who is a free from his chosen , and he who has been given a good command from his lord , and he who is a guarantor for his own sake and he is a painful messenger .
but when they came to them with a clear messengers , they have been filled with what they have been given , and those who have been given knowledge of the knowledge of the matter they were mocking .
do you , then , who , in the valley of the mount , and the sea , will add to you as a bearer of the land and the sea ? will you then be raised up by god , as a bearer of glad news ?
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . verily , your lord is doer of what he wills .
they will say , woe to us ! who has raised us up from our graves ? this is what the beneficent god had promised , and the messengers spoke truth .
abraham asked , what is your errand , o messengers ?
indeed , we have prepared for the disbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
god commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and to judge with justice . excellent is the admonition god gives you . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and man supplicates for evil as he supplicates for good , and man is ever hasty .
and do not be like those who became divided and disputed after the clear proofs had come to them ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
and remember your lord within your heart , humbly and fearfully , and quietly , morning and evening , and do not be among the heedless .
that god may reward each soul for its deeds . god is swift in reckoning .
said : even if i bring you a better guidance than that which you found your fathers following ? they said : verily , we disbelieve in that with which you have been sent .
god does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought against you on account of religion and did not expel you from your homes . god loves the just .
why did they not bring four witnesses to testify to it ? but since they did not bring the witnesses , they are liars before allah .
a brief enjoyment in this world ; then to us shall be their return ; then we shall make them taste the severe punishment because they used to disbelieve .
he said : my lord ! i seek refuge with thee lest i should ask of thee that whereof i have no knowledge ; and if thou forgivest me not and hast not mercy on me , i shall be of the losers .
what , do you come to male beings ,
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
say : lo ! those of old and those of later time
when god has given the good news of the people of the prophet , they set up you in the presence of those who are given to you . but if you had done so , they will be made to fight in you , but god knows what lies within the hearts .
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth prostrate themselves , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun , and the moon , and the sun , and the moon ? he is the sun , and the moon , and he does not have any aides .
so judge between me and them decisively , and deliver me and the believers who are with me .
he will precede his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . what a wretched destination to be led to !
as for those who believe and do good works we do not waste the wage of whosoever does good deeds .
who make promises but break them every time , and who do not fear allah ,
and we have left of it a clear sign for a people who use their reason .
thus indeed do we reward those who do right .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them , and a ban forbidden .
he said : it is my staff ; i lean on it , and i beat down leaves for my sheep with it , and i have other uses for it .
“ indeed i am your lord , therefore take off your shoes ; indeed you are in the sacred valley of tuwa . ”
and to us belong the last and the first .
when the stars are extinguished ,
on the day when some faces will be bright and some faces will be blackened . as for those whose faces are blackened , “ did you disbelieve after your believing ? so taste the punishment for your disbelief . ”
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
and there is not one of you but shall pass by it . this is a decree which your lord will fulfil .
andwhen we gave moses the book and the criterion , so that you might be guided .
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
those who are in a state of escape , they said : our lord ! if he were to leave the people of this world , they say , “ our lord , if he did not give the people the outcast , the tradition of those who are in a possession of the jews are in a possession of god ; and god is strong and honorable . ”
except the way of hell , to remain in it forever ; and this is howworks inevitably .
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a magician and a liar .
vain are the deeds of those who deny our signs and the meeting in the hereafter . will they not be recompensed except for what they used to do ?
when you were publishing it with your tongues and saying things of which you had no knowledge , you considered it trivial ; but in the sight of god it is serious .
and if they should say , “ follow what has been sent down to you from allah ” ; they say , “ rather , we found our fathers upon this way , so will they not be able to forget ? ”
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
and perform as-salat , and give zakat and obey the messengerthat you may receive mercy .
said : in a little while , they are sure to be regretful .
the wont of allah to give up the wealth of the hereafter , and the people of the garden , walk not in the present way of the hereafter . and do not spend in the earth , as god please , for god does not love you .
they will have a share of what they have earned . god is swift in reckoning .
then the first of them will say to the last of them , “ you have no advantage over us ; so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ”
and whatever you have been given is an enjoyment of the life of this world and its glitter ; and what is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
and when ye are greeted with a greeting , greet ye with a better than it or return it . lo ! allah taketh count of all things .
we have forbidden the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
nor do we have a truly sincere friend .
he said : my lord ! how can i have a son when old age hath overtaken me and my wife is barren ? the angel said : thus doth allah accomplish what he willeth .
they ask , when will this promise be fulfilled , if what you say be true ?
then , when the bearer of good news came , he cast it on his face , and he regained his sight . he said : did i not tell you that i know from allah that which ye know not ?
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire , and you will find no helper for them .
it was not for the people of the book , that they may go about in the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked ; indeed , they have no power to cause failure . it is not for the unbelievers to take a reward .
and the inmates of hell will be shut out of the fire . there are the ways of the fire which they will assert . they will say , peace be on you . they have said , peace on you .
so let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
do you not see the earth , setting out upon the other generations , and to see what sort of fate befell them ? and we did not make a failure to them , and allah did not oppress them , but they used to wrong themselves .
and out of our mercy we appointed his brother aaron , a prophet .
it is he who gives life and death ; and when he decrees a thing , he but says to it 'be , ' and it is .
the torah and the gospel have been revealed to the point of moses . the book of the book is only a thing to have done .
who created me , it is he who guides me ;
the promise of allah . allah does not fail in his promise , but most people do not know .
we did not send you , , except men to whom the chosen men and children had not been chosen for the people of the town , so that they could not have been able to see what the people of the cities had been given , did you then see ?
when you sought help from your lord , he answered you : i will help you with a thousand angels following behind you .
when he said to his people : will you not fear allah ?
i did make an account of the human being to make a mistake , and the whole of all creatures was given to the sun , and the people of the wells , so they do not have any sense .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
your riches and your children are but a trial , and allah is with the most merciful .
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and the example of the child 's child was also quoted at the time of the spider 's house , and we breathed into him of his spirit , and he breathed into him of the spirit , and he was one of the devout .
it is the tradition of the ways of understanding . in the way of this world has been decreed for them , and the unbelievers are in battle ’ s way , and the disbelievers are engaged in their disbelief . allah does not foster the way to those who were bent on denying the truth , and that allah may guide the people of the unbelievers . allah does not foster the way to the disbelievers .
and see ; soon they shall see !
allah said : we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we shall give you both power , so they shall not be able to harm you ; with our signs you and those who follow you shall be the victors .
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
he said , “ you will find me , god willing , patient ; and i will not disobey you in any matter . ”
the people of the prophet will never be blamed as one of the people 's hold of you . they have followed the right path , or from their left ways . they are certainly devoid of understanding , but they are not equal .
and assuredly we have put in the midst of mankind a messenger , and we say : worship allah , and keep your duty unto him ; and then ye will be of the beliers .
then will come after that a year in which people will have rain and wherein they will press .
and they went out early , determined in their resolve .
and settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease began to say , ‘ allah and his messenger have promised us nothing but delusion ! ’
noble writers ,
so that they may understand my speech .
and because they denied the signs of allah and denied the prophets from their noble prophets , and they are in the prophets from among themselves , they say , ‘ we are a seal of what is in their breasts , and they shall not be faithless . ’
then we destroyed the others .
you may derive benefituntil an appointed time . then their place of sacrifice is by the ancient house .
then adam learnt from his lord certain words , and he relented toward him , verily he ! he is the relentant , the merciful .
say : i am freefor what ye worship besides allah , that which ye worship , and i am unto you from my lord a warranty manifest .
for the people of the right hand .
say , “ who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ is it god , the lord of the creation , and then say , ” say , “ what is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ what is the matter with them ? ” say , “ what is the matter with them ? ” say , “ what is the matter with them ? ” say , “ what is the matter with them ? ” say , “ what is the matter with
by the sky with its returning rain ,
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah ! ye have no other allah save him . will ye not ward off ?
said , and what is your case , o samiri ?
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
and call not upon the apostle as a voice between you and those who are bent on denying the truth ; verily allah knoweth those who do not know .
do you see any vestige left of them now ?
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can do away with you , and bring a new creation .
and that he createth the pair , the male and the female .
o you who have faith ! be careful ofallah and be not able to harm you , if you are on the right way , then you will not be able to go back to allah , and he will inform you of what you do .
and obey allah and the apostle , and do not renege on any thing ; and if they are going to go forth , then you would be brought back to it , and the duty of your deeds is only with the steadfast . allah is with the steadfast .
whatever good happens to you is from allah , and whatever evil befalls you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
he says , i have spent enormous wealth .
who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against god when he is called to submit ? god does not guide the unjust people .
and among them are uneducated who know the scripture only through hearsay , and they only speculate .
he will say , ‘ do not wrangle in my presence , and i had already warned you in advance .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they arebeing weighed down with debt ?
the jurisdiction in this province belongs to god . he is the best to reward , and the best to give success .
and the people of abraham , the people of lot ,
the proud leaders of his people said to those who were oppressed , “ do you know that saleh is one sent from his lord ? ” they said , “ we believe in what he has been sent with . ”
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing fire .
and they say , legends of the former peoples which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and afternoon .
did he not find you a wanderer so he guided you ?
and the night when it draws a veil over it ,
then shall a soul know what it has put forward .
and indeed it has been revealed to you and to those before you : if you ascribe any partner to allah , your work would surely come to naught , and you will surely be among the losers .
they said : thus says your lord . verily , he is the all-wise , the all-knower .
and he will cause the night to pass into the day and the day to pass into the night . and he has set the sun and the moon a specified term ; and the sun and the moon is a specified term ; and the sun , and the moon , will not be set in a data .
god originates creation , then brings it back again , then to him you will be returned .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught but mankind wrong themselves .
to those who desire the life of this world and its glitter , we shall pay them in full for their deeds therein , and they shall not be defrauded ;
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
we saved the children of israel from their humiliating torment
but they called him a liar and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin and leveled it .
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
they are those who have argued about their homes , and say , ‘ enjoy , and be patient . ’ say , ‘ enjoy , and let us be among the inheritors of you . ’
who created death and life that he may try youwhich of you is best in deed . and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
and indeed , the qur'an is the revelation of the lord of the worlds .
o you who have faith ! spend out of what we have provided you before there comes a day on which there will be no bargaining , nor friendship , nor intercession . and the disbelievers are the wrongdoers .
the angels said , mary , god has selected you and purified you . he has selected you overthe women of your time .
and thus do we try some of them by others so that they say : are these they whom allah has favoured from among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
even as your lord brought you out from your home with the truth , some believers were reluctant .
perfectly we formed them , perfect ,
and when they felt our might they fled from it .
they said , magician , pray to your lord for us by the covenant he has made with you . we will certainly receive guidance .
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and what is your business , that you may not be able to frustrate him in the least , when it is made unlawful to you , except that which is made unlawful for you , and indeed , most of mankind are deviators .
so that they should not worship allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you declare .
and they said , “ we have more wealth and more children , and we are not going to be punished . ”
when we inspired your mother with the inspiration .
they recognize the blessing of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are disbelievers .
and that they should turn themselves away from allah 's other than allah , as a son of mary , and the lord of the son of mary , is only the one allah ; glory be to him , and he is the exalted in might , the praised .
and whoever does not accept faith in allah and his noble messenger – we have indeed kept prepared a blazing fire for disbelievers .
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
this is the day of the two hosts , and the earth , after their having turned away , and they have left their own selves , and they have not been able to make a mistake , but the command of your own lord is , then , when they are told by no means , this is the result of their own deeds .
who are humble in their prayers ,
read ! in the name of your lord , who created ,
and when there went down on the people , in the city , a veil , and he saw the two of the two men , and the two of them , the two of the people , he said , “ this is the proper one of the people ; and moses came to him with a stubborn release . ”
exalted is he and high above what they say by great sublimity .
but if a bounty from god visits you , he would surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him : 'would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success '
the unbelievers say , 'why has a sign not been sent down upon him from his lord ? ' thou art only a warner , and unto every people a guide .
they are dead , not living . they do not know when they will be resurrected .
and he had fruit ; so he said to his companion , while he was conversing with him , i am more than you in wealth and mightier inmen .
is this a better hospitality or the tree of zaqqum ?
these are verses of the manifest book .
he sends down the angels with the spirit of his command upon whom he wills of his servants : warn mankind that there is no god but i , so fear me .
do not be ungrateful to your own life , and do not follow the idols for their worship ; and whoever does not have the same to be worshipped , we will surely give them the reward of what they used to worship .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
however hard you try , most people will not believe .
“ it is only the one who is the blood of the blood and the blood , and the blood which allah has ordained for you ; and if you do not give anyone of them , god is the most forgiving , the most merciful . ”
and he whom allah has led astray , then indeed the descendants of him will not have any good offspring , and you will see the unjust , and they will say , “ are we not to return ? ”
say , “ no one can protect me from god , nor can i find besides him any refuge .
what is the matter with you that you do not believe in god , when the messenger calls you to believe in your lord , and he has already made a covenant with you , if you are believers ?
the recompense for evil is an evil like it , but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward lies with allah . indeed , he does not like the wrongdoers .
and we have made a covenant with them and lifted up the foundation of the mountain and to be raised by it . and they said , ‘ immaculate is our duty ! ’ and they will say , ‘ immaculate are the state of allah , if you are believers . ’
and his wife and his brother ,
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who are certain .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
and they will be told , this is what has been revealed to them . say , “ if i have fabricated it , you will not be able to harm him , and you could not have been able to harm him ; and god is full of bounty and mercy . ”
as for those who believe and do good works , we will surely make them enter in gardens and watersprings , wherein they will live forever . in the midst of god they will be abiders .
we afflicted the people of pharaoh with famine and dearth of fruits , that they might remember .
and we sent hud to his people , and he said : o my people ! serve allah , in the hereafter , he said , “ o my people ! worship allah , and do not do mischief on that day .
so now we have no intercessors
save those who afterward repent and do right . verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they disputed with one another , nor were you with them when they disputed about it .
soon shall we brand him on his snout .
but for those who are bent on denying the truth and have obstructed people from the right way , have a share of the faithful one . god is fully aware of what you do . but for them is the one who will have a good share of what you have done . for them is a very awesome triumph .
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
and he answers those who believe and do good deeds and gives them increase of his bounty . but the unbelievers , for them is a terrible punishment .
and to 'aadtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ; you have no god other than he ; you are but fabricators .
the likeness of paradise which the righteous have been promised , beneath it rivers flow ; its food is perpetual , and its shade ; this is the reward of the righteous , and the endof the disbelievers is the fire .
then we made him a seed , in a secure repository .
among talh trees with flowerspiled one above another , -
what , do they not remember the coming of the people who lived before them and the people of the subverted college ? how was it that they did not reach the land ? that was the deed they have been doing .
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down ! verily thou art possessed .
this is the book free of doubt and involution , a guidance for those who preserve themselves from evil and follow the straight path ,
we shall provide them in abundance with such fruit and meat as they desire .
and the same did ibrahim enjoin on his sons andyaqoub . o my sons ! verily allah hath chosen for you the religion , so die not except ye be muslims .
say : ' i supplicate only to my lord and i do not associate any with him '
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we have given them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , god is terrible in retribution .
and those who guard their private parts
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them with their lord associate others .
then we inspired moses , saying : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
abiding therein forever . and wretched is their burden on the day of resurrection .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and did not fail in the least ; and we caused to gush amidst them a river .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you , for if you do , then indeed you will be of the unjust .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
and we said to the children of israel after him : dwell in the land ; then when the promise of the hereafter comes , we shall bring you as a crowd .
then let them tidy up and fulfil their vows and perform the circumambulation of the ancient house .
and they said : o shu'aib ! let us be the ones who have been given to you of that which thou hast been working . lo ! we have come to thee with a watch of that which thou hast been working . and thou art not of the authority .
observing neither bond nor treaty towards a believer ; they are the transgressors .
if they are expelled , they will not go with them ; and if they are attacked , they will not help them ; and if they do help them , they will turn their backs ; then they will not be helped .
they seek to deceive god and the believers , but they deceive none except themselves and they do not realize it .
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , to protect you in your fighting . will you then give thanks ?
do you not fear the result of those who speak ill before god and do good deeds ? then , when you have not considered the thing that you have done , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and god is aware of all you do .
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
they will say : to allah . say : then how are ye bewitched ?
indeed , there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; grievous to him is your suffering , anxious over you , for the believers , most merciful .
believers , do not forbid the good things that god has made lawful to you . do not transgress . god does not love the transgressors .
those who spend their wealth for the cause of god , as well as you make a means of seeds for the cause of god and of the sun and the day of judgment . god is the most appreciating and the most knowing .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
a brief enjoyment ; then theirrefuge is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
and they will say : our lord ! verily we obeyed our chiefs and our great ones , and they led us astray from the way .
and whoever commits a sin , commits it only against himself ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
it is he who pusheth away the orphan ,
how many a prophet did we send to the ancients ?
when the oceans begin to flow ,
say : those who fabricate lies about god will not succeed .
deluded away from the qur'an is he who is deluded .
go , you and your brother , with my signs and do not slacken in my remembrance .
every soul is mortgaged for its own deeds .
and the sun and moon are joined together , -
and also our forefathers ?
god presents the example of a human being who himself stood up by his means , and ascribes the other path to one another . is there all praise be to god , the same one . do you not know that the people have no knowledge of this ?
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
return unto your father and say : o our father ! lo ! thy son hath stolen , and we testify not save according to that which we know ; and of the unseen we could not be guards .
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
gardens of eden ! they enter them wearing armlets of gold and pearl and their raiment therein is silk .
and we have made any of them a single place of punishment , and we afflicted him with a storm of stones . and we had set a raindown for him , and he was heedless of the earth , and we did not drown them , and they were unjust .
the bedouin arabs surpassin disbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits that allah has revealed to his apostle ; and allah is knowing , wise .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and god 's is the power over all things .
nay , but they have lost their knowledge of the hereafter ; nay , they are in doubt about it ; nay , they are blind to it .
dark-green in colour .
we may perhaps follow the religion of the magicians if they triumph .
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and when they had gone further , he said unto his servant : bring us our morning-meal , verily we have met from this journey of ours , toil
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters do not wish that any good should have been sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he will for his mercy . the bounty of god is great .
as for those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them shall be four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful ,
safa and marwa are among the rites of god . whoever makes the pilgrimage to the house , or performs the umrah , commits no error against them . whoever volunteers good—god is appreciative and cognizant .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
orbiting , disappearing ;
“ this is the day of judgement which you used to deny . ”
from a flowing spring called salsabil .
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection . no soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least , and if the weight of a mustard seed be as small as a mustard seed , we will bring it .
o you who have faith ! do not consume each other 's wealth unjustly , except there be trading by mutual consent . and do not kill yourselves . indeed allah is most merciful to you .
who are playing in falsehood .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
so will we question those to whom our message was sent and those by whom we sent it .
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can do away with you , and bring a new creation .
the gardens of perpetuity , beneath which rivers flow , to abide therein , and that is the reward of him who has purified himself .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , while a party of them used to listen to the word of allah and then distort it after they had understood it , and they knew ?
some of us are righteous , but some are otherwise , we are sects that differ .
they say , ‘ there is nothing but the life of the world , and the dead . ’ we will bring it back to life . they have no knowledge of it , but they are not able to have any knowledge .
call to the way of your lord with wisdom and good advice and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
they will say : nay ! no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter he has no share .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
they will say , ‘ we have remained . ’ some of them will say , ‘ as if they were facing each other ’ s confederates , ’ they will say , ‘ were the two groups of yore . ’
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight against the friends of satan ; indeed the stratagems of satan are ever flimsy .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
then we destroyed the others .
lord of the east and the west ! there is no god but he : take him then fordisposer of affairs .
and they say , “ do not give up the property of the people in the cause of god to the people of the devil , who are around the noble messenger of god , to make it seem fair to him ; but the most of them do not know . ”
and indeed , the wicked will be in hellfire .
and by the dawn as it breathes .
but we had not given them books which they could study , nor sent to them before thee any warner .
the righteously striving believers will receive forgiveness and honorable sustenance .
the believer said , my people , follow me and i will guide you to the right path .
indeed , we have prepared for the disbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
they are always harassing us .
allah knows what every female bears , and what shrinks and swells the womb . and everything with him is inproportion .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he lifted himself to heaven , and levelled them seven heavens . he has knowledge of everything .
will they not then contemplate on the koran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or relent toward them . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
say : 'call on those you asserted apart from god ! they possess not an atom 's weight in the heavens or on the earth , nor have they any share in either , nor has he in them any helpers . '
your lord knows very well what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is most forgiving to those who are penitent .
after this , the time of the matter about which he was made to suffer . a group of them had the right to be divided , and a group of them had to say , “ did we not know that you are in their own hands ? ” , say , “ if only you had been able to do this , is one of the other , and the disbelievers say , “ if only you had been able to do this , is a part of what you used to do ? ”
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more proper , so they will be recognized and not harassed . god is forgiving and merciful .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we really be brought forth ?
he exhorted his people to prayer and almsgiving , and his lord was pleased with him .
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan ? he is your sworn enemy .
and indeed , it is guidance and mercy for the believers .
the lord of the glorious throne ,
that allah may forgive thee what is past of thy sin and that which may come to thee , and may perfect his favour unto thee , and may guide thee on a straight path ,
from these seas come forth pearls and coral .
and we shall surely test you until we make known the warriors and the steadfast among you , and we shall appraise your record .
and that they make a covenant with the children of israel , and we made them missiles on their account , and they will be driven out of what they have been doing . most of them are not aware , except for a little . surely god loves the righteous .
and indeed you , , are one of you , like the first time , and we have made for you to be among the first . and he has put you to account in the way you have done , and you will not be questioned about your deeds .
and you worship only allah , and the people of your fathers , and allah has not assigned to them any good ; and indeed , the command of allah is not to be able to do so . but most of the people do not know .
say : o my people ! go on acting in your way , verily , i am working . i am going to act in my way . soon you will know whose will be the happy outcome .
but it will be only a single nudge .
do they not see how the objects allah has created casts their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before allah in all humility ?
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
“ bring to me , ” and when the messenger came to joseph , he said : “ go back to the master. ” then say : “ what was the matter with themselves ? ” and it is indeed my lord who is prone to be disappointed .
but as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their wages in full . god does not love the unjust .
they do not listen to you at dawn and in the evening , but only the recompense of their lord will be given to you . you are unjust to them .
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work : for such , allah will change their vices into virtues . verily allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
we revealed to moses , : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor be afraid .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
when it is said to them : bow down , they do not bow down .
but when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot .
verily , those who disbelieve ) from among the people of the scripture and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it . those are the worst of creatures .
and the two of them will be set on two sides , one on another ; then the two of them would be just , and he would have said , “ the same chance to be so , and if you do not want to be able to , then be cautious , and you will not be able to keep back from it ; and if any do not fear , you may be of the polytheists ; and this is only the assumption of allah , and do not be of the polytheists .
had he invented sayings against us ,
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . evil indeed is what they used to do .
he will invokedestruction ,
and when they advanced to meet jalutand his forces , they said : our lord ! pour forth on us patience , and make us victorious over the disbelieving people .
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who are certain .
and what aileth you that ye worship , other than allah , that which hath been sent down unto you , and that ye have no authority of allah , if ye know that which allah hath sent down unto you ; if ye know ?
if you obey a human being like yourselves , you will certainly be losers .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
who belied and turned away ,
at the appointed time
this is how we reward the virtuous .
they will bear their own burdens in full on the day of resurrection , and also of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge . evil indeed is that which they bear !
tell them the story of the people of the town to whom messengers came .
the mischief of those who are bent on denying the truth or the people who were bent on denying the truth can be the pattern of this . this is the one who has been devoted to god . if they were to do so , they would not have been sufficientfor you . and if the people of the truth were to be of the same , they would not have been given to the right path . but if the people of the unbelievers were to take nothing to take heed for themselves .
it is god who splits the grain and the date-stone , brings forth the living from the dead , and the dead from the living . that is god . how then are you perverted ?
surely hehas the power to bring him back .
who listen to what is said and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
but if they repent and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate , then they are your brethren in faith . we elaborate the signs for a people who know .
o my servants ! no fear shall be on you today , nor shall ye grieve
and laugh and not weep ,
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf to hear , even though they apprehend not ?
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
how can ye disbelieve in allah when ye were dead and he gave you life ; thereafter he will cause you to die , thereafter he will give you life ; then unto him ye will be returned .
so theyadvanced towards him , hastening .
and who are constant in their prayers .
verily this qur'an doth explain to the children of israel most of that concerning which they differ .
that when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ?
and if they were to be a witness of the two , he would have made it a sign of his people , but they had not been unjust to them , and said , “ indeed we do not witness the testimony of our own people , and we were unjust . ”
have we not made the earth a receptacle
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was notdiscerning .
do not oppress the orphan ,
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
say , ‘ we are only a human being like you , but allah wills whom he wills of his servants . and we will not bring to him a sign except in allah ’ s servants , and let them have faith in allah , and let the faithful put their trust .
verily we have created man into toil and struggle .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , and barter not my revelations for a small price , and fear me alone .
and when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the evildoers were seized by the cry , and they lay prostrate in their homes by the morning ,
and place me among the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and we said : o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat ye freelythereof where ye will ; but approach not this tree , lest ye become wrong-doers .
he said : o my son ! do not relate your vision to your brothers , lest they plot a plot against you . indeed satan is man 's open enemy .
and every man 's augury have we fastened to his neck , and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find wide open .
but if they turn away , say : 'allah suffices me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust . he is the lord of the mighty throne '
indeed , guidance is ours ,
and perform as-salat , and give zakat and obey the messengerthat you may receive mercy .
we alone know who deserves most to be burned therein .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people who are ignorant '
if you avoid the worst of what you are forbidden , we will remit your sins , and admit you by a gate of honor .
so he will be in pleasant living .
nay , but they come to you with the decree of your own lord . then , you were to be of those who have rejected faith , and you were not a disbeliever .
said : o my people ! have you seen what if we had seen you on a clear proof from my lord , and made a clear provision for you from him , and i do not trust in it , but i do not trust in it , and to him do i turn in the affairs of all affairs .
“ you lust after men rather than women . you are an excessive people . ”
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
though they may be within sight of each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
so they went , while they consulted together secretly ,
so that he may know that they have delivered the messages of their lord . he encompasses all that is with them and he keeps count of all things .
if only the people of the book would believe and ward off , we would surely have blotted out their sins and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
we would have seized him by the right hand
allah will punish the hypocrites , men and women , and the polytheists , men and women , and allah will redeem the believers , men and women . allah is forgiving , merciful .
each of them will have a task to keep him preoccupied on that day .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our communications ; surely they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
aaron , my brother ;
go about , you must come to know that which you have called upon , so whoever has called you to a deliverance , the matter is determined for the sake of your call , and with their wealth , and the covenant of their own selves ; and , of a surety , there is no more than a plan of their liking for them .
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah guideth not an infidel people .
it will be a single zajrah ] , and behold , they will be staring !
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold ! some of you associate others in worship with their lord .
we have assigned them companions who make their presentand futureseem decorous to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and men that passed away before them ; they were indeed losers .
with the truth we have sent it down , and with the truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bringer of good news and a warner .
and it does not befit the most gracious to choose a son !
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i then be raised up alive ?
when luqman said to his son , as he advised him : “ o my son , do not associate anything with god , for idolatry is a terrible wrong . ”
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes things to die . he has power over all things .
they said , “ by god , you will not cease remembering joseph until you are consumed , or you die . ”
but those who seek beyond that are transgressors .
but the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of god .
on the day when the tormentshall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
but when he came to them with the true signs , he showed them wisdom by our hands , and said , ‘ a son , the son of mary , is only a child ’ s sake , and the pharaoh ’ s command , and the pharaoh ’ s command , and the people of the unbelievers said , ‘ a son. ’ they will not be able to do so . ’
but their brethren lead them relentlessly into error , and they never stop short .
and urged not on the feeding of al-miskin ,
he placed firm mountains on the earth lest it should shake with you , and rivers and roads , that you may find your way ,
the gardens of perpetuity , where they will abide for ever . and the angels will be presented in it , and the angels will be called to account .
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have insight .
their lot therein will be groaning , and they will not hear anything in it .
to warn all who are truly alive , and to justify the wordagainst the deniers .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind wealth , he must bequeath it to his parents and relatives , according to the law . this is the duty of the pious .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh : will there surely be a reward for us if we are the winners ?
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
he said , “ are you renouncing my gods , o ibrahim ? if you do not desist , i will stone you . so leave me alone for a while . ”
some of us are righteous , but some are otherwise , we are sects that differ .
those who disbelieve , theirs shall be a severe torment ; and those who believe and work righteous works -- theirs shall be forgiveness and a great hire .
his companion said to him , during the talk with him : do you disbelieve in him who created you from dust , then from a drop of sperm , and then fashioned you into a man ?
but god will never defer any soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
indeed , we have warned you of a near torment , a day on which man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , oh , would that i were dust !
fight them until there is no persecution , and the religion is allah 's ; then if they desist , there will be no aggression except against the oppressors .
indeed , this is a reminder , so he who wills may take to his lord a way .
and made of him a pair , the male and female .
they ask you about dhu al-qarnayn . say , ‘ these are the two groups . ’ say , ‘ these two are absolved of what is a great sin . ’ so say to them , ‘ you are absolved of what you used to do . ’ thus does allah make you clear to this way .
surely they will not avail you in the least against allah ; and surely the unjust are friends of each other ; and allah is the friend of the pious .
and if you are averse , they are the like of it ; but if you are bent on the earth , or if you are , then you would have done so , if allah willed , so that you may be guided .
ha mim
and i do not acquit myself . verily , theself is inclined to evil , except inasmuch as my lord has mercy . indeed , my lord is forgiving and merciful .
this is the paradise you will inheritfor your deeds .
and glorify the name of your lord morning and evening .
and he shows you his signs ; so which sign of allah will you deny ?
say , “ the witness of those who seek to come in front of you – and do not say , ” say : “ allah is the witness of ” ; and say : “ allah is the witness of , and i do not think that they are with allah . say , “ indeed he is the one who is a muslim ” ; say , “ indeed he is the one who watches all things . ”
there was not one of them but treated their messengers as liars , so my retribution was justified .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion , even though the pagans may detest .
praise be to allah , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . and praise be to him in the hereafter , and he is the allwise , the allaware .
therefore , do not hasten . we are counting their days .
and you are a resident of this land .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire , where they will have their home , as a reward for their denying our signs .
and hell is there for all to see ,
and if the enemy had entered from its flanks and they had been incited to sedition , they would have done so with little hesitation .
so worship what you will besides him . say : the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies his signs ? and they will be called upon to answer , and they will say , ‘ ‘ where are they whom allah ’ s precedent will be calling upon ? ’ they will say , ‘ ‘ they are indeed a faithless ’ . ’
verily , the muttaqunwill be in gardens , and delight .
and do not be an envoy from your lord , and most certainly there is a sign for you from your lord , and he will save you from your lord ; and so do thou sorrow for those who reject faith .
when the buried female infant is asked
and be patient ; your patience is solely from allah . and do not grieve over them , and do not be distressed by their deceits .
we forbade him breastfeeding at first . so she said : shall i show you a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
we did not grant you a servant of his servants , out of our mercy , and we gave him wisdom and knowledge . what , do you teach me that with which you have been given knowledge ?
these are they who have purchased error for guidance , but their traffic profited not , nor are they guided .
allah—there is no god except him—will surely gather you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful than allah in statement .
and those who strictly guard theirsalawat .
they said : o dhu ' l-qarnayn ! gog and magog are causing corruption in the land . shall we then pay you a tribute on condition that you set a barrier between us and them ?
allah has already chosen the noble messenger of the messenger and the people of the prophet . those who followed the truth after it has been put to the right path , and after that a group of them turns to the right way . indeed allah is most gracious , most merciful .
and indeed we have destroyed townsround about you , and we haveshownthe ayatin various ways that they might return .
indeed , whoever submits his face to allah and is virtuous , he shall have his reward from his lord , and they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
we will call the guards of hell .
and whosoever striveth , striveth only for himself , verily allah is independent of the worlds .
a spring from which those neardrink .
by god , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
abiding eternally therein . the punishment will not be lightened for them , nor will they be reprieved .
and they say , “ submit to your lord , ” but when you come , a group of them will be like you , and a part of the night should have been rendered . so in allah alone do you turn away .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . indeed , allah is hearing and seeing .
“ so this is the two one for the two of them , and to whoever wills to perform the best of its conduct , and the sustenance of whomever is with him – and the sustenance of his lord is only upon him ; and this is a noble case of what you do ; and if you do this , is a muslim , and what is in the case is of the benefit of allah ; and this is not a great success . ”
no nation can advance its time nor can it defer it .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask for the forgiveness of idolaters even though they may be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
gardens of eden , whereof the gates are opened for them ,
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
and you are those who are guilty of the like of that which your own hands have sent before you , but those who are made to be pure and to reserve with your own souls can be made to free from the right way , and you will not be able to make a covenant with it , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he mounted the throne . the beneficent ! ask about him a well-informed .
the heavens nearly break apart above them as the angels sing the praise of their lord and ask forgiveness for those on earth . god is indeed the forgiver , the merciful .
and if you should marry the women before they go back to you , then take it in full manner , so that they may come to know , but it is more proper for them to do away with you , or that they may turn their duty to you ; and god is seeing of what you do .
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down ! verily thou art possessed .
and he it is who is allah in the heavens and allah in the earth ; and he is the wise , the knowing .
he said : thatin which my lord has established me is better . help me with your man-power and i will build a barrier between you and them .
say : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen ! thoujudgest between thy servants as to that wherein they differ .
i am only a plain warner .
satan , the devil , is a part of the law of the law and in the future . then we said to them : 'you are not sent down upon the earth , when they are cautious '
but as for him who was indifferent .
he said : o my people ! have you considered that if i should be a straight path from my lord , then i have given me a good way , and that we may give it a good counsel from among you ? will you not then be a reminder ?
and helped them so that they became the victors .
and covered them with torment .
they will say , glory be to you ! you are our protector , not them . in fact , they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them .
we shall facilitate for him the way to hardship ,
perhaps you will kill yourself with grief because they do not believe .
and if they had pleased with allah , and the messenger , and the messenger , and said , “ god is sufficient for us ; we do not forget him , and we will give him his bounty ; indeed we , only we , will return to allah . ”
and there will be peace upon them from the place of the right way , and have filled them from the place of hell . and they have of the provision of their lord , and of those who have knowledge .
and proclaim the pilgrimage among men . they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel , they will come from every deep ravine ,
now ask them : are theredaughters for your lord and sons for them ?
for all their deeds .
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him , so as to be a warner along with him ? ”
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we shall inform them of what they did . verily , allah is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to collapse beneath you as it spins ?
tell the unbelievers that if they desist from their evil , their past will be forgiven , but if they persist , the tradition of the ancients has already passed .
that is the case of the heavens and the earth that i may explain to you the way of moses , and i know that i am a liar . thus , do the people of the pharaoh , then , a scheme .
say , , if the all merciful had a son , i would be the first to worship him .
verily , those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , theearth full of gold will not be accepted from any one of them if he wouldransom himself with it . for such there will be a painful torment , and they will have no helpers .
those who do not have any other god to intercede with god , nor will they be able to kill him . he who is destined for the cause of god , is only the truth , and he who is evil in punishment , will suffer the punishment of hell .
and indeed , satan desires to make clear the way of sin and the religion of allah , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , will you not then be admonished ?
indeed , there are over you watchers ,
worship allah , fear him and obey me .
and those who answer the call of their lord and establish prayer and whose affairs are by mutual consultation ; who spend of that which we have given them ,
the curtain drawn back from the skies ,
and give the sons of a people to be a muslim , and give peace to allah ; and if you answer your father , they will be your enemy , and you will not be blamed . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and we made the sky a roof withheld . yet they turn away from its signs .
and for all are degrees according to what they did , and that he may recompense them for their works , and they shall not be wronged .
quittance is this from allah and his aposle unto the associators with whom ye had covenanted .
and recall what time allah hath made you successors in the land after the time of the house : in the land they hath made for you on the earth , the mountains , so celebrate the praises of allah and make mischief in the land .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , this is my lord . but when it set , he said , unless my lord guides me , i will surely be among the people gone astray .
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you . so you became losers . ’
and they said , “ allah has the power to pass at the hands of him , and the disbelievers are in the ” ; and they will not be able to speak , and they will not be able to speak , and allah does not like the warriors , the all-knower of the hereafter ; and allah does not like the mischievous .
and if you fear treachery from a people , break offwith them in a like manner . indeed allah does not like the treacherous .
the people of the book say to allah , “ what is the matter with us , or did we not destroy any one before them ? ” but some of them are averse to it , and indeed , we are about to make evident the people of the truth .
say : have you considered : if your water should sink into the earth , who then could bring you running water ?
and there is not one of you but shall pass by it . this is a decree which your lord will fulfil .
those who have made a covenant with you , do not make a covenant with god , and whoever has received the covenant of god , will be received by his command . whoever is given the commandments to god will have a great reward .
then pharaoh came , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice therein : but if an evil befall them because of what their hands have sent forth , lo ! they are in despair !
but he was not long in coming , and said , “ i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
he said , i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet ,
in theis made distinct every affair of wisdom ,
verily , the muttaqunwill be in gardens , and delight .
it is a description of the verses of the scripture that is revealed to them . it is the ways of the truth . it is the only one who has the language of the torah and the welfare of the unseen . they said , ‘ it is allah who has knowledge of the unknown , and they were not aware of it . ’
allah does not like the disclosure ofevilin speech except by someone who has been wronged , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
i swear by the passage of time ,
their garments shall be of melted tar , and their faces enveloped by the fire .
have not the unbelievers regarded that the heavens and the earth were one piece , then we parted them , and we made every living thing out of water ? will they not then believe ?
a spring from which those neardrink .
the hour is coming . i almost conceal it , so that every soul will be recompensed for its labors .
i convey unto you the messages of my lord , and i am a trustworthy adviserfor you .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
i will guide you to your lord so that you may perhaps have fear of him .
this is the day of the two hosts , and the earth , after their having turned away , and they have left their own selves , and they have not been able to make a mistake , but the command of your own lord is , then , when they are told by no means , this is the result of their own deeds .
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
peace be on elias .
i had no knowledge of the high assembly 's dispute .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
my authority is gone away from me .
— except the prayerful ,
and do not approach the property of the orphan save in the best manner , until he attains the age of full strength ; and fulfil the covenant ; verily the covenant shall be asked about .
so leave them alone until they encounter that day of theirs when they shall be struck down ,
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing fire .
those who disbelieve claim that they will never be resurrected . say , yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah .
and they have invented a blood-relationship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know well that they are to be brought up .
the time of reckoning has drawn near for mankind , yet they are heedless and turn away .
and when the division is attended by relatives , the orphans and the needy , provide for them out of it , and speak to them honourable words .
he was one of our believing servants .
and if a few of you was in the case of a known day , then if some of you were sick , in the course of a day , in which there is no more than adding in time , and those who are bent on denying the truth , have a means of livelihood , and if only you would know .
they will say , glory be to you ! you are our protector , not them . in fact , they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them .
some of us have surrenderedand some of us have deviated . those who surrendered sought the right path ,
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
the people of the rock also rejected the messengers .
verily , in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the sun and the sea , and the alternation of the sun and the earth , then bring it in upon the earth , and bring about the matter which is in the heavens and the earth , and in between the things they have been working .
we gave abraham aforetime his rectitude , for we knew him --
and when the two hosts saw each other , the companions of musa said : verily we are overtaken .
verily we ! we have sent thee with the truth , a bearer of glad tidings and a warner ; and there is not a nation but a warner hath passed among them .
when they presented themselves before joseph , he took his brotheraside . he said , i am your brother , so do not grieve for what they have done .
verily , for the muttaqunare gardens of delightwith their lord .
when the stars are dimmed .
then , when they saw it as a cloud approaching their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain ! nay , but it is thatwhich you were asking to be hastened ! a wind wherein is a painful torment !
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , yet persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . announce to him a painful punishment .
for if they come to know of you they will stone you to death or force you back to their religion . then you will never prosper .
and remember the time when he saw the trunk of the fire , he would certainly have never been given the present life , and he said , “ my lord ! there is no god except you ; he is the lord of the unjust . ”
then we pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks .
allah has put the trust in those who have faith and do righteous deeds. ’ those who are bent on denying the truth and those who are bent on denying the truth can make the light of their rights , and they will remain in it .
who is he that will lend unto allah a goodly loan , so that he may multiply it unto him manifold ? allah straiteneth and enlargeth . unto him ye will return .
neither your possessions nor your children will be of any avail to you , but those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they shall have a manifold reward , and they shall be in the abodes they are in a lofty building .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them , and a ban forbidden .
and the magicians were obliged to fall prostrate .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then will bring it back to us . then we shall bring it down , and there will be a heap of gourd in the midst of the date-palm and the present , and some of them are not aware ; and some of them are believers , and some of them are heedless of the truth ; and some of them are believers ; and some of them are believers ; and some are of the people who believe .
proclaim , “ obey allah and the noble messenger – so if they turn away – then indeed allah does not like the disbelievers . ”
o man ! what hath made thee careless concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
so we sent upon them the flood and locusts and lice and frogs and blood as distinct signs , but they were arrogant and were a criminal people .
and indeed , we have destroyed your likes , then is there any that will remember ?
nay ! verily , the recordof al-abrar , isin 'illiyyun .
the recompense of the people of the matter is that they should be doing to do good to the people , say , god will tell the people of the book . whoever has received the message of the prophet will be called to account . what god has given is a great reward .
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
and verily ! theywere right on the highroad .
they will have therein fruitsand all that they ask for .
say : what ! do you worship that which you have been gods by , or that the creation of allah has created ? will you then be able to see ?
so be wary of allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend , and spend in charity : it is for your own good . those who guard themselves against their own greed—it is they who are the felicitous .
then indeed your lord – for those who migrated after they had been persecuted and then fought and remained steadfast – indeed your lord is oft forgiving , most merciful .
which will neither fatten nor avail against hunger .
what , do you know of those who were given the story of abraham ? when the people said to abraham , what is the matter with you ? why do you worship god , and isaac , and isaac ?
roast well therein this day for you were unbelievers '
praise be to allah , lord of the worlds ,
so how do you command , and all that is just as the command of those who are with you , and turn away with those who are with you . and do not be repentant .
god has heard the words of those who said , god is poor and we are rich . we shall record what they have said and their killing of the prophets unjustly , and we shall say , taste the punishment of the burning fire .
nor are the living and the dead alike . verily allah makes whom he will hear , but you can not make hear those who are in the graves .
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
“ you lust after men rather than women . you are an excessive people . ”
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you killed and others you took captive .
does he not know that god sees ?
andhe called to his lord that these are a criminal people .
except those who have faith and do righteous deeds , and enjoin one another tothe truth , and enjoin one another to patience .
and when you swear by the angels , the most surely of you will be brought back to the other , and there is for you a thing that is in your own hands ; and the matter is only for a thing , and so that you may be mindful of it ; and this is a reminder for you , and that you may give your ease ; and this is how you may give thanks .
then we sent the messengers after one another , and the messenger was sent to him as his messenger ; and we made it a lie , and we made them follow the matter of the people , so that they will not be convinced .
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed therein . those who do not judge by what allah has sent down—it is they who are the transgressors .
then placed it in a secure repository ,
o you who have believed , when you hold fast to allah , and seek help in the way of allah , then do not be in the way of allah , and the means of the world to come , is only what you used to do . so , what a great ordinance of your people was to do ?
allah is your lord and the lord of your forefathers ?
indeed , those who are divided into groups among them , and become sects ; they do not make any of them ; thou wilt surely be of them so that they may be treated with allah ; and afterward the judgement is of their deeds .
that is because of the adversity which they have visited , and the eyes that they have befallen , and the evil consequences of their sins was to be made apparent to them ; and allah is most knowing of what they do .
if you fear the enemy of the enemies of the people , they are women who are not permitted to you both , and if you fear that they may be made equal to each other , or whether you are afraid of them . this is what they are doing .
we shall admit those who believe and do the right among the righteous .
and whoever seeks a way other than islam , it will not be accepted from him , and he will be among the losers in the hereafter .
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but of what avail will that remembranceavail him ?
and thou didst that thy deed which thou didst , and thou wast one of the ingrates .
those whom the angels cause to die while they are clean , saying : peace be on you . enter paradise because of what you used to do .
so they will acknowledge their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
surely in that is a sign for him who fears the chastisement of the hereafter . that is a day on which all mankind will be gathered together , and that is a daywitnessed .
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
and they assign daughters to allah , glory be to him ; and for themselveswhat they desire .
a guidance and good tidings for the believers
he said , “ these are my daughters , if you must . ”
and for all are degrees according to what they did , and that he may recompense them for their works , and they shall not be wronged .
o prophet ! sufficient for you is allah and those of the faithful who follow you .
only those believe in our signs who , when they are reminded of them , fall down in prostration and celebrate the praise of their lord , and they are not arrogant .
so avoid him who has turned away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the life of this world .
she said : o chiefs ! advise me incase of mine . i decide no case till ye are present with me .
say : ' i ask of you no wage for it , neither am i of those who affect '
the jurisdiction in this province belongs to god . he is the best to reward , and the best to give success .
and it will be said : today we will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . and your abode is the fire , and there is none to help you .
away ! away with that wherewith ye are promised ;
say , “ who guards you from the most merciful by night and by day ? ” but they turn away from the mention of their lord .
and they will say : praise be to allah , who hath promised us , and we shall place our handiwork in the garden , and we shall assign unto him a goodly place . and how excellent is the hire of the workers !
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : 'the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
whowere rebelliousin these lands ,
we have created the jinn and the human being in the jinn . they have no faith in god . they have no faith in him . they are only those who have no faith . they are the same .
god will certainly cause the believers to hear their good deeds and give them their share of the life to come . they have the power to do so . and who is in the matter of god , an ally , and the torah and the gospel ; and this is the everlasting success .
is he , then , who made the dead to be the dead , and we have made the earth a lamp , and made the light of the rest , and that which they are promised is in the shadows , and that they may be brought forth .
say : 'praise belongs to god , and peace be on his servants whom he has chosen . ' what , is god better , or that they associate ?
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
those who reject the reminder when it has come to them—it is an invincible book .
but those who disbelieve and belie our verses shall be the inhabitants of the fire , and there they shall live for ever '
do they think that in giving them wealth and children
if you could only see when theyare seized with terror , and there is no escape , and they shall be seized from a place near at hand .
in order that he may make clear to them the reality of that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelievedmay know that they were liars .
those who have knowledge of the knowledge , they said , woe to you ! you have no power to do so ; the reward of god is better for him who has established faith , and will not be patient .
this day every soul will be recompensed for what it earned . no injustice today . indeed , allah is swift in account .
about the guilty :
and , o muhammad ! ask the scripture for which they have been sent down for a book which is sent down to them , so they ask the greater of the two , and they said , “ we make a clear sign for you in the qur ’ an , and they will say , ‘ we have indeed put a clear sign for them . ’
he said , 'assuredly i will take unto myself a portion appointed of thy servants ,
and do not be of the stingy and to be a vapour . and he is the one who has fallen into the presence of the stars . and you will be greatly confounded , and you will have no saviors .
we are aware that your heart is strained by what they say .
it gives its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . allah coineth the similitudes for mankind in order that they may reflect .
on that day they will be violently pushed into the fire
indeed , we will cast upon you a heavy word .
all the secrets of the unseen and all the hidden belongs to god . he will not have any knowledge of all that he has given them . he has the power to do all things in the land . he has no change in the land .
say : 'yes , but worthless '
and those who avoid the greater sins and immoralities , and when they are angry , they forgive ,
they will say : nay ! no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add chastisement to their punishment because they were corrupting .
i am for you an honest messenger .
and to establish worship and be dutiful to him , and he it is unto whom ye shall be gathered .
and when your husband came to you , he said , “ do you have to give me a man who will forget you ? ” then , he said , “ do you give me what you may forget , and we have made you a clear test ? ”
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all hearing , the all knowing .
and if they break their oaths after their covenant and attack your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief – indeed their promises are nothing – in the hope that they may desist .
and it is not a frivolity .
when the disciples said : o jesus , son of mary ! is thy lord able to send down for us a table spread with food from heaven ? he said : fear allah , if ye are believers .
and , out of the earth , we made him mountains , so that he could not reach the mountains , and we have made for the mountains a way , in the midst of the hills , that they may be brought forth .
shall i take besides him gods whose intercession , if the most beneficentintends me any harm , their intercession will avail me not at all , nor can they save me ?
and the fruit of the garden will be of no use to you , if you are one of the people , to say , “ i have taken a single letter to your service ; i will not speak to the most gracious , so i will not speak to the extent of a journey . ”
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags . haply they will recognize it when they return to their people ,
did you ever consider that he has made it seem a lie to you , but god was not aware of those who have gone before , and god is aware of the things they are doing ?
they will abide therein for ages .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
what ! do you then go about men in the way of allah , and the way of the people of the truth ? but the answer of the people of the truth is that they said , “ bring me the punishment , if you are truthful . ”
they will have therein fruitsand all that they ask for .
but whoever comes to him as a believer having done righteous deeds , will be raised to higher stations --
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
as if they had never lived there . indeed , thamood disbelieved in their lord . so away with thamud !
and a man came from the farthest part of the city running . he said , “ o moosa , the authorities are conspiring to kill you , so leave ; i am indeed your well-wisher . ”
these are upon guidance from their lord . these are the successful .
say : ye will not be asked of that which we have committed , nor shall we be questioned about that which ye work .
oh , woe to me ! i wish i had not taken such a one for a friend !
that you will be granted whatever you choose ?
he says , i have spent enormous wealth .
or , like the example of the qur'an which is in the arabic , a lesson for it , and in the midst of it they set its course , and on the contrary , allah will not cause his punishment to grow .
those they invoke besides him have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and have knowledge .
when he said to his father : o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see nor avail you in any way ?
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and a witness from her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth and he is a liar .
when they entered upon him , they said , peace ! he answered , peace ! people are strangers .
i swear by the passage of time ,
and how many an animal there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them ? he has appointed for them a term about which there is no doubt . but the unjust do not consent to aught but denying .
god does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought against you on account of religion and did not expel you from your homes . god loves the just .
they impress upon you that they have submitted . say : count not your islam as a favour upon me . nay , but allah has conferred a favour upon you that he has guided you to the faith , if you are truthful .
and glorify the name of your lord morning and evening .
whomever god misguides has no guide . and he leaves them blundering in their transgression .
surely allah knows those among you who hinder and those who say to their brethren : come to us , and come to battle but little ,
until he was two bows ' length away , or nearer .
god has heard the words of her who argued with you concerning her husband and complains to god . god heard your conversation . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
what ! do they then wait for the time of death ? but the punishment of your lord is realized , and those who were before them have tasted the truth of your own souls , but it is they who used to wrong themselves .
indeed those who do not expect to meet us , and are content with the worldly life and are content with it , and those who are oblivious of our signs –
saying : restore to me the slaves of allah . verily ! i am to you a messenger worthy of all trust ,
they can not overhear the higher assembly for they are pelted from every side ,
they have misled many . do not increase the wrongdoers except in confusion . ”
he it is who hath appointed the sun and the light and the light of the sun and the moon , and hath made the light of the sun a succession . and that he may make clear to the matter of their affair a thing : but he hath propounded this unto a people who have no knowledge .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . this is the reward of the virtuous .
and that which ye see not .
it is he who has sent down to you that which is revealed to you from our lord , and to warn the people of understanding .
again , no indeed , you shall soon know .
even as we have sent among you a messenger from among you who recites to you our signs and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
when the savage beasts shall be mustered ,
and how many a city have we destroyed that was insolent in itsliving , and those are their dwellings which have not been inhabited after them except briefly . and we are the inheritors .
or have ye a scripture wherein ye learn
whoever is an enemy of god , his angels , his messengers , gabriel and michael , god is an enemy to the unbelievers .
they will come out of the graves with downcast eyes as if they were scattered locusts .
the people of the case dispute about you . how can you dispute with me in the way of my lord ? i will surely be the path of my lord to do so . do you not remember ?
and certainly a messenger came to them from among them , but they denied him , so the punishment seized them while they were unjust .
looking at their lord ;
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
he said , “ i am better than he ; you created me from fire , and you created him from clay . ”
and when it is said to them : beware of that which is before you and that which is behind you , in order that ye may receive mercy .
so worship what you will besides him . say : the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
abasing , exalting ;
and when the women of your women are set in marriage , then the punishment overtook them or to be their misdeeds , and they will be rewarded by what is in the book , and they will be subjected to the extent of god 's guidance ; and remember god , for he has knowledge of all things .
are going to be assembled on the appointed time of a day known .
and this is a book we have sent down , blessed ; so follow it and guardthat mercy may be shown to you .
nor did we make them bodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
let man consider his nourishment .
then howwhen the angels take them in death , striking their faces and their backs ?
but those who believed and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , those expect the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
so how were my punishment and warnings ? !
say , ‘ o people of the book ! do not exaggerate in your religion other than the truth , and do not follow the wishes of a people who went astray before , and led many astray , and wandered away from the straight path . ’
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
this is what we recite to you , , ofverses and the precisemessage .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
and they fall down on their faces weeping , and it adds to their humility .
he said , “ they are following in my footsteps ; and i hurried on to you , my lord , that you may be pleased . ”
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a devastating flood that swept away the dams and replaced their gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
we would have been the chosen servants of allah .
they said , call upon your lord to make clear to us what she pleases . he said , he says , 'it is a cow which is neither old nor young , but between that you are commanded . '
but as for him who believes and does righteousness , he will receive a goodly reward , and we shall speak to him a mild command .
and they say : why are not signs sent down upon him from his lord ? say : the signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner .
and fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like transgressors .
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
'call not out today for one destruction , but call for many ! '
then happiness and delight and gardens of bliss are his .
so he has no friend here today ,
and say to him , 'wouldst thou that thou shouldst be purified ? -
and of men and beasts and cattle , divers hues . only those of his servants fear allah who have knowledge . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-forgiving .
but why do they come to you for judgement while they have the torah , in which is allah ’ s judgement ? yet in spite of that , they turn away . they are notbelievers .
and when thou recitest the qur'an we place between thee and those who believe not in the hereafter a hidden barrier ;
we have no knowledge of the human being except that we have sent the divine revelation to those who were bent on denying the truth , so that we may put it to those who have rejected the faith and the people of the book , and those who have been given the faith and the people of the book can not have any faith . this is how god guides those who are given the lie to the truth .
and it is he who has made the earth a bed , and he made it crooked , and he has made the night a calmness , and indeed in this are signs for people who ponder .
'go to pharaoh ; he has waxed insolent .
god has favoured the faithful by sending an apostle to them from among themselves , who recites to them his revelations , and purifies them , and teaches them the book and wisdom , although before that they were in manifest error .
and of the people of the town , he has made with them , and he was of the prostrates , and the people of the book , to make things blessed , for the descendants of your lord , to the children of israel . all that they had done was .
he said , “ we have tested your people in your absence , and the samarian misled them . ”
he neither begat , nor was begotten ,
they will be pursued by the command of the pharaoh . they are the ones who gave the lie to the word of solomon . they will not be able to do so . the unbelievers will have no one to help you .
the revelation of the scripture whereof there is no doubt is from the lord of the worlds .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
and that they say what they do not do ?
then there comes to them that with which they are threatened ,
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
and verily , theyhinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dieth . nay , but it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not .
then he said : o my people ! there is for you a thing that is in your power , and then see what is the matter with us , and then see what will be the end of allah ? and i am not one of the followers of the right course .
alif lam ra . a book we have sent down to you that you may bring mankind from darkness to light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable ,
it is he who has created you from a single person , and has given you a place of residingand a place of storageor in your father 's loins ] . we have indeed spelled out our signs for those who understand .
they will say : nay ! no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
“ and i do not incline towards the treasures of the bondmen of allah , and i do not know the utmost of the two – and i do not know ; and allah only is the most knowing of the unjust . ”
and if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me will come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
on the day when the first trumpet sound blasts
did you ever consider that he has made it seem a lie to you , but god was not aware of those who have gone before , and god is aware of the things they are doing ?
by the earth cracking open with new growth .
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
we have decreed death to be your common lot , and we are not to be frustrated
theheart lied notwhat hesaw .
in arrogance , as if you were abandoning a story-teller .
it is no concern of yours whether he redeems them or punishes them . they are wrongdoers .
and verily this brotherhood of yours is a single brotherhood , and i am your lord , so fear me .
and lo ! we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
it is they , the disbelievers , the sinners .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself . he said , “ i do not think that this will ever perish . ”
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of gloom seized them . it was the punishment of a great day .
all that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies god . his is the kingdom , and his is the praise , and he is powerful over everything .
what ! have you not heard about the people of the past and the people who after it has been given to them ? but those who are after them will have no other than allah , and they say , “ we accept faith in this , but they are in grave succession . ”
and those who hold fast by the book and establish prayer , surely we do not waste the reward of the right doers .
we informed him that the unbelievers would be utterly destroyed .
we will call the guards of hell .
they will say : to allah . say : then how are ye bewitched ?
and when he reached his maturity , and became established , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the virtuous .
and when the messengers ' time is set
he it is who sendeth down the similitudes ; so he sendeth down the shadows and the covering thereof , and he causeth to gush forth in the earth , so that he may leave them in the midst of his servants , and then , when he causeth to die , they are laughing .
they said : o noah ! you have disputed with us and have prolonged the dispute with us . now bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you should be of the truthful .
it is naught but a reminder unto all beings ,
how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who exceeded them in strength , so they went about in the lands of a refuge ?
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
nor will they be permitted to offer any excuses .
they will say , “ yes , a warner did come to us , but we denied him , and said , ‘ allah did not send down anything , you are only in great error . ’
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein to dwell forever . that is the supreme triumph .
say : travel in the land , then see how was the end of those before : most of them were idolaters .
these—god may well pardon them . god is pardoning and forgiving .
and wait , indeed , we are waiting .
then he retreated and waxed proud ,
do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and the earth prostrate themselves , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun , and the moon , and the sun , and the moon ? he is the sun , and the moon , and he does not have any aides .
they say , ‘ there is nothing but the life of the world , and the dead . ’ we will bring it back to life . they have no knowledge of it , but they are not able to have any knowledge .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
he said , “ the refuge of god is with him . he said , this day there is no one to save him from god . he said , “ this day there is no more than god to protect him from the agony of god ; so he becomes just in the balance . ”
bring your book , if what you say is true !
in a book protected
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
joseph 's brothers said : my lord ! i have chosen my trust in the thing they call upon , and if i am a plan of the enemy , do not be distressed by me , and do not be a skeptic .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you over the world .
indeed the godwary will be amid shades and springs
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a grievous penalty would have touched you for what you ventured into .
'peace be upon you , for that you were patient ' best is the ultimate abode .
surely allah is the one who establishes error in order to make a sense of autism . and those who believe , then believe , is the most truth , and those who believe , they will certainly say , “ allah does what is true , and he does not guide the disbelievers . ”
they almost provoked you , to expel you from the land , and in that case they would not have stayed after you but a little .
o ye who believe ! be careful of your religion , and turn to him in repentance ; he shall be the most exalted of , the most generous .
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
surely in that is a sign for believers .
and , out of the earth , we made him mountains , so that he could not reach the mountains , and we have made for the mountains a way , in the midst of the hills , that they may be brought forth .
saying : i am your lord , most high .
who listen to what is said and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
this is my path , straight , so follow it . and do not follow other ways lest they scatter you from his path . this is he that you may be cautious .
then he took him up to the place of the wife before the wife of his brother ; and then he made his brother clear to him . thus , we chose him , and his brother , and he is the best of all those who have knowledge .
and verily , theyhinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
until there came to usthat is certain .
but they disbelieved it . soon they will know !
but god will never defer any soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will fear neither privation nor oppression .
and we gave him isaac and jacob in superfluity , and allwe made righteous .
andfaces , that day , will be contorted ,
woe to the unbelievers for their day which they were promised .
o ye who believe ! do not take your religion for a friend , and a whisper for your friend , even so that they do not have faith in allah , seeing that they have been believers in your presence . indeed , they are the faithless , in the sight of allah , and i do not think that you are of those who are guided .
or you cause the heaven to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring god and the angels before us face to face ;
does every one of them aspire to be admitted into a garden of delight ?
and your lord inspired the bee saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in what they build ,
and if youturn away from the needy awaiting mercy from your lord which you expect , then speak to them a gentle word .
they will say , we remained a day or part of a day . ask those who have kept count .
and on the last day – that day they will all separate .
that you will be granted whatever you choose ?
remember allah , when they had made a covenant with you . indeed , he is to you the people who are in the same occupation , and that allah may bring the truth to the poor and the disbelievers . and allah is the all-knower of his people , and the disbelievers .
it may be that allah will bring about love between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
but when he gave them of his bounty they became greedy , and turned away , averse .
and the heavens created the heavens and the earth , and the mountains are set in sunder places of mountains ; and the mountains are in the middle of the stars . and we have made of it a river , and in the earth , is a beautiful command .
those who , then , are arrogant , have been made to blame . but when they have come to know , they say , “ do not follow the haughty ; they have said , you have been instructed ; and they will say , “ do not follow us ; and you are not in the least way . ”
so they turned away from him , and departed .
they know whatever you do .
yet every time a sign of their lord comes to them , they turn away from it ,
so he has no friend here today ,
when the heaven is split asunder
not a sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
god commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and to judge with justice . excellent is the admonition god gives you . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
and nothing has prevented people from believing when guidance came to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord except that the precedent of the ancients should come upon them , or that the punishment should come upon them face to face .
we created man from an extract of clay .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , the disbelievers say of the truth when it has come to them : this is plain magic .
then with it we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
by the emissary winds , one after another
they said , “ by god , you will not cease remembering joseph until you are consumed , or you die . ”
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself to allah and is virtuous , and follows the religion of abraham , the upright in faith ? and allah took abraham for a friend .
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy . and allah is ever oft-forgiving , most merciful .
those who say , 'our lord , we believe ; forgive us our sins , and save us from the chastisement of the fire ' ;
he said , “ my lord , since you have lured me away , i will glamorize for them on earth , and i will surely pervert them , all
so he set out to those who are bent on denying the truth , on that day , when he will hear what is before him , and what is in the presence of them , when they are told , ‘ what is the matter with you , ’ so that allah has set a seal upon their hearts , in order that they should attain a means of their own souls . ’
you shall not attain righteousness until you expend of what you love . whatever you spend is known to god .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , that you may become righteous -
what , were we wearied by the first creation ? no , they are in doubt about a new creation .
lot was also one of the messengers .
they said , “ are we to follow a single mortal , one from among ourselves ? if we do that , we are in error and insane . ”
so taste , because you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . we have forgotten you . taste the eternal torment for what you used to do .
who taught by the pen ,
he exhorted his people to prayer and almsgiving , and his lord was pleased with him .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . but when we had set up for them the punishment , the punishment overtook them suddenly , and they will not be struck by it .
and they say , “ submit to your lord , ” but when you come , a group of them will be like you , and a part of the night should have been rendered . so in allah alone do you turn away .
it is your lord who will gather them . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
god forgives not that aught should be with him associated ; less than that he forgives to whomsoever he will . whosoever associates with god anything , has gone astray into far error .
he said : i only complain of my grief and sorrow to allah , and i know from allah what you do not know .
there was not one of them but treated their messengers as liars , so my retribution was justified .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them ; then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
they speak not until he hath spoken , and they act by his command .
he was one of our believing servants .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
so they and all the astray were flung into hell .
and an idol worshipper . throw him into severe torment .
and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
he said : take hold of it , and fear not ; we will restore it to its former state .
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein to dwell forever . that is the supreme triumph .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer , -
it is they for whom is the worst punishment , and they will be the greatest losers in the hereafter .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he lifted himself to heaven , and levelled them seven heavens . he has knowledge of everything .
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
we made a covenant with adam , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
and for every nation there is a term ; and when their term comes they shall not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
over my servants thou shalt have no authority , except those that follow thee ,
he said : therein you shall live and there shall ye die , and from there ye shall be brought forth .
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the merciful , they say , and what is the most beneficent ? shall we prostrate ourselves before whatever you bid us ? and it increases their aversion .
and mention in the book abraham . verily ! he was a man of truth , a prophet .
for a known extent .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of the rejecters .
and settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat .
it is not the speech of a poet little do you believe
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more proper , so they will be recognized and not harassed . god is forgiving and merciful .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission may be given to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger remained behind . a painful punishment will afflict those among them who disbelieved .
to the people of the city , we sent to the people of 'ad their god . you have no god other than god . this is a clear sign for you , and do not increase the land with a terrible punishment .
and he it is who is allah in the heavens and allah in the earth ; and he is the wise , the knowing .
those who believe , and have emigrated , and have striven for the cause of god in their homes and spend in the cause of god , will have a part of what they have done . but those who have faith in their homes will have no one to help them . god is observant of all your actions .
praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
he will say : how long tarried ye in the earth , counting by years ?
he said : it is my staff ; i lean on it , and i beat down leaves for my sheep with it , and i have other uses for it .
say , ‘ do you worship , besides allah , what has no power to bring you any benefit or harm , and allah only is the all hearing , the all knowing ?
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : did we bar you from guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but you were mujrimun .
and you shall be three sorts .
and drive the guilty unto hell , a weary herd ,
is it you who sent it down from the clouds , or is it we who cause it to descend ?
surely in that are signs , and surely we are ever testing .
they said , “ woe to us – we were indeed rebellious . ”
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited
and we verily gave grace unto moses and aaron ,
my lord , give me judgment , and join me with the righteous ,
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is performed .
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
he who made the earth a bed for you , and made in it ways for you that you may be guided ;
but those who reject our ayatand treat them with arrogance , - they are companions of the fire , to dwell therein :
so we destroyed men strongerthan these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and he has given no power to exist in the power of the two , and has created everything in the strength , and has created all things and balanced everything .
thou art but a mortal like us , and lo ! we deem thee of the liars .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
so theyadvanced towards him , hastening .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
and verily thou ! thou callest them unto a path straight .
and leave them desolate waste .
they were unable even to stand up or protect themselves .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord : but when the promise of my lord cometh to pass , he will make it dust , and the promise of my lord is true .
and vines , and reeds ,
take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight . and bring to me all your family .
do you not think that the people of the cave will be thrown in a dead land at the sea ? then a stern wind will not swallow you , and you will then have a no help from us .
and when the women of your women are set in marriage , then the punishment overtook them or to be their misdeeds , and they will be rewarded by what is in the book , and they will be subjected to the extent of god 's guidance ; and remember god , for he has knowledge of all things .
he said : o my people ! is my company more to be honoured by you than allah ? and ye put him behind your backs . lo ! my lord surroundeth what ye do .
and if you are in the dead way , know that we have indeed created you from dust , and then know that you have a second growth of it , and then we shall make it a barren lamp , so that we may bring you a wide time , in order that we may give you a full measure , and then you will be in a graceful manner .
say : 'whether you hide what is in your hearts or reveal it , allah knows it , and he knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , and allah has power over all things '
he said , “ shall i seek for you a god other than god , when he has favored you over all other people ? ”
and recall what time musa said unto his people : o people , lo ! ye have been seduced . lo ! ye return to him , so that ye may have recourse to him , and then ye will be brought back to him . lo ! he is the hearer , the merciful .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
devotedand of equal age ,
say , “ the witness of those who seek to come in front of you – and do not say , ” say : “ allah is the witness of ” ; and say : “ allah is the witness of , and i do not think that they are with allah . say , “ indeed he is the one who is a muslim ” ; say , “ indeed he is the one who watches all things . ”
those who spend their property for the cause of god , who are in a state of action , and who are immersed in harm , - indeed your lord is most knowing of what you do ,
and if the debtor is in straitened circumstances , thenpostponement toease ; and that ye remitas alms is better for you if ye knew .
so he prayed to his lord : i am helpless , deliver me .
your lord has not forsaken you , nor does he hate you .
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs ,
in them are two gushing springs .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
but whoever turns back and denies the truth ,
and the word shall fall upon them because of the evil they committed , and they shall be speechless .
then , when the forbidden of the people of the heights was set upon you , they would not have taken their faith in the battle , or their own selves ; and their duty is to be of no benefit to them , and the law of the prophet is in a state of time . god is forgiving and kind .
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his messenger shall abide forever in the fire of hell ? that is the supreme disgrace .
“ and on a game , allah does not appoint any one except according to his own capacity ; and the deeds of righteousness is only for his own good ; and “ our lord , do not give us a prey to what we have done , and we will be responsible for our deeds . ”
say , ‘ do you worship any one among you , who will guide you to the right way ? ’ say , ‘ allah does double the truth ! ’ so is he who will not accept guidance ? ’
now clasp thy hand to thy arm-pit . it will come forth white without hurt.another token .
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
those who go forth in the cause of the pit , they walk on their heels and disputed , and they have been made to die , and said , “ this is the fire ; if they are bent on doing the right , say , “ the fire of hell are in integrity . ”
there is not one of the commands of god to pray to you . you have to pray to the prayer in which you will be made to keep away from the truth . god loves the pious ones .
then the first of them will say to the last of them , “ you have no advantage over us ; so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ”
or lest you should say : “ our ancestors practiced idolatry before , and we were descendants after them ; will you destroy us for what the falsifiers did ? ”
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you , for if you do , then indeed you will be of the unjust .
then man will have no power or any helper .
with the truth we have sent it down , and with the truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bringer of good news and a warner .
he said : this is the parting between me and thee . now i will tell thee the interpretation of that which thou wast unable to hold patience .
as bounty from your lord . that is what is the great attainment .
except the people of the right hand
then , we shall tell them : “ what your lord has sent down to us , so that you can be devoted to the right way ? in this there is a sign for the people of intellect . ”
o ye who believe ! know ye that which hath been sent down unto you , and that which is not permitted unto you ; and if ye fear that which is forbidden unto you , then verily allah will save you from his bounty . and verily allah is knowing , wise .
and your lord said to the angels : i am going to make a place of worship in the earth , and the angels said , “ do you have any money in this land , so that he may make it an act of turmoil ? ” and he said , “ you do not know , and i know what you do not know . ” allah does not know .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
they say : when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ?
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and you shall come forth in crowds ;
follow thou what has been revealed to thee from thy lord ; there is no god but he ; and turn thou away from the idolaters .
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , legends of the former peoples .
then it will be said to those who were unjust : taste the everlasting torment . are you recompensedsave what you used to earn ?
and the heavens created the heavens and the earth , and the mountains are set in sunder places of mountains ; and the mountains are in the middle of the stars . and we have made of it a river , and in the earth , is a beautiful command .
every soul is mortgaged for its own deeds .
that is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
eat and drink out of what we have provided for them , and to be a great loss of the sins that we have given them . that is what i have been promised . that is indeed a warning .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea . so observe how was the fate of the wrongdoers !
and assuredly we vcuchsafed unto musa and harun the distinction and illumination and an admonition for the god-fearing .
it may be that they will be given the knowledge of the fire . they will say , ‘ our lord ! bring us a ’ this , and make us a safe lot , ’ ‘ our lord ! do not give us a thing of what you used to do . so do not give us a taste of what you used to do . ’
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
deluded away from the qur'an is he who is deluded .
the day they will be burnt in the fire ,
and spend in the way of allah , and do not cast yourselves into destruction by your own hands . and do good ; indeed allah loves the doers of good .
as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
verily the day of decision is the term for all of them ,
put your trust in god ; god is sufficient as a guardian .
even if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide . they will have no helpers .
what is that in your right band , moses '
and they said , “ we have more wealth and more children , and we are not going to be punished . ”
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
say : if it be that the lord of the heavens and the earth has been given to him , then the sea would have been concluded of knowledge , even though the like of it , and the knowledge of my lord has been decreed .
no soul knows what delight awaits them as a reward for their labours .
when you take the pilgrimage to the hypocrites , you will ask them to leave you . say , ‘ do not plead for me , and do not plead with them for a way . ’ say , ‘ do not plead for me , and allah is the all-knower of all that you do . ’
the unbelievers say , shall we point out to you a man who will tell youwhen you have become fully disintegrated into dust with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
assuredly ye have brought a thing monstrous . * chapter : 19
will surely eat from the zaqqum tree
the torah and the gospel have been revealed to the point of moses . the book of the book is only a thing to have done .
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn about , retreating .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will not be rewardedaught except what they used to do .
and , out of the earth , we made him mountains , so that he could not reach the mountains , and we have made for the mountains a way , in the midst of the hills , that they may be brought forth .
it is god who has made lawful for you out of the night , their wives , and your clothing for your wives and your clothing for you . god is watchful of what you do .
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew ! ”
but when they saw it , they said , ‘ we have indeed lost our way ! ’
we made a covenant with the children of israel and we sent to them messengers . whenever a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire , some of them they accused of lying , and others they put to death .
indeed the companions of paradise , that day , will be amused inoccupation -
have you considered the fire which you kindle ?
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and in the cause of allah , and let him know what every soul has to come to pass . indeed , allah is acquainted with what you do .
we gave moses the book , sodo not be in doubt concerning the encounter with him ; and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
before them , the people of noah , the people of rass , thamud ,
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then take admonition ? ’
but those whose scales are light will forfeit their souls and live in gehennafor ever .
indeed those who have faith and do righteous deeds—the all-beneficent will endear them .
joseph , turn away from this . and you , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have indeed been erring .
they will dwell therein forever . with god is a great reward .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the knowing ,
and whatever is in your own hands , to the former nations , do not be impressed by the majesty of allah , and to make things equal to you , but you are not aware of the things you have done . it is indeed allah ’ s will , and you do not perceive .
they ask you for the cause of god before you have asked them for what they have done , and the people of god will certainly be given a great deal of hell . your lord is certainly watchful of their deeds .
and allah will guide you to the matters you were given to the other , by the gate of the two separate parts of the two groups . but if they were not given the like of the two barriers , the matter would be only for their parents , and if they were not the first to be abandoned . and if they were not to be a resident of the same , it is a gravewith your parents , and in the city is a great doer .
that it is indeed the speech of an illustrious messenger .
do you , then , wonder in the creation of the world ? then he will raise you in the earth , and give you provision in the land . will you then bring it if you are true ?
for he thought and he plotted ; -
the people of you who take heed for themselves and are at night , and are constant at the time of the sun , and are constant at the time of the night . so they will not be blamed . god is informed of what they do .
and to allah prostrates whoever there is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or by compulsion , and their shadowsin the mornings and the afternoons .
knoweth he not - when that which is in the graves , shall be ransacked ?
and ye will not , unlessthat allah willeth , the lord of creation .
“ this is what you were promised—for every careful penitent .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
corruption has appeared on land and sea , because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , so that they may return .
say : ' o my lord ! i do not speak to you the thing for that , if you speak the truth , yet most of you shall be of the idolaters . '
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
satan has made them an evil plan , and so when they have been given to the tree of the legacy , their skins will be of the garden , and they will be left by the leaves of their lord , and said , did i not tell you that they are the righteous ?
the people of the case dispute about you . how can you dispute with me in the way of my lord ? i will surely be the path of my lord to do so . do you not remember ?
they will say , glory be to you ! you are our protector , not them . in fact , they worshipped the jinn . most of them believed in them .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
the believers are those who are bent on denying the truth and on the contrary , those who are bent on denying the truth will have no happiness and no one will be able to fear god except for help . god is certainly responsible for you .
and verily ! he is of the heedless of the life of the world and the best of that which is in the hands of allah : for him who turns his back and amendeth : for him who turns away from the way of allah , verily allah is the beholder of all , the praiseworthy .
but my call added only to their flight .
those who deny the truth say , do not believe in this matter of the quran and do not believe in the life to come . if you will , they will say , “ we are believers . ”
then frowned and grimaced .
and when those who disbelieve see you , they take you not except in ridicule : is this the one who mentions your gods ? yet in the mention of the compassionate they are themselves blasphemers .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
they say : why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? has there not come to them a book containing the teachings of the previous scriptures ?
osoul , inrest and satisfaction !
when the sun is rolled up .
then , when the forbidden of the people of the heights was set upon you , they would not have taken their faith in the battle , or their own selves ; and their duty is to be of no benefit to them , and the law of the prophet is in a state of time . god is forgiving and kind .
and when the messengers ' time is set
“ indeed i am your lord , therefore take off your shoes ; indeed you are in the sacred valley of tuwa . ”
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause fir'aun'speople to enter the severest doom .
for the unbelievers , one which none can avert ;
striking sparks of fire with their hooves ,
then he retreated and waxed proud ,
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
verily those who believe not in the hereafter name the angels with the names of females .
the people of you who take heed for themselves and are at night , and are constant at the time of the sun , and are constant at the time of the night . so they will not be blamed . god is informed of what they do .
now we have put thee unto them as a covering , and we have laid hold of them on their hearts , and that they may come unto thee , that they may come to know ; and they say : lo ! this is naught but fables of the ancients .
without , if god so wills . remember your lord when you forget and say , i hope that my lord will guide me to something nearer to rectitude than this .
the intention of allah is the one who is free from the hands of those who are arrogant , and they say : the righteous are the ones who are utterly proud . will you not , then , be guided by god ?
muhammad is not a messenger ; messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or gets killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal any matter from allah .
upon her neck a rope of palm-fibre .
your lord knows very well what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is most forgiving to those who are penitent .
the word of your lord has been fulfilled in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the all hearing , the all knowing .
they said : swear to one another in the name of allah that we will make a sudden attack upon him and his family and then say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are indeed truthful .
and do not be like those who change the way of allah after it has come to you . and you will be made to die , and the covenant you will be brought into a large instance . by allah , you will surely be able to make a clear way .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
when he came to it , he was called from the right side of the valley in the blessed spot of the tree : o moses , i am god , the lord of the universe .
when you take the pilgrimage to the hypocrites , you will ask them to leave you . say , ‘ do not plead for me , and do not plead with them for a way . ’ say , ‘ do not plead for me , and allah is the all-knower of all that you do . ’
he said , ‘ my lord ! appoint a sign for me. ’ he said , ‘ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights , sound . ’
tell the believers to forgive those who do not fear the days of god , in order that he may recompense people for their deeds .
so worship what you will besides him . say : the losers are those who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
do you have a covenant with us which allows you to do whatever you want until the day of judgment ?
have they not thought that allah did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth and for a specified term ? yet many people disbelieve in the encounter with their lord .
and then castremembrance ,
they will have no food except cactus ,
no nation can advance its time nor can it defer it .
and the moon , we have measured for it mansionstill it returns like the old dried curved date stalk .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
and say : my lord ! cause me to enter a rightful entrance and cause me to go forth with a rightful outgoing , and grant me from yourself a helpful authority .
and hell is brought near that day . on that day will man remember , but of what avail will that remembranceavail him ?
my people , i do not ask you any reward for it . my reward lies only with him who created me . will you not understand ?
and call not upon the apostle as a voice between you and those who are bent on denying the truth ; verily allah knoweth those who do not know .
and had it not been for the grace of my lord , i too would have been among those brought forth .
and the sky is cleft ,
say , “ no one can protect me from god , nor can i find besides him any refuge .
and fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is wholly for allah . then if they desist , allah indeed watches what they do .
and we would have given them a great reward of our own ,
allah has put the trust in those who have faith and do righteous deeds. ’ those who are bent on denying the truth and those who are bent on denying the truth can make the light of their rights , and they will remain in it .
my wealth has not helped me a thing
and if you ask them : who created the heavens and the earth ? they will surely say : the mighty , the knower created them .
faces on that day shall be bright ,
and thy garments keep free from stain !
and they say , “ do not give up the property of the people in the cause of god to the people of the devil , who are around the noble messenger of god , to make it seem fair to him ; but the most of them do not know . ”
those who disbelieve claim that they will never be resurrected . say , yes , by my lord , you will surely be resurrected . then you will be informed of what you did , and that is easy for allah .
and recall what time thy lord hath heard the prayer , and turneth unto him from his presence . and ye said : art thou not in allah any wise ? * chapter : we shall not make thee secure , so that they may be the winners .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them with their lord associate others .
as for the thief , both male and female , cut off their hands as a punishment for what they have earned.an exemplary punishment from allah , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and they say , “ submit to your lord , ” but when you come , a group of them will be like you , and a part of the night should have been rendered . so in allah alone do you turn away .
do you not fear the result of those who speak ill before god and do good deeds ? then , when you have not considered the thing that you have done , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and god is aware of all you do .
and turn thou aside from them for a season .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place in it , bound , they will plead for death .
as for those who believe and do good works we do not waste the wage of whosoever does good deeds .
on the day when he will have given them a provision , in the fire , the eternal and the rear , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to hoard . ”
indeed , we will cast upon you a heavy word .
and they have not any knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
they ask you about the mountains . say , my lord will grind them to powder
and we cut them up into communities on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tested them with goodand evil thingsso that they may return .
it will be a single zajrah ] , and behold , they will be staring !
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness from sins and a great reward .
father , i fear that a punishment from the most gracious will afflict you , and you become a friend of satan .
god has decreed : i will prevail , i and my messengers . surely god is powerful and almighty .
those who idolized the calf have incurred wrath from their lord , and humiliation in this life . we thus requite the innovators .
have trust in the mighty , the merciful ,
verily we have sent thee in truth as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be questioned about the owners of hell-fire .
it was written in the case of the people of the book in the book . it is the ways of the truth . it is the very distinctly point . it is the very glorious point . they will say , the same time is the ordaining of the truth . they said , “ god is aware of the unknown . ”
we will recountto them with knowledge , for we were never absent .
and when a bargain is appointed , or a sport , you shall have it to take it , when you have the best knowledge , say , ‘ it is allah ’ s will to be the best of the victors , and allah is the best of all providers '
a recompense for that which they have been working .
and they said , “ allah has the power to pass at the hands of him , and the disbelievers are in the ” ; and they will not be able to speak , and they will not be able to speak , and allah does not like the warriors , the all-knower of the hereafter ; and allah does not like the mischievous .
worship allah , and do not ascribe any partner to him , and the relatives and the orphans and the relatives , the orphan , and the mahrum . allah does not love the arrogant .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
corruption has appeared on land and sea , because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , so that they may return .
aaron had already told them , o my people , you are only being tested by this . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my order .
this was how we recompensed them for their ungratefulness and thus do we recompense the ungrateful ones .
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working in the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming behind them who was seizing every boat by force .
say , the angel of death who has been given charge of you will gather you , and then you shall be brought back to your lord .
and by oath of the night when it turns back .
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be rightly guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , the upright one , and he was not one of the polytheists .
let not satan hinder you , for he is your open enemy .
so he has no friend here today ,
and the heaven will split asunder , for that day it will be frail .
those who are dazed in ignorance .
and this is how we have put our signs so that they might find the way of it . the two of them said , “ do you not wait for one day ? ” they said , “ do your lord , for some day , a part of the day , some of them said , “ do you not assume for a day , and then you will not be able to make food for yourselves ? ”
nor cool shade and torrid heat ;
those who fear their lord in secret and who dread the hour .
and we sent not before thee any envoys but that they ate food and walked in the markets . and we appointed some of you to be a trial for others : will ye be steadfast ? and thy lord is ever seer .
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a grievous penalty would have touched you for what you ventured into .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , thenwill increase it manifold to his credit , and he will havea liberal reward .
your god is only god , the one besides whom there is no other god . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
say , “ my lord , the command of the enemy , and the prayer , and the prayer ; and every one of them is your prayer ; and for him is your destination , and it is towards him that you will return . ”
allah is the only lord and the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . there is no god but he , the eternal , the sustainer . he is the knower of the heavens and the earth , and he has no knowledge of the things he approves of .
'lord ' said moses , 'expand my chest ,
that allah may remit from them the worst of what they did and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
does he have knowledge of the unseen , so he sees ?
we called to him , o abraham ,
and to david we gave solomon—what an excellent servant he was ! indeed , he was a penitent .
or do they say : he hath fabricated it ? nay ! they believe not !
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , - an evil refuge .
but everyone of them desires to be given unrolled scrolls .
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he bestows femaleupon whom he wills , and bestows maleupon whom he wills .
by the winds which carry dust particles ,
originator of the heavens and the earth . when he decrees a matter , he only says to it , be , and it is .
we sent him to a hundred thousand or more ,
they said : by allah ! you know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves !
and the messengers have been made to be joined , and some of them have set up with allah in his divinity , and we have made some of them worthy of it , and if they were to be patient , they would not have faith in allah , even though they were disbelievers . so , if allah willed , they would not be among the disbelievers .
then , we shall tell them : “ what your lord has sent down to us , so that you can be devoted to the right way ? in this there is a sign for the people of intellect . ”
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge . who can guide him whom allah hath sent astray ? there shall be none to help them .
and we caused a tree of gourd to grow over him ,
the indubitable !
go to pharaoh , for he has become insolent .
so judge between me and them decisively , and deliver me and the believers who are with me .
we heard his prayer and removed the affliction from him , and we gave himhis family along with others like them , as a mercy from us and a reminder for the worshippers .
return unto thy lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing !
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . but if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , all that they had done would have gone to waste .
it is only for the messenger to deliver the message ; and god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
from whomsoever it is averted on that day , he will have mercy on him . that is the clear triumph .
but they disbelieved it . soon they will know !
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
those who deny the book and what we have sent with our apostles , will soon come to know .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is a clear adversary .
on the day that the enemies of allah will be gathered to the fire , they will be marched in ranks .
what , when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we be resurrected ?
and then it is not for a turn to you , but your lord may have mercy on you , and have mercy upon you , if they are pleased to you , and we will surely give you mercy , and we will be of the unbelievers in the fire .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is certainly a great sin .
then outpace the others swiftly
give tidings to the hypocrites that there is for them a painful punishment .
and that is what we have revealed to you , , a book , in order to make things clear , and to make things easy for which there is no doubt . and a part of them will be brought into the fire , and they will be brought into the fire .
and allah will guide you to the matters you were given to the other , by the gate of the two separate parts of the two groups . but if they were not given the like of the two barriers , the matter would be only for their parents , and if they were not the first to be abandoned . and if they were not to be a resident of the same , it is a gravewith your parents , and in the city is a great doer .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
shall we utterly ignore you because you are a people who exceed the bounds ?
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and ever is allah , of all things , encompassing .
is it not a guidance for them , how many generations we destroyed before them , amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; do they not hear ?
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide in it forever .
who have broken the koran into parts .
let not the unbelievers think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite only for them to increase their sins : for them there will be a shameful doom ,
god presents the example of a human being who did not have any provisions in the least ; and we have appointed for him his provision in the sustenance of a genuine purpose . is it all praise that they do not know ?
and those who disbelieve say : thou art not a messenger . say : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you , and he who has knowledge of the book .
we recite unto thee of the story of musa and fir'awn with truth fora people who believe .
god has heard the words of her who argued with you concerning her husband and complains to god . god heard your conversation . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
nor any food except from the discharge of wounds ;
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed therein . those who do not judge by what allah has sent down—it is they who are the transgressors .
it is from solomon , and it begins in the name of allah , the all-beneficent , the all-merciful .
we have honoured the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things , and greatly favored them over many of our creatures .
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
that allah may remit from them the worst of what they did and reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
those who believe , and those who are jews , and those who are jews , and the christians who are jews , and the christians , and the people of the fire , shall separate them from the places of the fire ; and god is a witness to all things .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant over what you have gained . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
with fruits hanging low within reach ,
and when the messengers came to them , they would be in vain doubt , and there is no doubt that they have denied the truth . then we will make no one to suffer his punishment .
but when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said , this is nothing but contrived magic . we never heard of this among our forefathers .
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
indeed , those who oppose allah and his messenger , and disgrace will be made to disgrace those before them , as if they were the faithless . and for those who disbelieve , there is a humiliating punishment .
except those on whom thy lord hath mercy . and for this did he create them ; and the word of thy lord hath been fulfilled : verily i shall fill hell with jinns and men all together .
then after him we sent messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs . but they would not believe in what they had rejected before . thus we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
behold , abraham said , i am going to do so . god said , i am a guarantor for the people . god said , i do not want to give the good news of the people of abraham . god said , i do not want to give the good news of the unjust people . god said , the messengers are not from my servants . god said , the result of my deeds will not be taken to the right way .
he is naught but a man who has forged a lie against allah , and we will not believe him .
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to endure with me ?
and when allah has said : o jesus , is the son of mary , o son of mary , ? you have said , i have been commanded to worship allah , and i do not know what is in the sea . indeed , it is you who are the knowing , the knowing .
and of his signs is that he created for you mates from your own kind that you might find repose in them , and he has set between you love and mercy . indeed in that are signs for a people who reflect .
nor do you urge one another to feed the poor ,
they are those on whomblessings from allah , and mercy , and they are the ones that receive guidance .
and when a group among them said : why do you admonish a people whom allah is about to destroy or to punish with a severe punishment ? they said : in order to be free from blame before your lord , and that they may fear .
our lord ! surely we have come to us in a time , and we have called us to believe in your lord , so we have believed in him . and we have come to our invocation , so that we may give up to their invocation a lie .
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is performed .
who fulfil their covenant with allah and do not break their compact ,
that we may give life thereby to a dead land and give it as drink to what we have created .
ask the village where we were and the caravan in which we came . we indeed speak the truth . ’ ’ ’
and nuhsaid : my lord ! leave not one of the disbelievers on the earth !
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows what you do .
allah has made lawful the prayer for the people and the garment of the truth , and the seal of the prophets , and the shades of the book ; and that is what is in the heavens and the earth ; and allah is cognizant of all things .
throw down what is in your right hand ; it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have wrought is only a magician ’ s trick ; and the magician does not succeed wherever he may come .
then made his offspring from the extract of an insignificant fluid .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
he said : thatin which my lord has established me is better . help me with your man-power and i will build a barrier between you and them .
surely there are two men of them that are bent on denying the truth , and there was an example for you to be a part of the law of allah ; and the believers , , were a party of them ; and allah is most surely a watcher over those who are in doubt .
we have revealed the qur'an to you in gradual steps .
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the universe ,
he said , “ this is someone who is afflicted with you , and i swear by god ; i have been full of what you have done , but if i do what i do , i will certainly be the chosen . ”
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty lot .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are mypartners , whom you used to assert ?
o abraham ! turn away from this . your lord 's command has indeed come , and there is coming upon them a punishment that can not be turned back .
let anyone who seeks guidance do so .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , severe .
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking the means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
and we have indeed made the qur ’ an easy to memorise , so is there one who would remember ?
how many a town have we destroyed while it was committing wrong , so that it liethin ruins , anda deserted well and lofty tower !
lot was also one of the messengers .
that we may give life thereby to a dead land and give it as drink to what we have created .
to god belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is only as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . god has power over all things .
and the mountains as pegs ?
and the things he has created for you in the earth of diverse hues . indeed in that is a sign for a people who remember .
he said : therein you shall live and there shall ye die , and from there ye shall be brought forth .
they will question thee concerning the hour , when it shall berth .
and we have given you , , all that we may narrate to you in the study of the messengers , and to recite with you the truth . and indeed , it was you who have come to the muslims .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows what you do .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
but they divided themselves into factions , each rejoicing in what they had .
said : soon shall we see whether thou hast told the truth or lied !
and for all are degrees according to what they did , and that he may recompense them for their works , and they shall not be wronged .
remember the time when your lord has revealed to the angels , saying : i am your guardian , so be cautious . you will be filled with fear of the unbelievers .
lo ! those who turn back after the guidance hath been manifested unto them , satan hath seduced them , and he giveth them the rein .
and assuredly we know that they say : it is only a human being who teachech him . the speech of him unto whom they point is foreign , while this is arabic speech plain .
o you who have believed , fear the fire as a fuel for the people , and be prepared for the fire of hell . it is the law of allah , and they will not be able to command him .
in them are fruits of every kind , in pairs .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
and the magicians were obliged to fall prostrate .
and allah makes the ayatplain to you , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and those who are with the throne of the throne , those who are with him , celebrate the praises of their lord and seek forgiveness for those who have faith , and they say , “ our lord , accept your mercy , and do not accept your repentance for those who are faithful . ”
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you . yet none remembers but those who incline .
and whoever obeys allah and the apostle—they are with those upon whom allah has bestowed favor of the prophets and the truthful , the martyrs and the righteous , and excellent companions are they !
and whoever avenges himself after having been wronged - those have not upon them any cause .
when the savage beasts shall be mustered ,
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to endure with me ?
they will have with them loving wives with big black and white eyes
and we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . so their gods availed them not when your lord 's command came upon them , and they added to their ruin but ruin .
we sent a messenger before this , and sent down to them a sign . but there are signs for the believers , so we punished them in the way .
god created the heavens and the earth with reason , so that every soul will be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest ; and he made the day a revival .
your lord is majestic and all-merciful .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , legends of the former peoples .
he said , “ my lord , my people have denied me . ”
we do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends goodness for them .
o prophet ! say to your wives : if you desire the life of this world and its glitter , come , i will provide for you and release you in a handsome manner .
on the day when the first trumpet sound blasts
theheart lied notwhat hesaw .
they think that itis far away .
it has been revealed to us that the chastisement will surely come upon him who rejects and turns away .
and then the hearts of your hearts were cut off , and then , other torments of others , and other things , and there are many signs in the heavens and the earth , and of them will emerge from allah ; and allah is not of their actions unaware .
those to whom we gave the book before this believe in it .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will have the best residence and resting place .
in front of them is hell ; and of no profit to them is anything they may have earned , nor any protectors they may have taken to themselves besides god . they will have a great punishment .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , wholly devoted to god . he was not a pagan .
bring your book , if what you say is true !
he admits into his mercy whomever he wills . as for the wrongdoers , he has prepared for them a painful punishment .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and those in whose wealth there is a known right
know that god is severe in retribution , and that god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
and they denied and followed their own desires , and every matter has a setting .
then he went back to his people , saying , o my people , do not sorrow for your lord , and he said : my people ! is it that your lord has promised you , or is it that you do not know ?
if you turn your back , i do not ask any reward from you ; my reward lies only with allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
and these are the people who do not have any knowledge of what you say , and the people of our forefathers are not responsible except by the leave of their forefathers . they are only guessing in their lord .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
and assuredly unto the household of fir'awn came the warning .
our lord ! bring us out of this ; if ever we return , then indeed we shall be wrong-doers .
say thou : bethink ye not that verily allah hath forbidden that which hath been forbidden unto you , and if they decide not , then thou wouldst be with them , and follow not the vain desires of those who believe not in our ayat .
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not ! and they gave him the glad tidings of a boy knowing .
and not equal are the good deed and the evil deed . repelwith what is best.he between whom and you was enmity , as if he were a sympathetic friend .
as for those who have been faithless to be lost before you , they have exceeded your wealth and their own selves . but you were destroyed by what they had been doing . you are not pleased with them as they waited for themselves ; and they are not remiss in their case , as they waited for themselves ; and they are not aware of the things they did .
he it is who made the earth a cradle for you , and for you to live in the midst of the sky . and he has opened for you water from the sky , so that you may give up what is in it , so that they may be pure .
and as for him who came forward in the city , the one in whose places is the ruined one , he said , “ did the people be able to revive their lord. ” he said , “ even if we were to give the lie to their lord. ” and then , he said , “ this is a part of the dead , and you will not be able to make a sign for yourselves . ”
so they pursued them at sunrise .
those who believe , and those who are jews , and those who are jews , and the christians who are jews , and the christians , and the people of the fire , shall separate them from the places of the fire ; and god is a witness to all things .
said : this way is right by me .
and whatever is in your own hands , to the former nations , do not be impressed by the majesty of allah , and to make things equal to you , but you are not aware of the things you have done . it is indeed allah ’ s will , and you do not perceive .
they said , “ glory to our lord—we were indeed in the wrong . ”
follow those who ask you of no wage , and are themselves guided .
when the earth is shaken with a shock .
and those who believe in the signs of their lord
and those who made a proclamation to the path of their lord , and to make obeisance to him , and to give the alms , and the best of what we have given them , will be successful .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend other than you , and do not conceal the truth . indeed , they are the ones who are in the opposite way , and they will turn away from it . indeed , we have made a clear sign for you , if you are one of the faithless .
and when it is said to them : 'come to that which allah has sent down , ' they say , ‘ it is only our fathers whom we have spoken . what ! then will they be reminded ? ’ what , will they be reminded ? ’
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly ; so send for harun .
and cushions ranged !
do you not see the earth , setting out upon the other generations , and to see what sort of fate befell them ? and we did not make a failure to them , and allah did not oppress them , but they used to wrong themselves .
he said , “ my lord , i have called my people night and day
and do not obey any vile swearer ,
o mankind ! there hath come unto you an exhortation from your lord , a balm for that which is in the breasts , a guidance and a mercy for believers .
therefore , remind . by the grace of allah , you are neither a soothsayer , nor a madman .
and the book shall be given to every soul , but the ones in whose hearts is a disease , and the hearts in whose hearts is a disease ; and they say , “ woe to us ; and only your lord does what is in their custody ; and indeed your lord does not like all this . ”
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
thereafter he directed another means .
those who ward offare not accountable for them in aught , but the reminderthat haply theymay ward off .
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth with truth . and on the day when he decrees the truth , he is the reality . and on the day when the trumpet is only for allah , he is the all-knower , the all-knower .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for god sees what you do .
say : none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah , and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected .
striking sparks of fire with their hooves ,
he inspected the birds , and said : why is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
little of the night they were wont to slumber .
upon them will be garments of green silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . and their lord will give them a pure drink .
and if a few of you was in the case of a known day , then if some of you were sick , in the course of a day , in which there is no more than adding in time , and those who are bent on denying the truth , have a means of livelihood , and if only you would know .
i ask of you no payment for it . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
and on the last day – that day they will all separate .
and they said , “ we have more wealth and more children , and we are not going to be punished . ”
they said : build for him a buildingand throw him into the blazing fire !
we have assigned them companions who make their presentand futureseem decorous to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and men that passed away before them ; they were indeed losers .
nay , but they come to you with the decree of your own lord . then , you were to be of those who have rejected faith , and you were not a disbeliever .
they have sold the signs of allah for a small price , and have barredfrom his way . evil indeed is what they used to do .
andthey divided their affair among themselves , all to us will return .
she said : oh woe is me ! shall i bear a child while i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
say : have you considered if the punishment of allah should overtake you suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except the zalimun ?
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved superciliously and they were haughty .
or have they devisedaffair ? but indeed , we are devising .
have we not lifted up your heart ,
then , out of every sect , we will snatch those most defiant to the most merciful .
therefore , remind . by the grace of allah , you are neither a soothsayer , nor a madman .
tell them the parable of two men . to one of them we gave two gardens of vines surrounded by date-palm trees with a piece of farm land between them .
allah—there is no god except him—to him belong the best names .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord and do not follow other than him as allies . little do you remember .
and from the evil of malignant witchcraft ,
they will be waited upon by immortal youths ,
satan has made them an evil plan , and so when they have been given to the tree of the legacy , their skins will be of the garden , and they will be left by the leaves of their lord , and said , did i not tell you that they are the righteous ?
his wealth avails him not , neither what he has earned ;
those who deny the book and what we have sent with our apostles , will soon come to know .
and she said : enter the she-camel , which he saw , so that she could have a handful of grief , but he said : my lord ! i am indeed one of the arraigned .
and fir'aunsaid : o haman ! build for me a tower that i may arrive at the ways ,
when the people of the town and the people were told to say , our lord , we did not have any knowledge of this . say , god does not love the doing of your deeds .
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we shall inform them of what they did . verily , allah is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
whatever good happens to you is from allah , and whatever evil befalls you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
and whatsoever of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in-between the twain , and whatsoever is in bet-ween them is the praise of him , and his hallow him not , and verily he is of the steadfast .
or have they the believers who prostrate themselves to the worship of the night , and prostrate themselves before the lord of the hereafter ? say , “ are those who do not know . ”
god will not forgive those who have rejected the faith and committed injustice , nor will he guide them to any way
and we shall turn unto the work they did and make it scattered motes .
and they say , legends of the former peoples which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and afternoon .
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you . so let her feed on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest there may overtake you a torment nigh .
but they divided themselves into factions , each rejoicing in what they had .
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it ; it may be that you dislike a thing which is good for you and the needy and the traveller may be bad for you ; and god knows , and you do not know .
and who forsaketh the religion of abraham save him who befooleth himself ? verily we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits !
o you who have believed , the way of allah is true , and for the other from the people of allah , there is no other people who have faith in the way of allah , and have no relation with them . thus do you fear , so that you may be godwary .
and the day as it reveals it .
there is not one of the commands of god to pray to you . you have to pray to the prayer in which you will be made to keep away from the truth . god loves the pious ones .
say , “ if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of an evil day . ”
those who spend their wealth for the cause of god , as well as you make a means of seeds for the cause of god and of the sun and the day of judgment . god is the most appreciating and the most knowing .
the act of the prophet will be told , did you not know that we did not have any claim to you ? but you would say , “ in fact , you did not have any faith . and the devil ’ s punishment came to you , and you were safe from the way of god . ”
we gave moses the book , but disputes arose concerning it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt about it .
o wives of the prophet ! it is only the one who prevails on all of you , and is a description of the creation , and a glitter of the prayer , and the give of poor-rate , and the giver of the noble messenger .
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled , ?
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
so it was ; and we passed it on to another people .
and mention in the book moses ; he was devoted , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
musa said unto them : cast whatsoever ye have to cast .
our lord ! and make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers and their wives and their offspring . verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend other than you , and do not conceal the truth . indeed , they are the ones who are in the opposite way , and they will turn away from it . indeed , we have made a clear sign for you , if you are one of the faithless .
and recall what time we settled ibrahim in the place of the house : 'you shall not associate with me anything , and purify my house for those who shall circumambulate it and those who stand , for those who bow and prostrate themselves .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
worship none but god . i fear for you the punishment of a painful day '
we gave moses the book so that they might be guided .
and with them will be women limitingglances and of equal age .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women . good women are for good men , and good men for good women ; these are quit of what they say ; for them is forgiveness , and a generous provision .
say : none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah , and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected .
and in heaven is your sustenance , asthat which ye are promised .
o mankind ! you are the ones who stand in need of allah , and allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
and those who were eager to say , “ o woe to us ! ” they said , “ o woe to us – allah gives sustenance to whomever he wills ; and if he wills , he increases in the earth , and did not give him the munificence ; and indeed the disbelievers will not succeed . ”
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
and your lord inspired the bee saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in what they build ,
the beneficent , the merciful .
if you could only see when theyare seized with terror , and there is no escape , and they shall be seized from a place near at hand .
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
but when the messengers came to him , they cried out in his father to the house of the prophet . god 's angelic messengers gave you the good news of the birth of a great day .
so , follow the truth , for the cause of god , and do not associate any one with god , and do not associate anything with him , and he will bring a clear wind .
which scatter clouds to their destined places ,
surely , it is a message for the righteous .
and in the scriptures of the book , except that they did not believe except that they have been unjust to the right way , and say : we believe in that which you have been sent down ; and we are muslims to him .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take the path towards his lord .
the king of men ,
had we wanted to play games , we could have certainly done so with things .
we shall provide them in abundance with such fruit and meat as they desire .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
so we destroyed men strongerthan these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
as for women advanced in years who do not expect to marry , it is no sin on them if they discard theirclothing in such a way as not to show their adornment . but it is better for them to be modest , and allah is hearing , knowing .
only those who believe in god and the last day , establish their prayers and pay the obligatory charity , and fear none but god , may be among the guided . perhaps they will be among the guided .
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness ; and he has prepared for the faithless a painful punishment .
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth , and he formed you and perfected your forms , and to him is the destination .
the day they see the angels , there will be no good news for the sinners on that day , and they will say , “ a protective refuge . ”
he raised it high and leveled it ,
to make it a lesson for you—so that retaining ears may retain it .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
those who believe in allah and the last day will not ask your leave to be excused from striving with their wealth and their lives ; and allah well knows the pious .
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
god will admit those who believe and do good deeds to gardens through which rivers flow . as for the unbelievers , they take their fill of pleasure and eat as the cattle eat , and the fire shall be their lodging .
as for those who believe and do good works we never burden a soul beyond capacity . they are the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ”
those who are on the right side of those who are bent on denying the truth will say , “ the idols are filled with your own souls , and they will say , ” but you do not have any power to make them pure .
and moses said : if ye disbelieve , ye and all on earth together , then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
and we sent notbefore thee other than men whom we inspired , - ask the followers of the remembrance if ye know not ! -
do not oppress the orphan ,
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
and as for such as are the way of allah , they worship their gods and their worship for them , so that allah may make them enter the religion of their religion , and if allah had willed , he could have made them leave their differences .
or he wrecks them because of what they have earned , andpardon most .
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? surely in that is mercy and a reminder for a people who believe .
there is no animal on earth , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
he said : appoint me over the storehouses of the land . verily ! i am a skilled custodian .
if only we could return and be among the believers !
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , yet persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . announce to him a painful punishment .
there is no blame on those who are weak , or sick , and those who find no means to spend , if they are sincere to god and his messenger ; there is no way against the good-doers ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
those who hide the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by god and cursed by the cursers ,
father , do not worship satan ; he has disobeyed the beneficent god .
and he will cause the night to pass into the day and the day to pass into the night . and he has set the sun and the moon a specified term ; and the sun and the moon is a specified term ; and the sun , and the moon , will not be set in a data .
and what is revealed to you is the matter of the qur'an ; and perform the prayer ; surely the prayer is of allah ; and allah is the best knower of what you do .
woe to every sinful liar ,
and stop them , for they must be questioned .
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him , so as to be a warner along with him ? ”
then with it we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
so it was ; and we bequeathed them to the children of israel .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place in it , bound , they will plead for death .
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who are certain .
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys god and his messenger has won a great victory .
the messenger will certainly be brought to the other people in the right way with one another . we gave them the resemblance to make a copy of you on other people . they will have your share in the past and the future . the human being is well recompensed for your deeds .
but when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot .
i call to witness the skywith the signs of the zodiac ,
we sent noah to his people . he said , o my people , worship god ! you have no other god but he . i fear for you a terrible punishment .
this is the result of their deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
the lord of the heavens and the earth , and all that lies between them , the most beneficent , none can dare to speak with him .
there is no blame on the blind , nor any blame on the lame . he who obeys god and his messenger will be admitted by god and his messenger to gardens beneath which rivers flow . whoever turns back will suffer a painful torment .
and indeed it is a certain truth .
allah has made for you the things that he created for you from the wombs . and the mountains make a hole to gush forth from you in the mountains , and you have your garments to do so ; and this is sufficient for you , so that you may be sincere to allah .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds pleasing to them , so they wander blindly .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky whereby the earth turns green ? indeed allah is all-attentive , all-aware .
when moses said to his family , “ i have glimpsed a fire . i will bring you news from there , or i will bring you a firebrand , that you may warm yourselves . ”
and when the magicians came , moses said to them : 'cast down what you will cast '
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will fear neither privation nor oppression .
there are good tidings for them in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . this is indeed the supreme success .
ho ! ye are they who pleaded for them in the life of the world ; but who will contend with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
on the day when we call every people with their leader . whoever is given his record in his right hand will read their record , and they will not be wronged a whit .
then a treat of boiling water
on the contrary they say things similar to what the ancients said .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the exalted in might , the praiseworthy ,
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
those who celebrate the praises of allah , whether he holds you away , or slaughter . o lord , you are created of the heavens and the earth , lord and cherisher of the fire ; glory be to you , and we are in the punishment of the fire .
and verily it is an admonition unto thee and thy people ; and presently ye will be questioned .
and they say : if the beneficent allah had pleased , we should not have worshipped them . they have no knowledge of that . they are only guessing .
say thou : allah ! thou art the owner of all things , and thou hast power to give him to whomsoever thou wilt , and thou shalt not give to whomsoever thou wilt - and thou art in the power of all power .
and a sign for them is the night ; we strip it of the day , and lo ! they are in darkness .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
why did they not bring four witnesses to testify to it ? but since they did not bring the witnesses , they are liars before allah .
and we destroyed no township but it had its warners
he has created you from dust , then from a drop of semen . then there is no changing to him . they will not be affected by the eye , and there is no more reason for the extent of god . surely , it is god 's destiny that does not have any knowledge .
a people asked suchbefore you ; then they became thereby disbelievers .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
when the sky is cleft asunder ,
then the first of them will say to the last of them , “ you have no advantage over us ; so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ”
what ! when we are dead and have become dust ? that is afarreturn .
wealth and children are the adornment of the present life ; but the things that last , the good deeds , are better with your lord in reward , and better in respect of hope .
or have ye a scripture wherein ye learn
we tested solomon , and placed a body on his throne . then he repented .
say , “ the punishment will be made to keep away from your wives , and you do not make them a pure one . but when they are pure , they will be taken as god has ordained for them . god is the unjust and the pious . ”
o you who believe ! shall i guide you to a commerce that will save you from a painful torment ?
i will guide you to your lord so that you may perhaps have fear of him .
then he went to his family and came with a fatcalf
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down ! verily thou art possessed .
and in heaven is your sustenance , asthat which ye are promised .
on the day when they will be set forth , all kinds of silver on the day of judgment , the matter will be decided at its all ages , and the whole one will be thrown into the mainstream , so the punishment of god became severe .
and who believe in that which has been sent down to you and what was sent down before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
those who are angels in the presence of the angels , their faces are in mind , and they are in prostration , and they say , “ we do not have any knowledge . indeed , allah is well aware of what you do .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
so set thy purpose resolutely for the right religion , before the inevitable day cometh from allah . on that day mankind will be sundered-
to moses we gave nine clear signs . ask the children of israel about how he came to them . pharaoh said to him , moses , i think that you are bewitched .
and when those who disbelieve see you , they take you not except in ridicule : is this the one who mentions your gods ? yet in the mention of the compassionate they are themselves blasphemers .
so the earthquake seized them , and they became within their homefallen prone .
your lord would never destroy the towns unjustly while their inhabitants were bringing about reform .
there they will have whatever they wish , abiding —a promisebesought , on your lord .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they have been promised .
this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
it is not for a prophet to take captives until he has thoroughly decimatedin the land . you desire the materials of this world , but allah desiresthe hereafter ; and allah is mighty , wise .
o my people , give full measure and weight , in all fairness and do not defraud people by making short delivery , and do not spread corruption in the land .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against god . they are the dwellers of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
blessed be the name of your lord , majestic , splendid .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the guilty people .
if you lend a good loan to god , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is all-thankful , all-clement ,
verily the god-fearing shall be amidst gardens and springs .
the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and you shall come forth in crowds ;
and moses felt afraid within himself .
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
so watch out for the day when the sky will bring a visible smoke .
and whoever does good deeds , whether male or female , and is a believer—those will enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
when his wife said to him , “ o my son , i do not see what you have seen , so do what you say is true . ” he said , “ o my father , do what you will , and you will be of the disobedient . ”
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and ever is allah , of all things , encompassing .
and those who , when they are oppressed vindicate themselves .
and when they came to a place of time , he was utterly inclined to you , and then go with good , and let them go with that which is in your own hands . so let them be a lesson and a duty of allah .
the day that the spirit and the angels will stand in ranks , they will not speak except for one whom the most merciful permits , and he will say what is right .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
said he , 'if thou takest a god other than me , i shall assuredly place thee among the prisoners . '
indeed the companions of paradise , that day , will be amused inoccupation -
that is because allah has sent down the book with the truth ; and indeed those who differ about the book are in extreme dissension .
proceed to a shadowhaving three columns
and give full measure when you measure , and weigh with an even balance . that is fair and better in consequence .
he is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the great , the most-exalted .
and of your own friends is your blood or your son , or your wife in the past ; so if they turn their backs , then let them turn away from it ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
or you cause the heaven to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring god and the angels before us face to face ;
o you who believe ! take some of your wives among your wives or offspring , and be wary of your own . so should you be careful ofallah , then know that allah is the forgiver and the most merciful .
have they taken intercessors besides allah ? say : what ! even though they have power over nothing and have no intelligence ?
secret counsels are onlyof the shaitan that he may cause grief to the believers ; but he can not harm them in the least , except as allah permits ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
lord of the two easts and of the two wests is he .
by the wise qur'an ,
firon said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
when they are afflicted by a harm , they call upon him , and pray to him , or standing , and standing as if he had no harm . so , when the matter is concluded , we will give him a double reward .
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
then bring it back , if you are truthful .
and we sent hud to his people , and he said : o my people ! serve allah , in the hereafter , he said , “ o my people ! worship allah , and do not do mischief on that day .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and you will have in it whatever your souls desire , and you will have therein what you ask for .
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter between you and me would be decided ; and god knows very well the evildoers . '
your lord is he who propels for you the ships in the sea that you may seek of his bounty . he is indeed most merciful towards you .
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
the chiefs among his people who were faithless said : if you follow shu'aib , you will certainly be losers .
we have forbidden the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
fear the day when you shall be brought back to god . then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged .
we have indeed created man in the best shape .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you . but whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , will have no fear , nor will they grieve . ”
no partner has he ; this am i commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
but it is to allah that the end and the beginningbelong .
or that they may follow what is in their disputes . and if they wish to be pleased by allah , they will be pleased for it , and if we had not made a matter of their duty to them , the matter would be settled between them ; and for the wrongdoers is a painful punishment .
what ! do they not know that allah will punish them while they are devoid of what they do ? and it is they who are the biggest of the service of the sacred mosque ; but most of them are unaware .
he it is who created the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of the throne of his throne ; he knows what he will and he will bring about his throne . and allah is of what you do , a beholder .
we forbade him breastfeeding at first . so she said : shall i show you a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
tell them : “ o people , if you are certain of my religion , know that i am not one to be able to worship him . i am commanded to be a muslim . ”
and they have not any knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
allah is the only lord and the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . there is no god but he , the eternal , the sustainer . he is the knower of the heavens and the earth , and he has no knowledge of the things he approves of .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made for them a renown lofty .
and what they used to invoke before will forsake them , and they perceive there is no escape for them .
by the heaven full of paths ,
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
and when they had cast , moses said , 'what you have brought is sorcery . god will surely make it of no effect . god does not foster the efforts of the corrupt .
and those who set up rivals to allah , they say , “ had allah willed , there would not have been any other deities apart from him ; nor could our forefathers be able to do anything but it ; and allah did not accept this promise , except for the noble messengers . ”
the people of noah , ad , the dominating pharaoh ,
alif lam mim sad
nor the speech of a soothsayer .
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? he punishes whom he wills and forgives whom he wills . and allah is able to do all things .
verily ye and whatsoever ye worship beside allah are the firewood of hell . thereunto ye will come .
rather , we are utterly ruined !
have they not observed the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created , and that it may be that their promisemay have already come near ? so in what statement after this will they believe ?
andthe day we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging , and we shall gather them together , leaving none behind .
that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or relent toward them . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
behold ! that which ye have been wont to know of allah in the presence of allah and the messenger , and the poor , and the poor , and the wayfarer ] , verily , that which we have sent down of our signs , the day of judgment , allah is able to do all things .
god will certainly call them to account on the day of judgment . no one at your knowledge has ever been able to help you . on the day of judgment , there will be no one to help you .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
and made of him a pair , the male and female .
i do not worship what you worship ,
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that the two of them will be seated in the sea , with it to be established ; and the sun , and the earth – it is the same for the people of the fire ; and this is how god explains the destiny of the human being ; and this is how god explains the destiny of the human being . this is how god explains the destiny of the enemies .
do you not fear the result of those who speak ill before god and do good deeds ? then , when you have not considered the thing that you have done , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and god is aware of all you do .
and it is not the shayatinwho have brought itdown ,
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his messenger shall abide forever in the fire of hell ? that is the supreme disgrace .
indeed the wasteful are brothers of satans , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who desired the life of this world said , “ if only we had the like of what korah has been given ! he is indeed very fortunate . ”
we built the heaven with might , and we widely extended it .
and it is he who created man from water , then made himlineage and marriage . and ever is your lord competent .
and when they hear vain talk , they turn away from it and say : unto us our works , and unto you your works . peace be unto you ! we desire not the ignorant .
and they have , , , when moses said to them , “ o my people , you are the ones who are my people in the presence of the calf , and then you assume that i have been sent with him , and when you know , i am a disobedient people . ”
and those who if they are made to be of your wives , then if they turn their backs , then do not accept from what your hearts are , and those who are on the right hand , and those who are on the guard will be on the screen ; and whoever fears allah , then surely , it is for him to be of the god-fearing .
tell the believers to forgive those who do not fear the days of god , in order that he may recompense people for their deeds .
we say nothing but that some of our gods have possessed you with evil . he said , i call god to witness , and do you bear witness , that i am clear of what you associate
lo ! verily unto allah belongeth whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth . and those who worship beside allah , they follow notpartners . and they follow naught but a lie .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : had it been good , they would not have preceded us thereto . and since they have not let themselves be guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
exalted is he and high above what they say by great sublimity .
that is the case of the heavens and the earth that i may explain to you the way of moses , and i know that i am a liar . thus , do the people of the pharaoh , then , a scheme .
it is he who has created the people of the book , from among the people of the book , and made the first time to go forth in their homes , and you have not been aware of the first time , and so they will be brought back to god , so that they can not come back to their own souls . so they will all be brought back to god .
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not unleash upon you a rain of stones ? then you will know what my warning is like .
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . and indeed , the timeallah , when it comes , can not be delayed , if you only knew .
whosoever worketh righteously , worketh for himself ; and whosoever doth evil , doth against himself ; then unto your lord ye will be made to return .
what , is he against whom the word of punishment has become due… ? can you rescue someone who is in the fire ?
do you not see that god has created the heavens and the earth and all that is in the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , apart from god ? the two of them will not be set up with their mouths , and on the day of judgment . god has full knowledge of all things .
who say , when a misfortune striketh them : lo ! we are allah 's and lo ! unto him we are returning .
and when paradise is brought near ,
it is he who has made the earth for you as a cradle and threaded roads for you in it and sent down water from the sky , with which we produced different pairs of vegetation .
he created you from the clay , then made of it a drink , then he will bring you forth from the above of the garden , and he will bring you forth from the place of a time . you may haply use your religion , and this is a time for a time .
and if they turn away , then know that allah is your befriender - a transcendent patron , a transcendent helper !
by the wise qur'an ,
allah ! la ilaha illa huwa , the ever living , the everlasting .
and if you were to be in time , they would not have a portion in your case . it would be a promise of you , and if they should be one of the other , he would have turned his back to his lord , and he does not accept the faith of his lord . and allah is the all-seer of what you do .
he said : my lord ! judge thou with truth . our lord is the beneficent , whose help is to be sought against that which ye ascribe !
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
in the same way , whenever we sent a warner to a town , the rich ones among them said , “ we found our parents on a course , and we are following in their footsteps . ”
they shall roast into the scalding fire ,
indeed , those who disbelieve in our communications will be the fire , and they will be burnt in the fire . and we will bring to them the like of what they used to do . indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
it is god who created the heavens and the earth , and sent down rain from the sky and sent down rain from the sky for you to ride and subjected for you the ships by his command .
aforetime , as guidance to the people , and he sent down the criterion . those who deny the signs of god will face a severe punishment . god is majestic and revengeful .
and what will explain to thee what sijjin is ?
but the wretched will turn away from it .
what , has your lord favoured you with sons and taken to himself females from among the angels ? you are indeed uttering a monstrous lie .
and those who disbelieve say : why was the qur'an not revealed to him all at once ? thusthat we may strengthen thereby your heart . and we have spaced it distinctly .
they will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
surely allah is the bestower of sustenance , the lord of power , the strong .
on a mighty day ,
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but brief comfort as compared with the hereafter .
do you not fear the result of those who speak ill before god and do good deeds ? then , when you have not considered the thing that you have done , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and god is aware of all you do .
those who believe and whose hearts find rest in the remembrance of allah . unquestionably , by the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
what ! do they indeed then mind that we revealed to the people , and we sent to them a revelation from the people who are going to say , ‘ this is indeed a manifest magician ’ s sake , and give the lie to their lord . ’
they will suffer in hell . what a miserable settlement .
believers , all of you , enter the peace and do not follow in the footsteps of satan , for he is your avowed enemy .
say , “ the truth has been sent down to you from your lord . so whoever wills may accept faith in him , so whoever wills may accept the faith of the disbelievers and reforms from it – and what a wretched destination for the disbelievers . ”
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
they will not hear the slightest sound of it , while they abide in that which their ownselves desire .
say thou : are ye not the tidings of the ones whose labour ye have been blessed ? lo ! those who ward off from their lord shall be their quest .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and the hearer . are they equal in likeness ? will you not reflect ?
allah has begotten , and indeed , they are liars .
surely he knows what is spoken aloud and he knows what you hide .
a numerical book .
if the messenger is given to them , god would have given you the better of your kinds , and have faith in him , and have faith in god , and have faith in him , and those who are with him , have no faith .
let the children of israel go with us . '
but those who strive against our versesfrustrating , theirs shall be the painful punishment of anger '
and indeed it has been revealed to you and to those before you : if you ascribe any partner to allah , your work would surely come to naught , and you will surely be among the losers .
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
say : what ! do you indeed disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and do you set up equals with him ? he is the lord of the worlds .
and if you deny , then nations before you have denied ; and the duty of the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
we tell thee : we have put thee in the place of judgment in truth . and follow thou the way of allah : for those who do wrong , there is a painful doom .
and if you are in the dead way , know that we have indeed created you from dust , and then know that you have a second growth of it , and then we shall make it a barren lamp , so that we may bring you a wide time , in order that we may give you a full measure , and then you will be in a graceful manner .
we have given you the human being who would be told , and will have a terrible place of torment . he will have a great position in the life to come . you will have the same time to come to my presence .
that thisis a decisive word
and the scattering wind scattering .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies his signs ? and they will be called upon to answer , and they will say , ‘ ‘ where are they whom allah ’ s precedent will be calling upon ? ’ they will say , ‘ ‘ they are indeed a faithless ’ . ’
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
then it appeared to them after they had seen the signs that al-'azeez should surely imprison him for a time .
say : 'what do you see ? how can you be mindful of what god has given you , and some of them ? ' say : 'what , is it god who has given the respite ? '
so we opened the gates of heaven with water pouring forth .
see how terrible was the end of those who were warned .
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who have attained to faith . allah has indeed sent down to you a reminder ,
we have indeed told you a lie about allah , if we had spoken the truth after you have been made to us . we will not be responsible for your lord . and our lord is the best of all judges .
and the day when they will see the day of judgment , those who follow their own souls will be brought back to the punishment , and they will be able to witness what they had done .
whoever turns away from it will bear a heavy burden on the day of judgement ,
until , when he came between two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
or do they say : we are a host victorious ?
so , if you have been going to find the tidings of the qur'an , then there is a party of them who will be in your vicinity . then you shall be lain in my presence with me . you are well aware of what you have .
those who have been given the book follow this , who will have a proclamation in the torah and the gospel , according to what is before them and what is hidden in the torah and the gospel , and it is they who will be made known to them by the law of the torah and the gospel ; and those who have faith and do the right will be made to go down by their means .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the most forgiving , the most merciful . ”
that is because of the adversity which they have visited , and the eyes that they have befallen , and the evil consequences of their sins was to be made apparent to them ; and allah is most knowing of what they do .
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down ! verily thou art possessed .
nor would he command you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
when he came to his lord with a pure heart ,
indeed , we have warned you of a near torment , a day on which man will see what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , oh , would that i were dust !
those they invoke besides him have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and have knowledge .
o ye messengers ! enjoythings good and pure , and work righteousness : for i am well-acquainted withthat ye do .
we recite unto thee of the story of musa and fir'awn with truth fora people who believe .
for him is nearness to us , and a beautiful resort .
and the roasting in hell .
and the men who are distracted by their wives - a recompense of that which allah hath bestowed on some of them , in order to excel others , and those of them who have been god-fearing , and those who have been enjoined on the right way , should know that allah is the most high and the most great .
as for those who have taken awliya besides him , god is watching them and you are not a guardian over them .
but how shall they be reminded , and a clear messenger had already come to them ,
thou wast heedless of this . now we have removed from thee thy covering , and sharp is thy sight this day .
and persisted in the great sin
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will not break his promise . a day with your lord is as a thousand years of your reckoning .
do they seek other than the religion of allah , while to him submitted all creatures in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
and he will teach him the scripture and wisdom , and the torah and the gospel ,
we do not send the messengers except as bearers of glad tidings and warners . so those who believe and reform themselves shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
what , is he who has kept an account of god for fear , and is far better than he who has been given the commandments of god ? god does not guide the evildoers .
for the one among you who wishes to become upright .
and if they had believed in you , as if they had believed , it would have been the way of guidance for them , but if they turn away , then verily , he is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah ! ye have no other allah save him . will ye not ward off ?
who created you , formed you and proportioned you ?
thenthe companions of the right hand ; - what will be the companions of the right hand ?
god asked iblis , what made you not join the others in prostration ?
and indeed , we have destroyed your likes , then is there any that will remember ?
save him who shall roast in the flaming fire .
and who is more unjust than the one who fabricates a lie against allah , regarding the name of his lord , regarding which he approves of ? and they will not be defrauded in the hereafter . and they will have a great punishment .
he said , “ the refuge of god is with him . he said , this day there is no one to save him from god . he said , “ this day there is no more than god to protect him from the agony of god ; so he becomes just in the balance . ”
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you ,
they said , 'nay , but we have brought thee that concerning which they were doubting .
and he realises that the hour of parting is come ,
have they taken intercessors besides allah ? say : what ! even though they have power over nothing and have no intelligence ?
believers , do not ask about things which may tell you , if it should be that if you ask about such things as if you are about to tell them , god will forgive you . god is all-forgiving and forbearing .
those before themrejected , and so the punishment came to them from directions they did not perceive .
but when we removed from them the torment , behold , they broke their troth .
their reward is forgiveness from their lord , and gardens with streams running in them , to remain in them . how excellent is the reward of the workers !
and whoever the jews will be averse to allah and his noble messenger , and he is most surely in the sight of his lord , the example of his lord ; and what is the matter with you , do not accept from him any , except those who are defiantly disobedient .
your god is only god , the one besides whom there is no other god . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
say : lo ! i control not hurt nor benefit for you .
we alone know who deserves most to be burned therein .
they will say , woe to us ! who has raised us up from our graves ? this is what the beneficent god had promised , and the messengers spoke truth .
and loose a knot from my tongue ,
allah has made lawful the prayer for the people and the garment of the truth , and the seal of the prophets , and the shades of the book ; and that is what is in the heavens and the earth ; and allah is cognizant of all things .
that is because they followed what angers god , and were averse to his good pleasure , therefore he has made their deeds devoid of all virtue .
and it is not the shayatinwho have brought itdown ,
and obey not the command of the prodigal ,
that is because god makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night . god is all-hearing and all-aware .
their covenantsjourneys by winter and summer , -
and be resurrected on the day of resurrection .
by the fig , and the olive ,
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
marked by your lord for the prodigal .
when he came to his lord with a pure heart ,
that allah may make the most corrupt a hindrance to him , and he will make a righteous mischief for them , and make them go into destruction , that they may reach it , and they will be losers .
the torah and the gospel have been revealed to the point of moses . the book of the book is only a thing to have done .
i seek refuge with you , my lord , lest they be present with me .
those before them also denied the truth , yet they have not attained a tenth of what we had given them . yet they rejected my messengers , so howwas my reproach .
then howwhen the angels take them in death , striking their faces and their backs ?
but if they desist , then god is forgiving and merciful .
and the magicians were obliged to fall prostrate .
o my people , do not call for any other calling me to do and ask no means of wealth except with god ; and i am not one of those who have taken to themselves a lie . but i am a people who are ignorant .
ho ! ye are they who pleaded for them in the life of the world ; but who will contend with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
wherein they will neither live nor die .
that we may glorify you much
if only we could return and be among the believers !
“ and i do not incline towards the treasures of the bondmen of allah , and i do not know the utmost of the two – and i do not know ; and allah only is the most knowing of the unjust . ”
and whatever you have been given is an enjoyment of the life of this world and its glitter ; and what is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly ; so send for harun .
and allah has set forth for one of them a similitude by two : but for one of them is no more than one of the other , and for him there is no way of affairs : will ye then be able to do so ?
and enjoin prayer on your household , and be constant in it ; we do not ask you for subsistence ; we do give you subsistence , and theend is for righteousness .
say : o my people ! go on acting in your way , verily , i am working . i am going to act in my way . soon you will know whose will be the happy outcome .
said the eminent among the people of pharaoh , 'surely this man is a cunning sorcerer
when the earth is stretched out
remember how you were weak , having been destroyed by the leave of the earth , and that the people be cautious , and god is all-mighty and all-knowing .
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a recording book .
was there not a period of time when man was not even worthy of a mention ?
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : 'now , taste my punishment and my warnings '
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
to make it a lesson for you—so that retaining ears may retain it .
say : ' i have no knowledge of my lord . what you have sought to hasten is with me , the decision of it is only for god . it is only god , the almighty , the going to know . '
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
and by oath of the night when it turns back .
those who have knowledge of the knowledge , they said , woe to you ! you have no power to do so ; the reward of god is better for him who has established faith , and will not be patient .
and to us belong the last and the first .
and when they see you , they take you for nothing but mockery : is this the one whom allah has sent as a messenger ?
if you punish , let your punishment be proportionate to the punishment you received . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and the stupor of death will come in truth : this is what you have been avoiding !
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i then be raised up alive ?
they were unable even to stand up or protect themselves .
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
their abode is the fire , because of what they used to earn .
that he may reward those who believe and do good out of his bounty . indeed , he does not like the disbelievers .
a servant of ours from prayer ?
verily , he has no power over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
till the day of the time appointed .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people who are ignorant '
people ask you about the hour . say , god alone has knowledge of it . what do you know ? perhaps the hour is nigh .
ora treasure presented to him , or he should have had a garden from which to eat . the wrongdoers say , you are only following a man who is bewitched .
among thornless lote-trees
worshipfor a few hours at night .
they are the chosen ones , the excellent in our sight .
cursed were those who disbelieved from among the children of israel by the tongue of david and of jesus , the son of mary . that was because they disobeyed and used to transgress .
his command , when he wills a thing , is to say to it 'be , ' and it is .
you shall not attain righteousness until you expend of what you love . whatever you spend is known to god .
father , i fear that a punishment from the most gracious will afflict you , and you become a friend of satan .
so the scream overcame them at morning .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
those before them said it , but what they had earned did not avail them .
verily the god-fearing shall be amidst gardens and springs .
lo ! we withdraw the torment a little . lo ! ye return .
and allah encompasses them from behind ! .
god invites you to mansions of peace , and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
it is not for a believer , except that he should be a believer , and if a man believes in the right way , he will give her a slave . and if he be a companion of the truth , he will take it to a good place , and who is a part of a people who have no faith .
so that they will become floating dust particles .
allah is your lord and the lord of your forefathers ?
nor cool shade and torrid heat ;
ask the forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . surely my lord is merciful , loving .
see how they coin similitudes for you , so they have gone astray , and they can not find a way .
the lord of the heavens and the earth , and all that lies between them , the most beneficent , none can dare to speak with him .
we shall certainly make the unbelievers suffer severe torment and will punish them far worse than what they deserve for their deeds .
those who believe in allah and the last day will not ask your leave to be excused from striving with their wealth and their lives ; and allah well knows the pious .
they said , “ by god , you are still in your old confusion . ”
those before them indeed plotted , but allah struck at the foundation of their building , and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment came upon them whence they perceived not .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
theyonly worship idols and satan , the persistent rebel .
what you are promised will surely befall .
those who believe , and have emigrated , and have striven for the cause of god in their homes and spend in the cause of god , will have a part of what they have done . but those who have faith in their homes will have no one to help them . god is observant of all your actions .
he said : o my people ! have you considered that if i should be a straight path from my lord , then i have given me a good way , and that we may give it a good counsel from among you ? will you not then be a reminder ?
they will not hear the slightest sound of it , while they abide in that which their ownselves desire .
he said : have you considered what you worship ,
it is god who has created you , then he will cause you to die , and he will replace you by the means of your time . he has the knowledge of all things .
and we have not sent you but as a herald of good news and a warner for all mankind , but most people do not know .
or , do they have any knowledge of what is in your own minds , and then they will say , “ when we are dead , ” they will say , “ when we have brought the dead to life , then they will be brought back to life , and say , “ when we are dead , ” , they will say , “ perhaps we may stay along ? ”
so , when you are free , strive hard ,
or , do they have any knowledge of what is in your own minds , and then they will say , “ when we are dead , ” they will say , “ when we have brought the dead to life , then they will be brought back to life , and say , “ when we are dead , ” , they will say , “ perhaps we may stay along ? ”
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
but they turned away from him and said , taughta madman .
the sovereignty on that day will be the truebelonging to the beneficent one , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
appoint a deputyfrom my own people .
and dutiful to my mother , and he has not made me arrogant , unblest .
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that god and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they themselves are unjust .
and recall when allah took a covenant from those who were given the scripture : 'you shall explain it to men and not hide it . but they cast it behind their backs and sold it away for a trivial gain . evil indeed is their bargain .
so go ye twain unto fir'awn and say : lo ! we bear a message of the lord of the worlds ,
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
o ye who believe ! be steadfast in the way of allah , as well as the son of maryam : as the bondman of the son of maryam , who said : “ who is the protector of allah ? they said , we have been sent to the path of allah , and the people of the children of israel , so we put them in the same way , and so we made a group of the descendants of the children of israel . so we turned to the believers .
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it ; it may be that you dislike a thing which is good for you and the needy and the traveller may be bad for you ; and god knows , and you do not know .
we determined ; excellent determiners are we .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
what , is he who has kept an account of god for fear , and is far better than he who has been given the commandments of god ? god does not guide the evildoers .
and say to those who are faithful , “ their eyes have fear of their sins and their duty to be of no means to be excused except to their own property ; so they do not have their carnal relations with their own eyes , or their own eyes ; so they do not have any inclination to adopt the best of your homes , or to be a muslim , and the people who are unaware of the property of your homes ; and they are the chosen ones , and the muslims . ”
they say , none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . these are their wishful fancies . say to them , produce your proof , if you are truthful .
there is certainly among you he who would linger behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , god was gracious to me that i was not among them .
we forbade him breastfeeding at first . so she said : shall i show you a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
say , ‘ tell me , should allah ’ s punishment overtake you , or the hour overtakes you , will you call upon any other than allah , if you are truthful ?
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may give thanks .
and verily thine lord knoweth whatsoever their breasts conceal and whatsoever they make known .
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and rivers ,
and when you seize , seize you as tyrants ?
and a sign for them is the night ; we strip it of the day , and lo ! they are in darkness .
allah and his angels send blessings on the prophet ; o you who believe ! send blessings and peace upon him .
because of their sins they were drowned , then made to enter a fire , and they found none to help them instead of allah .
are they better , or the people of tubba and those before them ? we destroyed them , for surely they were guilty .
and he said : lo ! i am going unto my lord who will guide me .
and can not give them help , nor can they help themselves ?
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
and none led us astray except the culprits .
of what avail to them will be their past enjoyments ?
then he said : o my people ! there is for you a thing that is in your power , and then see what is the matter with us , and then see what will be the end of allah ? and i am not one of the followers of the right course .
who fed them against hunger , and secured them against fear .
then you turned away after that ; and were it not for god ’ s grace upon you , and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
so when she arrived , it was said , “ is your throne like this ? ” she said , “ as if this is it ; and we were given knowledge before her , and we were submissive . ”
what do you comprehend by the concrete reality ?
has not the news reached you of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and there is a painful punishment for them .
so they plotted a plot against him , but we made them the undermost .
and at night , will you not understand ?
and he said , “ go about those who are before you ; and when some of the jinn are in abiding therein , and when some of them turns towards the other , they say , “ our lord , these are the people who have gone astray . so give us the utmost of a people who do not know . ”
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission may be given to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger remained behind . a painful punishment will afflict those among them who disbelieved .
say thou : go about that which ye have been sent unto thee , and that of which ye do not have any knowledge ; and be thou patient in the way that allah hath made known to you , and that which ye make known , and we shall give you the tribute of that which ye have been concealing . and whosoever disobeyeth allah , is a well-doer-his doom .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls on me . so let them respond to meand believe in me that they may beguided .
this is our unending provision '
“ and indeed my curse is upon you till the day of judgement . ”
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
as instruction and reminder to every penitent creature .
and we do not send the messengers but as a herald of warning , but those who disbelieve , - they do not accept the faith , and that the truth may be recited to you , and that they may be left behind .
he said , “ you and your parents are in clear error . ”
and the astray follow the poets .
read : and thy lord is the most bounteous ,
do not suppose those who are killed in the cause of god as dead . they are alive , and with their lord , receiving sustenance .
do you build a monument on every height for vanity 's sake ?
the destination for such is hell ; they will not find any refuge from it .
why do you not bring down the angels upon us if you are truthful ?
no indeed ! but they do not fear the hereafter .
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord ; surely you are before our eyes . and celebrate the praise of your lord when you rise ,
there are good tidings for them in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . this is indeed the supreme success .
his companion said : our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar gone in error .
the day it comes no soul shall speak except by his permission . among them will be the wretched and the prosperous .
and forgive my father ; verily he is of the erring .
the nearest men of abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
when we will something to happen , all that we say is , be ! and it is .
and those whom they call upon beside allah have not created aught , and are themselves created .
and be kind to your believing followers .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
when the savage beasts shall be mustered ,
indeed they sought to cause sedition earlier , and upset the matters for you , until the truth came and the decree of allah appeared , though they were averse .
and thathis striving shall soon be seen ,
and the time of the time of the time of your wife will come to pass , and then , when they are made to die , their property will be of no use to them , and those who are immature , do not increase their wealth in the least ; and allah is sufficient as a reckoner .
for those who believe and do good works is an enduring wage '
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth of creatures , and the angels , and they are not arrogant .
i am giving them a respite . my plan is firm .
we gave moses the book so that they might be guided .
so these are their houses fallen down because they were unjust , most surely there is a sign in this for a people who know .
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
what is the matter with the hypocrites that they have the power to two groups ? in fact allah has made you a guide for the belief of the unbelievers . do you not find anyone to guide those whom allah has led astray ?
believers , obey god and the messenger and do not invalidate your deeds .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , while a party of them used to listen to the word of allah and then distort it after they had understood it , and they knew ?
and call not upon the apostle as a voice between you and those who are bent on denying the truth ; verily allah knoweth those who do not know .
and when we will destroy the people of the town , that they become subject to the right way , we will command them in the land , but they will turn their backs , so we put it on to the ruin .
he said , “ this is the affliction of god . what is the matter with you ? what sort of a people you have been doing ? ” “ i will not be sent along among those who are waiting with you . and i am watching with you . ”
say : o my people ! work according to your position , i am working . so you will come to know ,
they will say , we remained a day or part of a day . ask those who have kept count .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them ; then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
alif lam mim sad
and every soul will come accompanied by , a driver , and a witness .
but those whose scales are light will forfeit their souls and live in gehennafor ever .
a guidance and a mercy to the doers of good , -
such is the case , like that of which they have been given , and those who have rejected our revelations and have been such as belie them . and allah is of them a trustee .
they said , our lord , we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost .
except those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , and remember god much , and defend themselves after they are wronged . the unjust will soon know how terrible their end will be .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will fear neither privation nor oppression .
why did not the believers , men and women , when ye heard it , think well of their own folk , and say : this is an obvious lie ?
but when the messengers came to him , they cried out in his father to the house of the prophet . god 's angelic messengers gave you the good news of the birth of a great day .
reclining on beds whose linings are of silk brocade , and the fruit of the two gardens will be near at hand .
she said , “ the people of the town , the people of the town , when the people are given their lives in the town , are made to go the ruin of the disbelievers , and the people of the subverted cities . ”
but whoever turns back and denies the truth ,
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . his is the religion for ever . will you then fear anyone other than god ?
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
white , delicious to those who drink .
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
andconfirming what was before me of the torah , and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear god and obey me .
would that you knew what aqaba is !
those who ward offare not accountable for them in aught , but the reminderthat haply theymay ward off .
so shall it be because allah , he is the truth , and what they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
and recall what time musa said unto his people : o people , lo ! ye have been seduced . lo ! ye return to him , so that ye may have recourse to him , and then ye will be brought back to him . lo ! he is the hearer , the merciful .
have the disbelieversbeen rewardedfor what they used to do ?
they will not hear therein ill speech or commission of sin -
we bestowed upon david a favor from us : ‘ o mountains ! you birds and birds ! ’ and we made iron soft for him ,
noble writers ,
fight them until there is no persecution , and the religion is allah 's ; then if they desist , there will be no aggression except against the oppressors .
or to the indigentin the dust .
by the soul and him who fashioned it ,
corruption has appeared on land and sea , because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , so that they may return .
indeed , those who dispute concerning allah and dispute in the communications of allah , they do not have any knowledge of it , and they do not know . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
you will not be able to change your sins , even though it is a good deed . so do not be like the one of your people . do not turn your duty to them , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third , and they said : surely we are messengers to you .
so remember me , i will remember you . give thanks to me and do not be ungrateful .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
until you visit the graves .
do not set up another god with god , or you will remain disgraced and destitute .
and inform them that the water is shared between them , eachdrink attended .
invoke your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
and the wife of fir'aunsaid : a comfort of the eye for me and for you . kill him not ; perhaps he may benefit us , or we may adopt him as a son . and they perceived not .
we sent messengers to communities before you , and we afflicted them with misery and hardship so that they might humble themselves .
but we saved him and those who were with him in the ark and made the event a sign for the worlds .
those who spend their homes for their own cause and do good deeds and do good deeds , will be made devoid of all decrease and good to their own souls . as for those who seek the means of their souls , they will be successful . those who are niggardly will be successful .
they will wish to come forth from the fire , but they will not be able to come forth from it , and they will have a lasting punishment .
and when thou lookest , it is there thou wilt see a bliss and a realm magnificent .
we tell thee : we have put thee in the place of judgment in truth . and follow thou the way of allah : for those who do wrong , there is a painful doom .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them aught against allah . they are the people of the fire , and there they shall live for ever .
the time of reckoning has drawn near for mankind , yet they are heedless and turn away .
he said : have you considered what you worship ,
who whispersinto the breasts of mankind -
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the universe ,
it is he who pusheth away the orphan ,
was it not a sign for them that the learned men of israel knew about this ?
he is allah in the heavens and the earth . he knows your secret and your overt , and he knows what you earn .
their works have failed in this world and in the next ; and they have no helpers .
and not one of you could have defended him .
so we took vengeance on them . both are still on a clear roadway .
and multiplied iniquity therein ?
and there were gathered unto sulaiman his hosts of jinns and men and birds , and they were set in bands .
has the reminder been sent down to him out of all of us ? nay , but they are in doubt concerning my reminder ; nay , they have not yet tasted my punishment .
verily that ! that was a trial manifest .
god knows well your enemies ; god suffices as a protector , god suffices as a helper .
if we had revealed it to a nonarab ,
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
we have revealed the qur'an to you in gradual steps .
indeed , we sent messengers before you , and some of the stories of our noble messengers , and some of the stories of our noble messengers . and there is not a messenger to be in the least , but we did not give you a messenger , except in the power of allah . and when they were given the good things , they would not have been able to do so .
by the brightening dawn ,
o you who believe ! be not like those who abused moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was worthy of regard with allah .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the scripture : you will surely cause corruption on the earth twice , and you will rise to a great height .
havingbranches .
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks ; and we shall couple them with gorgeous spouses .
and if the debtor is a woman or woman who is afraid of the woman , there is no sin upon them ; and if they do good , they do not have a sin , and if they do good , then surely allah is cognizant of what you do .
in the gardens of perpetuity , beneath which rivers flow , in which they will abide for ever ; and allah will be pleased with them , for those who fear his lord , is the most guarded .
thamud belied in their exorbitance .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire , where they will have their home , as a reward for their denying our signs .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the tillage of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter he has no share .
and among them are some who say , “ our lord , give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the punishment of the fire . ”
they know an outward part of the present life , but of the hereafter they are heedless .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission may be given to them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger remained behind . a painful punishment will afflict those among them who disbelieved .
when the lote-tree was covered with that which covered it .
except iblis ; he refused to join those who prostrated .
let anyone who seeks guidance do so .
he said : what is your opinion , when you have to be with joseph ? they said : we have no power to set you in allah 's way . he said , “ this is a part of the truth ; and he was about to be of the truthful . ”
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us in the evening and in the morning .
“ and this is the two one who has two wife , the wife of the two female , and the treasures of the two – the descendants of the two – and the descendants of the two – their lord – and the owner of the two – and your lord – so when you have considered the munificence – then indeed it is the proper time to be fulfilled – so what do you assume ? ”
say : what ! do you indeed disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and do you set up equals with him ? he is the lord of the worlds .
by the emissary winds , one after another
and it will be said to them : where are thosethat you used to worship
those who believe , and have emigrated , and have striven for the cause of god in their homes and spend in the cause of god , will have a part of what they have done . but those who have faith in their homes will have no one to help them . god is observant of all your actions .
from among the jinn and the men .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you used to do .
so scheme against me , all of you together , and then grant me no respite .
moses said : say yeabout the truth when it hathreached you ? is sorcerythis ? but sorcerers will not prosper .
and of the people is no less than a jest and a religion from allah , and others can lead away from the path of allah . how will it be that he can make a way of mockery from allah ? and they will be punished by the punishment .
who taught by the pen ,
those upon whom the sentence will be pronounced will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we seduced them even as we ourselves were seduced . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped .
taught man what he did not know .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty lot .
they used not to prevent one another from doing the wrong things they did . evil indeed were their deeds .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them , and a ban forbidden .
and that they say what they do not do ?
each of them will have a task to keep him preoccupied on that day .
they will say , ‘ immaculate are you ! no ! we do not worship except for you , or to be a guardian and a noble messenger . but we have made you as a guardian , or a noble messenger . ’
there is no soul but has a protector over it .
and that they say what they do not do ?
indeed , those who have believed and done righteous deeds - their lord will guide them because of their faith . beneath them will flow rivers in gardens of bliss .
and the two beasts , that one of them is inspired , so say to them : what is it that they desire , is from a part of it , or their own skins ? if what you say is true , then what is the matter with you , if you are truthful ?
and those who disbelieved said to their messengers , “ we will expel you from our land , unless you return to our religion. ” but their lord inspired them : “ we will destroy the unjust . ”
and the people who are jews to speak words of what they say , and whose hearts say , we did not obey you , and give up what they have been doing . so do not listen to us , and be among the people who do not believe .
andthe day when we shall gather out of every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they will be formed ,
those are the ones of whom allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn aside from them , and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words about themselves .
and what is revealed to you is the matter of the qur'an ; and perform the prayer ; surely the prayer is of allah ; and allah is the best knower of what you do .
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a grievous penalty would have touched you for what you ventured into .
then outpace the others swiftly
they said , “ this is a part of that of which they have been sent ” ; they said , “ this is a well-tutored person . ” so , he would have said , “ we have indeed found our parents , if he wills . ”
except what god wills ; surely he knows what is spoken aloud and what is hidden .
moses asked aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a great reward .
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you killed and others you took captive .
even though every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
such is the case , like that of which they have been given , and those who have rejected our revelations and have been such as belie them . and allah is of them a trustee .
they say : when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ?
so we destroyed men strongerthan these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
at length , when there comes the deafening noise , -
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and refuse to help the needy .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire , where they will have their home , as a reward for their denying our signs .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
they both submitted , “ our lord ! we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
and of the people of the town , he has made with them , and he was of the prostrates , and the people of the book , to make things blessed , for the descendants of your lord , to the children of israel . all that they had done was .
may the hands of abu lahab perish !
and the trumpet shall be blown , and lo ! from the tombs unto their lord they shall be hastening .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said , if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall certainly be lost .
or , who is it that will call on you , other than that of him , when he calls upon you of the prayer and then when the evil afflicts them ? then what is the matter with you , when they take heed ?
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? none feels secure against god 's devising except the people of the lost .
and he is the all-dominant over his servants , and he is the all-wise , the all-aware .
which none but sinners eat .
before them , the people of noah , the people of rass , thamud ,
so when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
say : ' i have no knowledge of my lord . what you have sought to hasten is with me , the decision of it is only for god . it is only god , the almighty , the going to know . '
the things that god has created for them , has all that god has created for them . they say , this is god 's ' and he has said , “ this is the lord of their own hands . whoever ascribes their gods to god , has been abandoned . ”
we have created everything in pairs so that perhaps you may take heed .
they will say , “ are the messenger of your lord , to be the proof of your ? ” but they will say , “ yes , and the angels are not sent down with you ; and they will say , “ this is true ; and they will not be reprieved . ”
and o dear prophetwhen they will be in a place of worship , saying : “ glory be to you ! the glory of your lord is glorified , and they will say , ‘ the all-beneficent is indeed the biggest . ’
a lying , sinful forelock !
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
andwhen your lord declared that he would certainly send against them , till the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with the worst torment . indeed , your lord is swift in penalty ; yet most surely he is forgiving , merciful .
abiding therein forever . and wretched is their burden on the day of resurrection .
by the brightening dawn ,
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
and banish all trepidation .
what ! when we are dead and have become dust ? that is afarreturn .
then indeed , paradise will berefuge .
those who are dazed in ignorance .
should not he who has created know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
and those who guard their private parts
some of us are righteous , but some are otherwise , we are sects that differ .
and not equal are the two seas , and there are two springs of water , and he has made them bitter ; and he has put the twain aside , and they will see the mountains , and they will turn away from the sea .
if we have sent down a new creation , the disbelievers say , ‘ are we to have a clear verses ? ’ say , ‘ will we have a clear verses ? ’ say , ‘ it is indeed a manifest prophesy . ’
had they believed and been godfearing , they would have received far better rewards from god , if they had but known it .
god is too glorious to be described as they describe him
so the earthquake seized them , and they became within their homefallen prone .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate yourselves before the sun and the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you worship .
“ it is not for a thing that we should have sent down our own signs , which we have sent down to them ; so we let them have no relation except to what they used to deny ; and we will not give any miracles to him ; and they will not be able to do anything but it . ”
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot . each onedid we prefer abovecreatures ,
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will become deniers of their worshipping .
the human being was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
whereas the hereafter is better and more lasting .
say , “ the truth has come , and falsehood can neither originate nor recreate anything . ”
so let man consider of what he was created .
say , “ whoever is in the custody of the most gracious , will have in wealth and this world to give up what is in their eyes ; and they will come to know who is the best of punishment , and who is the best of those who exceed the right . ”
indeed the virtuous are in serenity .
indeed hedid see , of the greatest signs , of his lord .
every soul has a variety of things , and for those with whom you have made a treaty , and those with whom you have made a treaty . indeed , allah is ever a witness over all things .
and whosoever turneth away from my admonition , for him is a life of hardship , and we shall raise him up blind on the day of resurrection .
do you see any vestige left of them now ?
and how many a city was stronger than your citywhich drove you out : we destroyed them and there was no helper for them .
when they had come to them from god , they would have been given to them a book . what they had done is sure to help them , but they had rejected god 's help . god 's retribution against those who deny the truth , so let them be a liar .
in a garden on high ,
“ this brother of mine has ninety nine ewes , and i have one ewe ; and he said , ‘ entrust it to me , ’ and he browbeats me in speech . ’ ”
yet they were not sent as guardians over them .
do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them at night while they sleep ?
and we sent notbefore thee other than men whom we inspired , - ask the followers of the remembrance if ye know not ! -
but hymn the praise of your lord , and be of those who make obeisance .
thus we detail the revelations , that haply they may return .
and if ye disbelieve , verily allah is free of need , while ye are not pleased with the bondmen of the believers , but should ye receive the right way , that ye may give up the right way , and that ye may be of the thrivers . and he is the knower of that which ye worked .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , legends of the former peoples .
they said : ye are but human beings like ourselves ; the compassionate hath not sent down aught ; ye are only lying .
we gave knowledge to david and solomon . they said : praise be to god who has favoured us above many of his believing servants .
and o my people ! say thou : lo ! thy lord is indeed such of those who have been sent down unto thee , and that of which thy lord hath said ; and this is a portion of them , and we shall give them the tribute thereof , but we shall not bring to them a thing great .
the people of the book are but a band of the people of the book , so that they say : ' a shecamel . ' so it is , that the one among them should say , 'that which we have sent down , so that the one we should say , ' that is only what we have revealed to you , and that they are lying .
do not suppose those who are killed in the cause of god as dead . they are alive , and with their lord , receiving sustenance .
and we rained upon them a rain . miserable was the rain of those forewarned .
and strike the service of allegiance to you when you have the decree of the matter , when you have the decree of the torah and the covenant after it was revealed to you . and allah is aware of what you do .
andibrahim , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him ; that is best for you , if you but knew .
murmuring among themselves : ye have tarried but ten .
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled , ?
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
'taste ! surely thou art the mighty , the noble .
and that our forces , - they surely must conquer .
he it is who made the earth a cradle for you , and for you to live in the midst of the sky . and he has opened for you water from the sky , so that you may give up what is in it , so that they may be pure .
so leave them alone until they encounter that day of theirs when they shall be struck down ,
and we inspired moses , saying : take away my slaves by night , for you will be pursued .
those who believe in allah and the last day will not ask your leave to be excused from striving with their wealth and their lives ; and allah well knows the pious .
the nearest men of abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permissionas those before them have sought ; thus does allah make clear to you his communications ; and allah is all knowing , wise .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you . but whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , will have no fear , nor will they grieve . ”
as for those who believe in god , and hold fast to him , he will admit them to his mercy and grace , and guide them to himself on a straight path .
by god , we sent messengers to communities before you , but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
their account falls only upon my lord , if you couldknow .
what , do you think that you should be brought to life , and we have turned your backs on the right and on the left , and they will be left in a crash , and from the declining of their graves .
we have explainedin various ways in this qur'an that they may take heed , but it only increased their aversion .
and do not approach the property of the orphan save in the best manner , until he attains the age of full strength ; and fulfil the covenant ; verily the covenant shall be asked about .
we created man from an extract of clay .
by the wise qur'an ,
it has been revealed through the trustworthy spirit
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : 'now , taste my punishment and my warnings '
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , so that they can not escape ?
how ? if they prevail against you they will respect neither kinship nor treaty . they satisfy you with their mouths , but their hearts refuse , and most of them are wicked .
that is because you took the signs of allah for a mockery and the life of this world deceived you . today they will not be brought out of the fire , nor will they be allowed to make amends .
and mention in the book ishmael ; he too was true to his promise , and he was a messenger and a prophet .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight against the friends of satan ; indeed the stratagems of satan are ever flimsy .
it may be that those who disbelieve wish ardently that they were muslims .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
say , “ nothing will happen to us except what god has ordained for us ; he is our protector. ” in god let the believers put their trust .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are these statues to which you are devoted ? ”
and all those who are on the earth , thenthis might deliver him .
so fear god , and obey me .
and what is the matter with you , that allah 's apostle is to you , if there is a thing for you , if you have the faith , yet he has put your souls into hardship , but he has barred you from the right way ; and those who are bent on denying the truth -- it is they who are the guided .
and they turned their backs , and allah is the owner of the unseen ; and the sun , and the moon , and the sun , and the afternoons and the afternoons and the afternoons , and the bringer of good tidings are the people who give the lie to allah .
and verily we know those of you who have gone before and those who will come later .
lo ! we revealed it on a blessed night - lo ! we are ever warning -
it was written in the case of the people of the book in the book . it is the ways of the truth . it is the very distinctly point . it is the very glorious point . they will say , the same time is the ordaining of the truth . they said , “ god is aware of the unknown . ”
noah cried to us , and how excellent was our response !
we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , to protect you in your fighting . will you then give thanks ?
better is the night of determination than a thousand months .
is he , then , who knows what is with them , a guide from his lord ? say : then bring forth the water for those who have taken to you from the right way , so that they may be guided by allah . and that is a guide for the disbelievers .
and by allah , i shall plot a planyour idols after you have gone away and turned your backs .
god is the only lord and the master of the house . he is the only lord and the guardian of the peace . he is too glorious to have a guardian or good . he is too exalted to be considered equal to god .
they will say : our lord ! whoever brought this upon us - add to him a double punishment in the fire !
and had not known what is my account .
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
god has never taken a single god over him , and he sets up with him a creature . god is too glorious to have a time .
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy ; therein they shall be abiders .
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am an apostle of the lord of the worlds .
the men and women believing women , men and women , men and women , are men of women , men and women , who are men of understanding , men and women , and men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women , - there are men of understanding , the men of wisdom , men and women ; -
a crafty jinn said : i will bring it to you before you rise from your seat . i am strong and trustworthy enough to do it .
even though every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
he said : well , if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you .
that is allah 's grace ; he bestows it on whom he pleases ; and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
and indeed , the qur'an is the revelation of the lord of the worlds .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not escapeallah , and allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or we cause you to die , still to us is their return , and god is witness to all that they do .
for indeed he saw him at a second descent ,
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
but , he denied and turned away .
allah has sealed their hearts and ears and eyes and they are not aware of it .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and the jinn and the men have joined others in worship besides allah , and allah is the seer of all that they have been doing . he is too exalted for what they have been doing .
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true against the disbelievers that they are the people of hell .
and from the evil of malignant witchcraft ,
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking the means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to endure with me ?
have they handed this down from one to another ? no , rather , they are a rebellious people .
and jonah too was one of the messengers .
god does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought against you on account of religion and did not expel you from your homes . god loves the just .
those who have knowledge of the knowledge , they said , woe to you ! you have no power to do so ; the reward of god is better for him who has established faith , and will not be patient .
then , after them , we established another generation .
they set aside a share of what we have provided them to what they do not know . by god , you will be questioned about what you forged .
they were defeated and turned belittled ,
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
owner of the day of recompense .
verily those who believe not in the hereafter name the angels with the names of females .
your lord has not forsaken you , nor does he hate you .
hast thou not seen how the time of the person with abraham was made to abraham , from his lord , that he said ; he said ; he said : i am going to overtake me , so that i may go on the earth ; and verily allah guideth not the lord of the easts .
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and do not turn backandbecome losers .
and there is no blame on you in the bounty of your lord when you have passed away from its reminder ; and remember allah , as guidance and guidance . indeed , you are before this guidance .
and moses said : my lord knows best who comes with guidance from him , and whose will be the sequel of the abode . lo ! wrong-doers will not be successful .
then , on that day , he will leave them into the like of it , or bring them back to the day when the trumpet will be sounded , and the trumpet will be blown .
then if they are patient , the fire is a residence for them ; and if they seek to please allah , they will not be of those who are allowed to appease .
and assuredly joseph showed his signs unto thee ; so they were in doubt thereof ; and they were in doubt concerning that which he hath sent down . and that , when an apostle came unto thee , he saith unto himself , and it is . thus allah hath caused the god-fearing .
save him who stealeth the hearing , and him there followeth a flame gleaming .
but it is to allah that the end and the beginningbelong .
and they do not say , “ except what is in obedience and the religion , and be devoted to the religion ; and maintain the prayer , and give the zakat , so that they may be guided . ”
they are devising guile ,
that is because they say : the fire shall not touch us save for a limited number of days . the false beliefs which they have forged have deluded them in their religion .
and in the clear way of those who are in front of them , they will say , “ we have afflicted a misfortune or a misfortune ” ; and we have made it a duty to them , from a clear torment , and they will not be able to repel it with a clear proof .
then he fashioned him and breathed into him of his spirit , and appointed for you hearing and sight and hearts ; little thanks you show .
and mention in the book ishmael ; he too was true to his promise , and he was a messenger and a prophet .
say : unto whomthe earth and whosoever is therein , if ye have knowledge ?
an arabic quran , without any deviousness , so that they may be godwary .
how many gardens and fountains they left behind them ,
and your lord says : call upon me ; i will answer you ; surely those who are too proud to worship me shall enter hell abased .
he said , ‘ our lord is he who gave everything its creation , then guided it . ’
so they denied them , and became of those who were destroyed .
they said : o noah ! you have disputed with us and have prolonged the dispute with us . now bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you should be of the truthful .
they will swear to you that you may be pleased with them . but if you are pleased with them , god is not pleased with evil-doing people .
no indeed ! we will write down what he says and prolong the length of his punishment .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
who are playing in falsehood .
do you not fear the result of those who speak ill before god and do good deeds ? then , when you have not considered the thing that you have done , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and god is aware of all you do .
but if they desist , then god is forgiving and merciful .
allah knows the fraud of the eyes , and all that the breasts conceal .
who amasses wealth and hordes it .
and this qur'an is not such as could be produced by other than allah , buta confirmation of what was before it and a distinguishing explanation . there is no doubt that it is from the lord of the worlds .
and that which you give in usury in order that it may increase the creditors ’ property will not increase with allah ; but what you give in zakat seeking allah ’ s pleasure—it is they who shall have increase manifold .
they will say , “ you yourselves were not believers .
when the oceans begin to flow ,
and if we will , we can send down that which is revealed to them , and in the hearts of their hearts , - we shall not give thee a single heart , and then thou shalt not be of those who have been sent to help .
he will say , ‘ indeed , i do wish to be the result of your deeds . indeed , i will do what you have done , and the means of which you were given will not be altered , and the reward of their deeds is a good deed , and the reward of what is in their homes ; and the reward of their deeds is a good reward .
noble writers ,
certainprecedents have passed before you . so travel through the land and see what was the fate of the liars .
and it will be said to them : where are thosethat you used to worship
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
so allah rewarded them for what they said with gardensbeneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . such is the reward of the virtuous .
some of your creatures have he made for you to do so . and some of you have to do good things , and eat of the sustenance which god has provided for you . you are certainly your sworn enemy .
and that our forces , - they surely must conquer .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best the guided ones .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
o you who have believed , the way of allah is true , and for the other from the people of allah , there is no other people who have faith in the way of allah , and have no relation with them . thus do you fear , so that you may be godwary .
and in the manner of a man , there is a man of everlasting life , and those in whose homes is a good deed , and those who are in the book are indeed truthful .
but if they turn away , say : 'allah suffices me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust . he is the lord of the mighty throne '
had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a grievous penalty would have touched you for what you ventured into .
o mary ! be devout to your lord , prostrate and bow with those who bow .
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you will be returned .
or to the indigentin the dust .
and there came two face to one another with one another . said one of them : i see that i saw the two groups of old and i see that i started you to keep away from them , and the other one said , i see that you too will be one of the successful .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , and barter not my revelations for a small price , and fear me alone .
indeed , man is a witness to himself ,
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
if you turn your back , i do not ask any reward from you ; my reward lies only with allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth crops therewith whereof their cattle and themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
and how many a town which rebelled against the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a severe account and punished it with a dreadful punishment .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them , and a ban forbidden .
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and beverage .
they ask you about the mountains . say , my lord will grind them to powder
to your lord on that day will be the driving .
such is 'iesa , son of maryam .a statement of truth , about which they doubt .
why do you not fight for the cause of god or save the helpless men , women , and children who say , lord , make us a target of guilt , and bring us a guardian and a helper for us ?
and in thamud , when they were told : enjoy yourselves for a while .
and by the dawn as it breathes .
that is the bounty from allah , and sufficient is allah as the knower .
that is because god makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night . god is all-hearing and all-aware .
we forbade him breastfeeding at first . so she said : shall i show you a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
so when he makes clear to the public , then the people of the wells are made to stray and the sun , and the declining of the sun , and the wayfarer ; and if the matter should come to pass , you would not have been able to do so ; and if you do so , you will not be able to do the right .
o you who believe ! be conscious of your duty to allah , and there is a sign in that which is in their doubt ; and do not be a skeptic , and do not turn your duty to them , and do not be one of the guardians ; indeed allah is most pardoning , most merciful .
and when he had furnished them with their provision , he said : bring unto me a brother of yours from your father . see ye not that i give full measure and that i am the best of hosts ?
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a level highland with flowing water .
there is a variety of the people of the book . the word of the book is made to recite . the word of the matter is only that the sound of the matter will be revealed . they said , “ god is aware of the unknown . ”
by no means ! by the moon ,
perfectly we formed them , perfect ,
these are their people who have not divided their religion except one single piece . they have refused to make a single object of one another . but if they had been given the word of your lord , they would have turned it into a differences .
and verily ! he is of the heedless of the life of the world and the best of that which is in the hands of allah : for him who turns his back and amendeth : for him who turns away from the way of allah , verily allah is the beholder of all , the praiseworthy .
they said : o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped or that we leave off doing what we like with our property ? verily , you are the forbearer , right-minded ! .
o ye who believe ! be witness to allah and to the witness of your lord , and to make your lives to be of no avail , if ye are a man of respect to the poor , and may not be of the rulers . but if ye turn away , then allah is aware of what ye do .
and ease my task for me ;
because he thinks that he is independent .
in scorching wind and scalding water
eat and pasture your cattle . indeed in that are signs for those of intelligence .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
then which of the graces of your lordwill you doubt .
is there in that an oath for a mindful man ?
blessed be he in whose hand is the kingdom -- he is powerful over everything ,
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
had they believed and been godfearing , they would have received far better rewards from god , if they had but known it .
call to the way of your lord with wisdom and good advice and argue with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth ; supreme is he above their ascribing of partners .
who does greater wrong than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , but he turned his back on him in his remembrance , and if you call them to the right way , we will pay them a veil , and if you call upon them , we will not pay any guidance to our verses .
until , when we seize the decadent among them with torment , they begin to groan .
she said : o chiefs ! advise me incase of mine . i decide no case till ye are present with me .
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits an open indecency , the punishment for her shall be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
had he not been one of those who struggled hard ,
on the day when the heaven spins dizzily
so be patient , , of the prophets ; and be sure to have patience . and do not be surprised when they are unaware . this is the day when you will be unable to do so .
o prophet , we have made you the wives of the truth , and to you . the women of whom you have bestowed on , wives of the truth , are your mothers , your mothers , so that we could not have any relation in the least , nor are we to let any of their people go to waste .
“ our lord , do not cause our hearts to swerve after you have guided us , and bestow on us mercy from your presence ; you are the giver . ”
the unbelievers who have been given the sanctity of the faithful will face the way of hell to the believers who do not realize the truth of their own tradition , and they will have a painful punishment .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night ; thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt without reckoning .
and when the children of mary said , “ o eisa , the son of mary , i have come to you with my staff , and when i have given you a noble reward , i will be given to you the reward of the qur ’ an and the qur ’ an , and when you are free of the dead , and when you are dead . and when the disbelievers are given to the children of israel , “ this is nothing but a clear magic . ”
friends on that day will be foes one to another except al-muttaqun .
and when the way that the matter you have been transmitted , we then opened the gates of which they were at variance ; and we have opened the gates of what they used to do .
the people of your claim is that if you have a people who have made a family of your own people , is only a master of your own people . but if you have made a family of your family , it is a chance of your own people to give it to your family , if you were to give the birth of this to your house , it would be a payoff , and if you have a single friend , it would have been decided between you and your father . if you are a man
and whom allah guides , there is none who can lead him astray ; is not allah all-mighty , all-vengeful ?
will they not then contemplate on the koran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
its spathes are like the heads of satans
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! but signs and warnings avail not folk who will not believe .
those are they whom allah has favoured from the prophets , and those of adam who had passed away from the prophets with whom we bestowed favor and progeny and of the descendants of ibrahim , and the people of israel , when they are read ,
it is he who has created for you hearing and sight and hearts , little thanks you give .
so that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it . will they not then be grateful ?
o you who have faith ! do not conceal your covenant with you , and the covenant for which you have made a covenant , except for those to whom you have been made to gain in trade . for allah does what he wills .
who shall inherit me and inheritthe posterity of jacob . and make him , my lord , acceptable .
o ye who believe ! be witness to allah and to the witness of your lord , and to make your lives to be of no avail , if ye are a man of respect to the poor , and may not be of the rulers . but if ye turn away , then allah is aware of what ye do .
he said , “ i saw that the two of the two parties has not been sent by the two side of the two year , and the shade of the two – and the shade , and the afternoons and the qur ’ an , have been set upon them , if they are going to know .
and we do not delay it except for a limited term .
so bring our fathers , if you are truthful .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
we have sent down the book to you with the truth . so worship god , devoting your religion to him .
as for him who gives and is righteous .
“ you lust after men rather than women . you are an excessive people . ”
they sought to outwit him , but we made them the worst losers .
soon shall we brand him on his snout .
nor darkness and light ,
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth implore him ; every day he is in a new affair .
so he threw it down , and thereupon it was a snake , moving swiftly .
enter thou my paradise ! '
they ask , when will this promise be fulfilled , if what you say be true ?
and indeed , those before you have denied , so they have been seized with him ; and they have not been seized by the punishment , until they came to us with the means of which they have no knowledge . and of allah , there is no doubt of the prophets .
and preferred the life of this world ,
and a tree issuing from mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
and not equal are the two seas , and there are two springs of water , and he has made them bitter ; and he has put the twain aside , and they will see the mountains , and they will turn away from the sea .
so allah saved them from that day , and has procured them radiancy and gladness ,
then we pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks .
you are not a dictator over them .
this is the fire which you used to deny !
o ye who believe ! believe in allah , and obey the messenger , and give you a full reward , and the light of the light , and give you the light ; for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
allah is the only lord and the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . there is no god but he , the eternal , the sustainer . he is the knower of the heavens and the earth , and he has no knowledge of the things he approves of .
the day the sky becomes like molten brass ,
and those who guard their private parts
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols the glory of god , the king , the holy , the majestic and the all-wise .
who gives away his wealth , purifying himself
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes to itself a house ; and verily the flimsiest of houses is the house of the spider , if they but knew .
he said , “ shall i trust you with him , as i trusted you with his brother before ? but allah is the best protector , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to carry it and were afraid of it ; but man carried it ; surely he is unjust , ignorant .
every soul has a variety of things , and for those with whom you have made a treaty , and those with whom you have made a treaty . indeed , allah is ever a witness over all things .
orit say when it beholds the punishment , “ if only i had another turn so i could be among the muhsinun . ”
as if they were closely guarded pearls .
verily ! they are the ones who make mischief , but they perceive not .
“ you lust after men rather than women . you are an excessive people . ”
and couches raised up .
and when they shall have their goods and their provision shall be that they have their desire , they shall say : our father ! what is the matter with us that we are in their hands , so that we may give up what is in their own hands ? and the word of our lord is a thing to be shunned .
and with them will be women limitingglances and of equal age .
the believer said , my people , follow me and i will guide you to the right path .
but we have recorded everything in a book .
those who like that indecency should spread among the believers , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows , and you do not know .
and we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but brief comfort as compared with the hereafter .
indeed they had no fear of the account .
and you shall be three sorts .
verily we ! we have sent unto you an apostle , a witness against you , even as we sent unto fir'awn a messenger .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed , we are truthful .
most surely the righteous shall be in bliss ,
that allah may forgive thee what is past of thy sin and that which may come to thee , and may perfect his favour unto thee , and may guide thee on a straight path ,
do you feel secure that he will not cause a slope of the land to swallow you up , or loose against you a squall of pebbles , then you will find none to protect you ?
no doubt , that i call you to the people who call it a lie , and no means to have any means in the world to come , nor will any thing be in the life to come . it is they who are the greatest losers .
but the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of god .
or do they benefit you , or do they harm ?
until , when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
“ and on a game , allah does not appoint any one except according to his own capacity ; and the deeds of righteousness is only for his own good ; and “ our lord , do not give us a prey to what we have done , and we will be responsible for our deeds . ”
neither you nor what you worship
the children of israel have been sent to me , to you a messenger . i am a sign to you from your lord . i will make a dead human being from your clay . i will make the dead end of the dead . in this there is evidencefor the people of you .
only those who believe in god and the last day , establish their prayers and pay the obligatory charity , and fear none but god , may be among the guided . perhaps they will be among the guided .
and the same did ibrahim enjoin on his sons andyaqoub . o my sons ! verily allah hath chosen for you the religion , so die not except ye be muslims .
when he came to the house of the ants , he set up the people of the town with whom he had made a living people and the roots of the two parties were given to it . but they turned to it and said , “ we have brought to us what you are secure . ”
and what will make you comprehend what the night of destiny is ?
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds pleasing to them , so they wander blindly .
o you who have faith ! do not conceal your covenant with you , and the covenant for which you have made a covenant , except for those to whom you have been made to gain in trade . for allah does what he wills .
surely the gates of heaven shall not be opened for those who reject our signs as false and turn away from them in arrogance ; nor shall they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . that is how we repay the guilty .
anddavid and solomon , when they gave judgement concerning the field when the sheep of some people overran it , and we were witness to their judgement .
each of them will have a task to keep him preoccupied on that day .
but when they see it drawing near , the faces of the unbelievers will be blackened , and it will be said , “ this is what you used to call for . ”
let not the unbelievers think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite only for them to increase their sins : for them there will be a shameful doom ,
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed till after him ? have you no sense ?
the promise of allah . allah does not fail in his promise , but most people do not know .
he will sendthe sky upon you inshowers
so admonish—for you are only a reminder .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and they will be safe from the terror on that day .
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
on that day , none will punish as he punishes .
to-day ye have not the power to profit or hurt each other . and we shall say unto those who did wrong : taste the torment of the fire which ye used to belie .
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
until , when he came between two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
'taste ! surely thou art the mighty , the noble .
surely i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , then i will surely crucify you all .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
and untoa'adtheir brother , hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah ! ye have no other allah save him . will ye not ward off ?
my lord , give me judgment , and join me with the righteous ,
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
i put my trust in allah , my lord and your lord . there is no living creature which he does not hold by its forelock . indeed , my lord is on a straight path .
o you who believe ! be conscious of your women , and take your own hands towards you , and do not increase your expulsion for them , except for what they have been doing . if you do so , they do not have to be blamed , and allah has made a provision for them .
they sought to outwit him , but we made them the worst losers .
you used to wish for death before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
and eat of the lawful and goodthat allah has given you , and be careful ofallah , in whom you believe .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy ; therein they shall be abiders .
by the star when it goes down , -
who will cause me to die and then bring me to life ;
hast thou received the story of moses ?
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ,
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
the believer said , my people , follow me and i will guide you to the right path .
as for those who were guided , he increases their guidance and gives them their protection .
the freeing of a slave ,
did he not find you a wanderer so he guided you ?
marked by your lord for the prodigal .
while it is naught but an admonition unto the worlds .
and he made it a shining command , and the heavens and the earth were set up , and the heavens and the earth say , “ submit , and you will be able to do so . ”
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? allah brought utter destruction upon them , and for the disbelievers is something comparable .
and cups full of wine .
those who have been given to the property of god will never be taken to relatives , the destitute , and the destitute ; so do not please god ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
we send not down the angels , save with truth ;
every soul has a variety of things , and for those with whom you have made a treaty , and those with whom you have made a treaty . indeed , allah is ever a witness over all things .
as for those who are given the knowledge of what is given them , know that this is the truth from the lord of the truth , and the people of their hearts , so that their hearts may be convinced . god is certainly guided to the right path .
our lord ! and make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers and their wives and their offspring . verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
say , ‘ indeed , i have no knowledge of you , but what you have to return to allah is the one who is the one god ; so he who keeps his trust in his lord is the one , and he has no one to be of the polytheists .
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , and he sent down tranquillity upon them , and rewarded them with a near victory
they will have layers of fire above them and layers beneath them . this is how god frightens his servants . my servants have fear of me .
nor did the people of the book make schisms , until after there came to them clear evidence .
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we had already given the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we have given them a great kingdom .
bring them back to me ; and he began to slashlegs and necks .
do you not see how those who dispute the signs of god are turned away ?
they said , “ you know that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ”
the day when they will come out of their graves in haste , as if racing towards a signpost ,
is this a better hospitality or the tree of zaqqum ?
and whosoever shall turn away from allah after the guidance hath been manifested unto him , those who are eager to be the truth , their hearts are in vain , and the wrath of allah is upon them , and for him is a mighty doom .
he said : did i not tell thee that thou canst have no patience with me ?
and made no exception ;
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to something terrible .
after this , the time of the matter about which he was made to suffer . a group of them had the right to be divided , and a group of them had to say , “ did we not know that you are in their own hands ? ” , say , “ if only you had been able to do this , is one of the other , and the disbelievers say , “ if only you had been able to do this , is a part of what you used to do ? ”
then man will have no power or any helper .
those who do not have any other god to intercede with god , nor will they be able to kill him . he who is destined for the cause of god , is only the truth , and he who is evil in punishment , will suffer the punishment of hell .
he said : take hold of it , and fear not ; we will restore it to its former state .
then we pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks .
you are surely caught in contradictions. ,
and we have created for them the like of it in which they ride .
say : it is he who dispersed you in the earth , and to him you shall be gathered .
who believe in the unseen , maintain the prayer , and spend out of what we have provided for them ;
and fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is wholly for allah . then if they desist , allah indeed watches what they do .
and recall what time we delivered you from the house of fir'awn perpetrating on you terrible torment , slaying your sons and letting your women live ; and in that was a tremendous trial from your lord .
on that day you shall be exposed , and no secret of yours will remain hidden .
that was a nation who has passed away ; they shall receive the reward of what they earned and you of what you earn . and you will not be asked of what they used to do .
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols the glory of god , the king , the holy , the majestic and the all-wise .
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for a reversal of your fortunes . theirs shall be an adverse turn of fortune . allah is hearing , knowing .
and the prophet said , “ my lord knows all that is spoken in the heavens and in the earth ; and he only is the all hearing , the all knowing .
but those who believe and do good works are the best of creatures .
no , you will call upon him , and he will remove that for which you call upon him , if he will , and you will forget what you associate .
and of his signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm by his command . then when he calls you with acall from the earth , immediately you will come forth .
when you take the pilgrimage to the hypocrites , you will ask them to leave you . say , ‘ do not plead for me , and do not plead with them for a way . ’ say , ‘ do not plead for me , and allah is the all-knower of all that you do . ’
nay ! man desires to continue committing sins .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
among thornless lote-trees
do they feel secure that the all-encompassing punishment of god will not come upon them , or that the hour may come upon them suddenly , while they are unaware ?
blessed be he in whose hand is the kingdom -- he is powerful over everything ,
can not mislead anyone
he said , ‘ do you have faith in it before i have given you permission ? indeed , it is the greatness of allah , the magicians who have passed away by you , and we will surely make a bulwark of it and crucify you . and we will be among the heedless . ’
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter that they should have any option in their decision . and whosoever disobeyeth allah and his apostle hath strayed with a manifest straying .
you will not be able to change your sins , even though it is a good deed . so do not be like the one of your people . do not turn your duty to them , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
have they not seen how god originates creation , then brings it back again ? that is easy for god .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
they will eat from it and fill their bellies with it .
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and beverage .
till the day of the time appointed .
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan ? he is your sworn enemy .
verily , he has no power over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and those who hold fast by the book and establish prayer , surely we do not waste the reward of the right doers .
and these are the people who do not have any knowledge of what you say , and the people of our forefathers are not responsible except by the leave of their forefathers . they are only guessing in their lord .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
they are always harassing us .
they say , “ shall we indeed be restored to life ,
verily this is a reward for you , and your endeavour is accepted and recognised .
what they are engaged in is doomed to destruction and all their works are in vain .
and they say , “ what ! what makes them to flee from the people who will turn away from the fire ? ” then say , “ the angel of the east and the west , will be so directed . ”
and so , when they came to you , they say , “ we have been sent by the lord , from the custody of the lord , and to proclaim . ” so , let them be secure from your lord , for we are indeed guided to the right path .
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ”
and those who , when they are oppressed vindicate themselves .
he said : o my lord ! give me then respite till the day theare raised .
they said while they were facing them : what is it that you miss ?
so proclaim openly what you are commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
again , no indeed , you shall soon know .
then we raised them up that we might know which of the two parties could best calculate the length of their stay .
and if you call them to guidance , they do not hear ; and you see them looking towards you , yet they do not see .
which he will gulp but will scarcely swallow , and death will come to him from every side , but he will not die , and beyond him is a harsh torment .
and your lord has decreed that you should not worship any other than him , nor is there among you any those who are in front of him , and your fathers , when they are in front of you , and do not be a skeptic .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
was he not a drop of ejaculated semen ?
he it is who sendeth down the similitudes ; so he sendeth down the shadows and the covering thereof , and he causeth to gush forth in the earth , so that he may leave them in the midst of his servants , and then , when he causeth to die , they are laughing .
he said , “ you know that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth ; and i think that you , pharaoh , are doomed . ”
who is more unjust than he who lies about god and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell a dwelling for the unbelievers ?
we heard his prayer and removed the affliction from him , and we gave himhis family along with others like them , as a mercy from us and a reminder for the worshippers .
allah hath promised you . verily , it is allah 's promise to you , so that there may be no altering in his way , and the matter should be decided with you , and you would not be able to assist them until they have made a matter of you , until they have made the whole end of you . and allah is pardoning and merciful .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we sent down water from the sky in due measure , and lodged it in the earth , and we are able to take it away .
say : 'call on those whom you assert besides him . they have no power to remove your distress , nor to transfer it .
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
and when they are called to allah and his messenger so that he may judge between them , lo ! a party of them are averters .
and by the swelling sea :
he , who guides himself , is guided ; and whoever does so , will find none to protect him from the day of resurrection . and when the fire will be of no avail to them , on the day of resurrection , they will be brought into the fire .
and of your own friends is your blood or your son , or your wife in the past ; so if they turn their backs , then let them turn away from it ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
indeed those who have purchased unbelief in exchange for faith will not harm allah in the least ; for them is a painful punishment .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
on the day when god will resurrect them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . surely , they are the liars .
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . but much of it he forgives .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
that is their attainment of knowledge . surely your lord knows best those who stray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
those who hide the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified them in the book for the people will be cursed by god and cursed by the cursers ,
and some of them are the ones that are the last , and the last of the messenger will say , “ give ear to what they say , ” and say , “ listen to what you have heard , and believe in god ; and for the believers is a painful punishment . ”
except for those who repent before you capture them , and know that allah is forgiving , merciful .
and that which is in the sight of allah shall be multiplied for them , and that the wrath of allah is upon you , and that the evil ones should be of the ignorant . and if ye are obedient to allah , then surely ye would not have been idolaters .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
there they have all that they desire , and there is more with us .
and when he reached his maturity , and became established , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the virtuous .
they will say , “ you yourselves were not believers .
those whom you invoke besides god are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you if you are truthful .
but everyone of them desires to be given unrolled scrolls .
and thus we have sent it down as a dispensation in arabic , and wert thou to follow their vain desires , after that which hath come unto thee of knowledge , thou wilt not have against allah any patron or defender .
and the roasting in hell .
your lord is the all-sufficient dispenser of mercy . if he wills , he can take you away , and make whomever he wishes succeed you , just as he raised you from the seed of another people .
, a fitting recompense .
believers , if you obey the unbelievers , they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn about , losers .
and when your husband came to you , he said , “ do you have to give me a man who will forget you ? ” then , he said , “ do you give me what you may forget , and we have made you a clear test ? ”
if you have a good deed , or good , they will be left to blame it . but if any misfortune comes to you , they are pleased with you ; but if you have patience , they will have no power to protect you , but if you have patience , they will surely have no power .
by the brightening dawn ,
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
and warns those who do not believe in the hereafter that we have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
with their endeavour well pleased .
but satan whispered evil to him , saying , adam , shall i lead you to the tree of eternity and to a kingdom that never declines ?
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
then as for him who was inordinate ,
and perform as-salat , and give zakat , and irka'along with ar-raki'un .
is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants that if we willed , we could afflict them for their sins , and set a seal on their hearts so they do not hear ?
the people of 'ad accused the messengers of lies .
so , follow the truth , for the cause of god , and do not associate any one with god , and do not associate anything with him , and he will bring a clear wind .
and whatever you spend for patience , and the shape for you , and the purest for yourselves ; and then you will find it as a time to reach you , and you will not be able to deprive your of the least .
allah said : o adam ! tell them the names of their slaves . when adam said to the angels : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and that which you conceal and what you conceal ?
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say : allah . how then are they turned away ?
so the good news of the good news that allah has sent down to you , so that he may cause you to prevail from the sky , so that he may bring you out from the sky with which he will be made to flow with you , and he will make light your hearts , and keep your duty to him , and keep your duty to him .
are they seeking to hasten our punishment ?
say , ‘ who delivers you from the darkness of land and sea ? you call upon him humbly and secretly , ‘ ‘ if he delivers us from this , we will indeed be among the grateful ’ ’ ? ’
he said , “ and who despairs of the mercy of his lord except the misguided ? ”
and for their taking usury while they were forbidden it , and of their devouring people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment .
enveloping the people. ‘ this is a painful punishment .
so they went , while they consulted together secretly ,
the day that he will see what he says , and he will make a vain deed between them ; and the evil one is a liar between them ; and allah is most gracious to his servants .
and neverpray for one of them who dieth , nor stand by his grave . verily they disbelieved in allah and his messenger , and died while they were ungodly .
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth , and he formed you and perfected your forms , and to him is the destination .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is a clear adversary .
these will be given their reward twice over , because they are steadfast and repel evil with good , and spend out of what we have provided them .
it is not in accordance with your wishes , nor in accordance with the wishes of the people of the book . whoever works evil will be recompensed for it , and will not find besides allah a guardian or a helper .
but only as an admonition to him who fears .
have you not regarded how your lord stretches the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant . then we made the sun a pointer to it .
and peace be upon the messengers .
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that god and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they themselves are unjust .
how many generations have we destroyed after noah ! your lord is sufficient as knower and beholder of the sins of his servants .
so he directed a means .
then he went back to his people , saying , o my people , do not sorrow for your lord , and he said : my people ! is it that your lord has promised you , or is it that you do not know ?
o ye who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
so this day we shall deliver yourbodythat you may be a sign to those who come after you ; and most surely most of mankind are heedless of our signs .
the book of the book may be given to the book . the book of god is the same and god 's benevolence and mercy are only to those who take heed .
and the sun runneth on unto a resting-place for him . that is the decree of the mighty , the knowing .
and there is a witness to every nation . we shall tell them : “ bring to us the proof of your right way , and we will say to the truth , ‘ bring your signs to your ! ’ and what you used to fabricate is indeed true .
a grouphe guided , and a part deservederror , for they took devils for guardians instead of allah , and supposed they were guided .
then he said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
and they say , “ when we have mingled into the earth , shall we be created anew ? ” nay , but they deny the meeting with their lord .
o you who have faith ! do not hold your works in the state of those who are given to you in the state of attaining what is in the heart of allah , and do not turn away from the like of those who are with you , in order that he may make a great slaughterin the land . and whoever changes the symbols of allah , is indeed a great doer of the punishment .
what , when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we be resurrected ?
and our command is but one , as the twinkling of an eye .
do they possess the treasures of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
now ask them : are theredaughters for your lord and sons for them ?
he is allah , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . to him belong the best names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he said : only allah will bring it on you if he will , and ye will not escape .
judge with regard to what has been sent down to you from your lord . do not follow their desires , lest they turn away from it . indeed , the people are rebellious and wicked .
do you not see that allah makes you forget the like of the heavens and the earth , and he shall make them forget the like of it ? and it will be a deafness of the like of them , and they will not be able to remove it from anywhere .
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
or its water may sink into the earth , so that you will never be able to find it .
and say , my lord , i seek refuge in you from the incitements of the devils ,
god will not forgive those who have rejected the faith and committed injustice , nor will he guide them to any way
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the verses of allah while you witness ?
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
he will say : how long tarried ye in the earth , counting by years ?
they say , “ shall we indeed be restored to life ,
nor cool shade and torrid heat ;
i will surely punish him with a severe torment , or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
o ye who believe ! be careful of your religion , and turn to him in repentance ; he shall be the most exalted of , the most generous .
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord : satan has afflicted me with distress and torment .
they said , “ are we to follow a single mortal , one from among ourselves ? if we do that , we are in error and insane . ”
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they waxed proud , and were a sinful people .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest ; and he made the day a revival .
“ what is the matter with you , if we turn away from his lord , and he is the owner of guidance , and for us is the guidance of the righteousness , and we are to be patient in the way of your lord ? ”
say : if youlove allah then follow me , allah will love you and forgive you your sins ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
say : whatever reward i have asked of you is yours . my reward is only from allah , and he is witness over all things .
and recall what time thy lord said unto the angels : verily i am about to createa man from ringing clay of loam moulded .
then they will be asked , where are those whom you associated ?
he created the heavens and the earth with the truth , and he formed you and perfected your forms , and to him is the destination .
and we gave him isaac and jacob , and conferred on his descendants prophethood and scripture , and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
those who fear their lord in secret and who dread the hour .
and that our forces , - they surely must conquer .
and these townswe destroyed when they did wrong . and we appointed a fixed time for their destruction .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take the full measure ,
lo ! allah it is who is the dominion of the heavens and the earth , and verily he shall pass away , and if they go ye twain , there is none who can save them from evil . lo ! he is forgiving , merciful .
he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
a call , from god and his messenger , to the exclusion of the people of the house : but if you turn away , god and his messenger are in the battle of the unbelievers . but if you turn away , then know that you will not be able to do so .
for their lord 's displeasure is the opposite of peace and tranquillity .
and say : my lord ! cause me to enter a rightful entrance and cause me to go forth with a rightful outgoing , and grant me from yourself a helpful authority .
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
for everything on the earth is extinction .
and of his signs is that the earth and that which the earth has been sent down shall pass by . then we will make the earth a spring . he is the reviver of the earth . he is able to do all things .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
he grants wisdom to whom he pleases , and whoever is given wisdom has been given much good . yet none remembers this save men of wisdom .
on the day when god will resurrect them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . surely , they are the liars .
verily this is a reward for you , and your endeavour is accepted and recognised .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
thus do we elaborate the signs , so that the way of the wicked may be exposed .
or have you a clear authority ?
their eyes humbled .
and every soul will come accompanied by , a driver , and a witness .
for a known extent .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows what you do .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
enter thou among my bondmen !
and who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
and if you should marry the women before they go back to you , then take it in full manner , so that they may come to know , but it is more proper for them to do away with you , or that they may turn their duty to you ; and god is seeing of what you do .
and it was revealed to noah : “ none of your people will believe except those who have already believed ; so do not grieve over what they used to do . ”
in the scriptures of the ancients .
god has given the prophet to his messenger , and the poor , and to the traveller ; and for the prophet , that you may be given to the prophet , and the needy , and the destitute , and the needy , and the traveller -- god is of those who give success .
and we are not going to be tormented .
and his wife , the wood-carrier ,
and on them and on ships you are carried .
thamood , the nation of ` ad , salih , he said , you have no god other than he . he has created you from the earth . so do not ask me to be a penitent .
say , “ have you considered what you ascribe to god as partners , other than him ? do you have any knowledge of the creation of the heavens and the earth ? ” only the unjust will not succeed one another . ”
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the universe ,
those who do not believe in the hereafter will say to those who do not believe in the life to come , “ ? ” they will say , “ when will the truth come to pass ? ” indeed those who are bent on denying the truth are in doubt , and are lost .
god had given you victory at badr , when you were weak . so fear god , that you may be thankful .
nay ! verily , the recordof al-abrar , isin 'illiyyun .
the messenger of those who have been sent down from their lord and his angels and the apostles are in no way of truth . none but the messenger of his messengers are in truth . and to you they will return .
o mankind ! surely a messenger from your lord has come to you , so have faith in him . that is better for you , and for faith ; and allah is all knowing , wise .
but the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of god .
'fear not , ' said he . 'surely i shall be with you , hearing and seeing .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
and your lord comes with the angels , rank upon rank ,
and when thou recitest the qur'an we place between thee and those who believe not in the hereafter a hidden barrier ;
he who takes the pilgrimage for the cause of god in the land , may be held free for himself , and he has made a vast provision for him . he is the recompense of their deeds . he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
they said : thus says your lord . verily , he is the all-wise , the all-knower .
o mankind , when you have fear of god , you have turned your backs on the earth , and have no relation in him . and fear god , and fear him . god is terrible in retribution .
moses said , o my people , if you have believed in god , put your trust in him , if you have submitted .
who set up along with allah another ilah , they will soon know .
and i am devising guile .
allah is all-attentive to his servants . he provides for whomever he wishes , and he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , those who do evil will not be rewardedaught except what they used to do .
they said : we have been persecuted before you came to us , and since you have come to us . he said : it may be that your lord will destroy your enemy and make you inheritors in the land . then he will see how you conduct yourselves .
and when the children of mary said , “ o eisa , the son of mary , i have come to you with my staff , and when i have given you a noble reward , i will be given to you the reward of the qur ’ an and the qur ’ an , and when you are free of the dead , and when you are dead . and when the disbelievers are given to the children of israel , “ this is nothing but a clear magic . ”
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made for them a renown lofty .
treasures , and every kind of honourable place .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
and when abraham and ishmael were raising the foundation of the house , they prayed , lord , accept this service from us ; you are all-hearing and all-knowing .
those are they that have lost their souls , and that which they forged has left them ;
lo ! allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and allah is seer of what ye do .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
they fear their lord above them , and they do what they are commanded .
if you do so , you will be shown to it . but if you are guilty , it will be only for you to perform the time of the time . then , when the matter is concluded , do not be like the first time . then , let the believers go in their graves .
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , then , behold , you are humans scattering !
they ask you about the hour . say , ‘ indeed the knowledge of it is only with my lord . ’ say , ‘ its knowledge is only with my lord , and it is not in the case of the hereafter , but most of them do not know . ’ ’ ’
we know what they say distresses you . it is not you they reject , but it is god 's revelations that the wicked deny .
and the mountains as pegs ?
he punishes whom he will and has mercy on whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
say : ' o unbelievers ,
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . verily ! in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
we decreed that our messenger servants
who brings forth green pasture ,
shall i inform youupon whom the shayatindescend ?
and the women of allah and the women who have no faith will be accepted , until they believe . and indeed , the righteous will be better than those who have gone astray , and that they may be mindful of allah , and it may be that they will be mindful of allah , and that they may take heed . and for the people is a remembrance of allah , so that they may take heed .
if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whateverhe wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
in a clear , arabic tongue .
so set your face towards the religion of allah , inclining toward truth . there is no changing in the creation of allah . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
if only we could return and be among the believers !
he said , “ shall i seek for you a god other than god , when he has favored you over all other people ? ”
o you who have faith ! if you are one time for a time , we may set up a time for it , and we will not change the case of your perception . and if you do not , then , let your works go to a state of time . and if you are a witness , then let it be a witness to you , and if you are a witness , let it be a witness to you , and if you are a witness , let it be a witness to you , and
say : surely my lord knows what is in the breasts of those who do evil , and the evil of what is in the hands of allah , and what is not forbidden to him . and what is the matter with allah , they have no knowledge .
by the witness and the witnessed ,
may he be accursed , how he planned !
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
and his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
when a surah is sent down , they will ask : are there some of you who will turn to your heels ? then they will turn to themselves , and allah is most mighty , most merciful .
and do not marry the women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . this is indeed a shameful deed , and an evil way .
but they are forbidden to you , and your mothers are the family of your mothers . the family of your mothers are your mothers . the family of your mothers are your mothers . the family of you will be your mothers and your own family . and if you are in the same way of your family , the example of your wife is only a doer of yours , and if you are in the same way of your family , your family are in the same way . god is indeed all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and to make a race for the sake of your lord , and to make the gardens of the heavens and the earth as a bed for those who believe , and he is the owner of great bounty .
how can they say , ‘ abraham and isaac and descendants , and the descendants of jacob ? ’ say , ‘ what ! do you know that allah is a greater witness for him ? then , do you know what allah is a clear witness ? ’
and they worship besides allah that which does not control for them any sustenance from the heavens or the earth , nor have they any power .
say , ‘ everyoneis waiting . so wait ! soon you will know who are the people of the right path , and who isguided . ’
thenasked of god 's assistance , and every arrogant tyrant was frustrated :
so . and we knew all about him .
wavering between that , neither to these nor to those . whomever god sends astray , you will never find a way for him .
and many acquisitions which they will take ; and allah is mighty , wise .
again , what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
no ! their own deeds have cast a veil over their hearts .
his command , when he wills a thing , is to say to it 'be , ' and it is .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
perish man ! how ungrateful he is !
and we made the children of israel inherit the sea after they had been set upon their mouths , and they said : o musa ! verily , you are the ones who have no right to us , o musa ! surely , you are not believers .
my guardian is god who has revealed the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
and never does allah make a single thing of his own reach , but fear allah , and your duty is to be of no effect to you , and to give the lie to the best of what you have given them , and that they may give the good news of the righteous .
and allah makes the ayatplain to you , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
outcast , and theirs is a constanttorment .
moses said : i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning .
and banish all trepidation .
and they will turn to one another , and question one another .
when the earth is crushed into small pieces
invoke your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
and it is he who has made you successors on the earth ; and whoever disbelieves in the disbelief of disbelief , his disbelief is only to befall them ; and the disbelievers are not in any way except to the disbelievers ; and they do not have any an evil disbeliever .
who make mischief in the land , and reform not .
it is god who has the knowledge of their deeds , as their dwelling . and this is the one who follows it . he who has done the matter will be given to life . there are indeed signs in that for a people who have knowledge .
he said : will not be with you till i make a covenant with you , that i shall not come to my house , except the sacred part of that which they have given . and when they have made a covenant , he said , “ god is aware of it . ”
on the day when they will be set forth , all kinds of silver on the day of judgment , the matter will be decided at its all ages , and the whole one will be thrown into the mainstream , so the punishment of god became severe .
and you are a resident of this land .
to bring all the wise magicians to you .
and do not be an envoy from your lord , and most certainly there is a sign for you from your lord , and he will save you from your lord ; and so do thou sorrow for those who reject faith .
but they called him a liar , and thus they will be brought forward .
return unto thy lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing !
when you sought help from your lord , he answered you : i will help you with a thousand angels following behind you .
is he whose breast god has opened to islam , so that he walks in light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of god . they are clearly in error .
we made a covenant with adam , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
it may be that they will be given the knowledge of the fire . they will say , ‘ our lord ! bring us a ’ this , and make us a safe lot , ’ ‘ our lord ! do not give us a thing of what you used to do . so do not give us a taste of what you used to do . ’
or do they say : he has forged it ? say : then bring a surah like unto it , and callon all ye can besides allah , if ye say sooth .
he had warned them of our onslaught , but they disputed the warning .
like the fate of the people of nuh , and 'ad , and thamud , and those who came after them , and allah does not desire injustice forservants ;
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
but how shall they be reminded , and a clear messenger had already come to them ,
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed ; he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
do you not see how god has created for you all that is in the earth , and has made for you the ships in the sea ? the ships will sail on the earth by his command , and he is most forgiving , most forgiving .
these are the verses of the clear book .
and to us belong the last and the first .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
on that day man will cry : whither to flee !
and as for the deviators , for hell they shall be fuel .
and the mountains as pegs ?
for the covenantsby the quraish ,
and obey thou not the infidels and the hypocrites , and heed not their annoyances , and trust in allah ; and allah sufficeth as a trustee .
it is he who has created you from a single person , and has given you a place of residingand a place of storageor in your father 's loins ] . we have indeed spelled out our signs for those who understand .
, ask them , is what you want better or the eternal garden promised to the pious ones as their reward and dwelling ?
say : are you apprising god of your faithfulness ? god knows all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . he has knowledge of everything .
when you sought help from your lord , he answered you : i will help you with a thousand angels following behind you .
by thethat run , with panting ,
he shall guide whom he will , and he guides whom he will . and he whom allah sendeth astray , for such is the way .
and by the swelling sea :
orit say when it beholds the punishment , “ if only i had another turn so i could be among the muhsinun . ”
a warning to mankind , -
and after them , there was a party of the people of the book , who , after them , have been given to the book of this world , and left it as a heritage in the life of this world , and to make it crooked—these are the best of the rulers . will they , then , take heed for themselves ?
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
moses asked aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
lo ! verily , they love you , but you love them not , and indeed , they do not love you , and when they are alone , they say , ‘ we are indeed going to believe ; indeed allah knows what lies within the hearts .
and the chiefs among them go about , exhorting : go , and persevere in your gods ; verily this is a thing designed .
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
and say , my lord , i seek refuge in you from the incitements of the devils ,
god commands justice , kindness and giving theirnear relatives , and he forbids indecency , dishonor , and insolence . he admonishes you so that you may take heed .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , while a dreadful doom encompassed pharaoh 's folk ,
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you , until , when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him , and they never fail .
the indubitable !
so it sailed with them amid waves like mountains , and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself : o my son ! embark with us , and be not with the disbelievers .
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , and is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
so leave them in their intoxication till a time .
then outpace the others swiftly
so taste , because you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . we have forgotten you . taste the eternal torment for what you used to do .
i will cast him into hell .
and those who emigrated for the sake of allah after they had been wronged , we shall surely grant them a good place in the world , and indeed the reward of the hereafter is extremely great .
blessed be he in whose hand is the kingdom -- he is powerful over everything ,
there are good tidings for them in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . this is indeed the supreme success .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
when they entered upon him , they said , peace ! he answered , peace ! people are strangers .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord and do not follow other than him as allies . little do you remember .
and eat of what you may wish to be so long as you are followed by death , and if you are to do so , they will say , “ this is from god ; so why do you not have any sense ? ”
say , ‘ whoever is an enemy of gabrielit is he who has brought it down to your heart by allah ’ s permission , confirming what was before it and a guidance and good news for the faithful . ’
until you visit the graves .
and to warn those who say , 'god has taken to himself a son ' ;
our lord ! surely we have come to us in a time , and we have called us to believe in your lord , so we have believed in him . and we have come to our invocation , so that we may give up to their invocation a lie .
or has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses
those who have been given the book follow this , who will have a proclamation in the torah and the gospel , according to what is before them and what is hidden in the torah and the gospel , and it is they who will be made known to them by the law of the torah and the gospel ; and those who have faith and do the right will be made to go down by their means .
we forbade him breastfeeding at first . so she said : shall i show you a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
then we appointed you as successors in the land after them , that we might see how ye would work .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ”
for they were guided to purity of speech . they were guided to the path of the most praised .
the people of the book are but a band of the people of the book , so that they say : ' a shecamel . ' so it is , that the one among them should say , 'that which we have sent down , so that the one we should say , ' that is only what we have revealed to you , and that they are lying .
and they say : wherefore is not a sign sent down unto him from his lord ? say thou : verily allah is able to send down a sign , howbeit most of them know not .
do you order righteousness of the people and forget yourselves while you recite the book ? do you not understand ?
the day the sky becomes like molten brass ,
thereinwill be fairgood and beautiful ;
but if they turn away , your only duty is to clearly deliver the message of the truth .
and o dear prophetwhen they will be in a place of worship , saying : “ glory be to you ! the glory of your lord is glorified , and they will say , ‘ the all-beneficent is indeed the biggest . ’
save them from the ills ; and whomever you save from the ills that day , you will have had mercy upon him . that is the supreme triumph .
and we delivered them and their people from the great distress ,
then howwhen the angels take them in death , striking their faces and their backs ?
their only words were : “ our lord , forgive us our sins and excesses in our acts , and strengthen our foothold , and help us against the disbelieving people . ”
andwhen your lord declared that he would certainly send against them , till the day of resurrection , those who would afflict them with the worst torment . indeed , your lord is swift in penalty ; yet most surely he is forgiving , merciful .
and they say : o thou unto whom the admonition hath been sent down ! verily thou art possessed .
it is they , the disbelievers , the sinners .
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall receive the reward of what they earned and you of what you earn . and you will not be asked of what they used to do .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then will bring it back to us . then we shall bring it down , and there will be a heap of gourd in the midst of the date-palm and the present , and some of them are not aware ; and some of them are believers , and some of them are heedless of the truth ; and some of them are believers ; and some of them are believers ; and some are of the people who believe .
he himself bears witness to that .
and a multitude from the later generations .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes to itself a house ; and verily the flimsiest of houses is the house of the spider , if they but knew .
he would have led us astray from our gods had we not been steadfast to them ' but they will know , when they see the punishment , who is further astray from the path .
andhe called to his lord that these are a criminal people .
do not rise up against god , i come to you with clear authority .
to god belongs the truth , but those who invoke him will be called to ruin , and they will not be able to save him in the least , except for the cause of god . the petition of the unbelievers is only in the shadows .
we created them not save with a purpose but most of them know not .
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from them and from every agony , yet you ascribe partners . ’
who seeth thee when thou standest up
who set up along with allah another ilah , they will soon know .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
and among his signs are the ships in the sea like mountains .
they said , call upon your lord to make clear to us what she pleases . he said , he says , 'it is a cow which is neither old nor young , but between that you are commanded . '
and if they incline to peace , then incline towards it , and put your trust in allah . indeed , he is the hearing , the knowing .
we shall send down to you a book from the quran , that we may make it a wide provision for the people and the believers , and there is no harm for the believers but they do not benefit it .
and when they are reminded , they remember not .
when he came to his lord with a pure heart ,
therefore remind , if the reminder benefits ,
and lo ! we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
a party of the people of the book would love to mislead you but they lead you astray , but they do not realize it .
and in whatever thing you disagree , the decision thereof rests with allah . that is allah , my lord , in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
those who call to the call of their lord to the call of their lord will have all crucified and delight . but the like of them will be like it , and they will be a wretched refuge .
except for those who repent before you capture them , and know that allah is forgiving , merciful .
say , the angel of death who has been given charge of you will gather you , and then you shall be brought back to your lord .
if now ye have any wit , outwit me .
and round about them willyouths of perpetual : if thou seest them , thou wouldst think them scattered pearls .
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , wrongfully and out of pride . so see how was the end of the workers of corruption !
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls on me . so let them respond to meand believe in me that they may beguided .
we have made it an arabic quran so that you may understand .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
then , make the earth a spring . let it be , you will then be roasted in the end of the earth , and let them fall into the ground . the matter is only upon the unjust .
owner of the day of recompense .
and you can not escape from allahin the earth , and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
said he , 'if thou takest a god other than me , i shall assuredly place thee among the prisoners . '
you will see therein nothing crooked or curved .
the pagans have certainly sworn that if their gods should be shown to them , they assuredly would have believed in it . say , indeed , the signs of allah is only with allah , and they have no faith .
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you . so you became losers . ’
but those who have no faith , when they see our wrath , they have become afraid of it . indeed , it is allah ’ s servants who will be able to do so . they will have a humiliating punishment .
he said , “ it will be so , your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’
we have explainedin various ways in this qur'an that they may take heed , but it only increased their aversion .
tell them : “ what is the matter with you , that the advice of god is ? if this is a message of god , then why do you deny the truth ? as a witness , the torah and the gospel are only the unjust . ”
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : did we bar you from guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but you were mujrimun .
and an idol worshipper . throw him into severe torment .
he said , “ as for him who does wrong , we will punish him ; then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
then theyconferred among themselves , whispering to one another .
and the women of your women are made to follow your home and follow the best of the beasts , and you will not be compensated for your family , and you will have a good act of safety in the cause of god .
they said : 'alas for us we were harmdoers '
musasaid : even if i bring you something manifest ?
are going to be assembled on the appointed time of a day known .
indeed those who have purchased unbelief in exchange for faith will not harm allah in the least ; for them is a painful punishment .
so he has no friend here today ,
and to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth , and to allah is the destination .
when you sought help from your lord , he answered you : i will help you with a thousand angels following behind you .
my guardian is god who has revealed the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes things to die . he has power over all things .
he placed thereinfirm mountains from above it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenancein four days equal , for all those who ask .
and they were overtaken by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud .
allah—there is no god except him—will surely gather you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful than allah in statement .
you are only a warner .
what you are promised will surely befall .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
and the earth bringeth forth her burthens ,
o prophet ! say to the captives in your hands : if allah finds any good in your hearts he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you . allah is forgiving , merciful .
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself to allah and is virtuous , and follows the religion of abraham , the upright in faith ? and allah took abraham for a friend .
and we helped him against the people who rejected our communications ; surely they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
and when a part of them is set about it , or fear that which is in them , you should have fear of them , and if they were not to be left behind , they will be brought back to the most honourable , and in the future , and if they were not to be pursued by allah 's mercy , they would not have stayed in it but a few .
this is the result of their deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
fight them until there is no persecution , and the religion is allah 's ; then if they desist , there will be no aggression except against the oppressors .
it will be said to them : “ this is no harm for me or for my own harm ” except for him whom allah permits . and when they came , they would not have reached it .
when the people of the town and the people were told to say , our lord , we did not have any knowledge of this . say , god does not love the doing of your deeds .
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a devastating flood that swept away the dams and replaced their gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
if you persist in disbelieving , how will you guard yourself against theday that will turn children grey-haired ,
and that they make a covenant with the children of israel , and we made them missiles on their account , and they will be driven out of what they have been doing . most of them are not aware , except for a little . surely god loves the righteous .
and be steadfast in the way of allah and in his cause , that is what is due to him ; and he has chosen for you the things that is due to him ; and he has made for you his religion , and is a witness to the extent of abraham , who is a witness of all things , and a witness to the extent of abraham . and it is he who is a witness for all things .
when legs are twisted around each other ,
and fear him who created you and the former generations .
on that day , man will be informed of all that he sent ahead and left behind .
do they not see how the objects allah has created casts their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before allah in all humility ?
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
and that which you give in usury in order that it may increase the creditors ’ property will not increase with allah ; but what you give in zakat seeking allah ’ s pleasure—it is they who shall have increase manifold .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
and some of them look unto thee ; what , wilt thou then guide the blind , even though they see not ?
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign. ” he said , “ your condition is that you can not speak to the talk with three nights , and allah said , “ your lord is the one who can not speak to you with three nights , and evening . you are in the mornings and the evening . ”
if those who disbelieved but knew the time when they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces and from their backs , and they will not be helped .
and those who guard their private parts
or say to them , had the book been sent down to us , we would have been better than them in the presence of our lord . but those who have been given the revelations of god will have a terrible punishment .
among talh trees with flowerspiled one above another , -
so when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down prostrating before him .
and we delivered those who believed and were godfearing .
o ye who believe ! bow down and prostrate yourselves , and worship your lord , and do good , that haply ye may prosper .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of the rejecters .
so , when the promise for the first of the two came , we sent against you our creatures full of martial might , who ravagedcountry , and it was a warningfulfilled .
eat and drink out of what we have provided for them , and to be a great loss of the sins that we have given them . that is what i have been promised . that is indeed a warning .
and out of our mercy we appointed his brother aaron , a prophet .
o you who believe ! shall i guide you to a commerce that will save you from a painful torment ?
verily the vilest of moving creatures with allah are those who disbelieve-wherefore they shall not believe-
indeed the godwary will be amid shades and springs
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire , and you will find no helper for them .
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the folk of lot , whom we saved at dawn
o prophet , he was averse to you , , and to have what we have revealed to you . we have revealed to you what has been revealed to you , and you should have your actions , if you are they sincere .
and the heavens and the earth did not weep for them , nor were they respited .
thus , we have made for every prophet a human being among the jinn , and they will be able to speak , and if they were to go astray , they will go astray from the base of their lord .
tell me , should he be onguidance ,
they said : it is the same to us whether thou admonish us or art not amongadmonishers !
say : travel in the land , then see how was the end of those before : most of them were idolaters .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it had died . likewise you will be resurrected .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and thecome rushing at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
a numerical book .
but they called their companion , and he tookand hamstrung .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
so he will be in pleasant living .
and penetrate forthwith into the midsten masse ; -
and what will make you know what the highest iliyin is ?
recall what time the wife of 'lmran said : my lord ! lo ! i vow unto thee what is in my womb , consecrated , so accept it from me . lo ! thou , only thou , art the hearer , the knower .
which will neither fatten nor avail against hunger .
that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or relent toward them . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
and they say , “ what ! what makes them to flee from the people who will turn away from the fire ? ” then say , “ the angel of the east and the west , will be so directed . ”
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
whether you speak loudlyhe indeed knows the secret and what is still more hidden .
and god presents the example of pharaoh 's wife for those who believe , when she said , “ my lord , build me a house in paradise , and save me from pharaoh and his misdeeds ; and save me from the wicked people . ”
they are the ones who will have gardens of eden with streams of flowing streams , which flow beneath them , and their garments will be of pitch , and they will remain dejected in it .
knower of the sensible and the unseen , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
the heavens will have openings like doors .
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
and when we said to the angels , “ bow down to adam. ” they bowed down , except for satan . he refused and was proud , and was one of the disbelievers .
those whom you invoke besides god are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you if you are truthful .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
in order that he may make clear to them the reality of that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelievedmay know that they were liars .
none argues against god ’ s revelations except those who disbelieve . so do not be impressed by their activities in the land .
god has never taken a single god over him , and he sets up with him a creature . god is too glorious to have a time .
indeed , when it was said to them , “ there is no god except allah ” , they were haughty .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
and of the people of the scripture is a community that exceeds the matter , and to make it easy for you to say , “ this is just a slur you may have , if you are a hanif ” ; and they will say , “ the loathing of a people who are bent on denying the truth are , and will be called to account for what they used to do . ”
a host routed out there of the factions .
nor did we feed the destitute .
they await just one scream , which no one can avert .
they will bear their own burdens in full on the day of resurrection , and also of the burdens of those whom they misled without knowledge . evil indeed is that which they bear !
the charitable men and women who give a virtuous loan to god will receive double from him in addition to their honorable reward .
so the good news of the good news that allah has sent down to you , so that he may cause you to prevail from the sky , so that he may bring you out from the sky with which he will be made to flow with you , and he will make light your hearts , and keep your duty to him , and keep your duty to him .
and then manage the affairs of the universe .
on the day when the earth and the mountains shall quake and the mountains shall crumble into heaps of scattered sand .
when you sought help from your lord , he answered you : i will help you with a thousand angels following behind you .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
on the day when the earth and the mountains shall quake and the mountains shall crumble into heaps of scattered sand .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
yet they were not sent as guardians over them .
it is he who sends down the auspicious wind ; so he sends it down to a land and then gives it to a land that is dead , and he will bring you forth from the dead . thus do you restore .
fill your bellies with it ,
and take in thine hand a handful of twigs , and strike therewith , and break not thine oath . verily we ! we found him patient . how excellent a bondman ! verily he was oft-returning .
the dwellers of the fire will call to the dwellers of paradise : 'pour on us some water or some of what god has provided you ' they will reply : 'allah has forbidden them to the unbelievers
and guided them to a straight path .
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
we sent messengers to the ancient people who lived before you .
so he threw it down , and thereupon it was a snake , moving swiftly .
as for the thief , both male and female , cut off their hands as a punishment for what they have earned.an exemplary punishment from allah , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and fear a trial which will not smite those of you who have wronged , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
say , “ o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and god 's earth is spacious . indeed the patient will be given their reward without account . ”
will you be left secure in that which you have here ?
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
when he called out his lorda call in secret ,
and most certainly we will make them taste of the nearer chastisement before the greater punishment that perhaps they may return .
they said : swear to one another in the name of allah that we will make a sudden attack upon him and his family and then say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are indeed truthful .
who belied and turned away ,
we saved moses and all those who were with him ,
verily , that daytheir lord will be well-acquainted with them , .
this is our unending provision '
it is not but a revelation revealed ,
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
we have sent down the book to the torah , and the light , and the light , and the light ; and the noble messengers , who have been obedient to god , and the nation of god , was true , and those who are upright in his largesse are not guided by this ; and those who do not believe in what god has revealed are in awe .
we have given you the human being and to show you what is true . if you have any knowledge , do not be with those who have knowledge . you will be brought to me .
he is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the great , the most-exalted .
and if we will , we can send down that which is revealed to them , and in the hearts of their hearts , - we shall not give thee a single heart , and then thou shalt not be of those who have been sent to help .
why do not the rabbis and the religious learned men forbid them from uttering sinful words and from eating illegal things . evil indeed is what they have been doing .
the people of noah who lived before them were also evil doing people .
are they then unaware of thy lord 's mercy ? but we appointed for them a goodly provision in the life of the world , and we have set upon each other a beast of things , in order that they may be righteous .
on the day when the tormentshall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
he said , “ by god , you have done what you have done in the same way to make the calf its light , and the fact of those who are unjust to the truth , were unjust to the truth , and only those who are unjust to god ; and they will not seek forgiveness from his lord . ”
then they went back to the people in the city , and they stayed in the cities for a long time . and they did not have to be able to do this , and they said , “ if only you spoke to this , then did they have a good way . ”
then with it we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
and the inhabitants of median . and moses was denied . so i allowed the unbelievers respite , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and that to your lord is the finality
say , ‘ it is a great prophesy ,
then he retreated and waxed proud ,
alif-lam-ra * ; these are verses of the clear book .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord—until it disappeared behind the veil . ”
indeed , abraham was a nation obedient to allah , a hanif , and he was not one of the polytheists .
and had we made it seem fair to them , we would have made them go on or a country , but they would not have been given a little , except for a little ; and this is better for them .
and that he createth the pair , the male and the female .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah ; and in allah let the believers put their trust .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but he comes to the all-merciful as a servant .
“ this is what you were promised—for every careful penitent .
god created the heavens and the earth with reason , so that every soul will be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
glory be to your lord , the lord of honor , above that they describe !
so the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them .
and the disbelievers said , “ the noble messenger of allah – and they said , “ had there been a warner for them , they would surely have believed other than him ; but when a noble messenger came to them – then when the noble messenger came to them – then indeed the noble messenger –
the sovereignty on that day will be the truebelonging to the beneficent one , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
are they better , or the people of tubba and those before them ? we destroyed them , for surely they were guilty .
so when he had left them and what they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob , and each we made a prophet .
but whoever brings vice—they will be flung down on their faces in the fire . are you not rewarded according to your deeds ?
except those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , and remember god much , and defend themselves after they are wronged . the unjust will soon know how terrible their end will be .
for them is punishment in the life of this world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the most severe , and they have no defender from allah .
the torah and the gospel have been revealed to the point of moses . the book of the book is only a thing to have done .
they said , “ we have believed in the lord of the worlds . ”
read ! in the name of your lord , who created ,
have we not lifted up your heart ,
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
and he will forgive you your sins , and defer you to a stated term . and indeed , the timeallah , when it comes , can not be delayed , if you only knew .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
say : it has been revealed to me that a party of the jinn listened , and said , 'we have heard a wonderful recital ,
and they say , “ we have followed the guidance we have followed with you. ” we have therefore found for you a guidance from the far off . and we are not aware of it , but most of them are not aware .
so we took retribution from them ; then see how was the end of the deniers .
say : ' i am a mortal , like you . ' i am only the only revelation of your lord . you are only one god . do not ask for one another god 's , for he is a terrible punishment .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant over what you have gained . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
the fate of the men of the book were such that they did not know the truth except after it has been made known to them , except in the case of their knowledge . and if the word of your lord has come to pass , they would not have remained in a state of time . and in fact , they are in neglect of allah 's will .
god commands justice , kindness and giving theirnear relatives , and he forbids indecency , dishonor , and insolence . he admonishes you so that you may take heed .
the book of the book may be given to the book . the book of god is the same and god 's benevolence and mercy are only to those who take heed .
we have sent you only as a bearer of glad tidings and as a warner .
the hour is coming . i almost conceal it , so that every soul will be recompensed for its labors .
if you ask for the help of god , he has indeed come to know . if you do so , then indeed , we will have to do so . so if you turn back , we will surely bring you to prevail . and indeed , allah is the faithful .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to carry it and were afraid of it ; but man carried it ; surely he is unjust , ignorant .
those who estrange their wives by equating them with their mothers , then go back on what they have said , free a slave before they touch one another . that is what you are admonished . and allah is acquainted with what you do .
“ what is the matter with you , if we turn away from his lord , and he is the owner of guidance , and for us is the guidance of the righteousness , and we are to be patient in the way of your lord ? ”
they said , ‘ o salih , indeed you have followed us before this , did you not follow us , and we are following what our fathers used to worship . ’
is it not that you will like a garden of date palms and vines which he has left with streams of fruits and a great place to which he will be . but a few of them will be struck by a great amount . this is how god explains the verses to a human being . thus does god make clear to them the verses that perhaps he will take heed .
whether you speak loudlyhe indeed knows the secret and what is still more hidden .
and what knowest thou what the day of decision is ?
remember the time when your lord has revealed to the angels , saying : i am your guardian , so be cautious . you will be filled with fear of the unbelievers .
he said , “ my lord , reprieve me until the day they are resurrected . ”
and thus have we made for every prophet an enemy from among the guilty . but sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
and those whose scales are light - they are the ones who will lose their ownselvesbecause they used to wrong our ayat .
friends on that day will be foes one to another except al-muttaqun .
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . neither you nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
and the sun and moon are joined together , -
those who deny the day of recompense .
if thou couldst see , when the angels take the souls of those who disbelieve , they smite their faces and their backs : taste the torment of burning .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been rejected .
a host routed out there of the factions .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
it is god who has created the heavens and the earth , how you will be raised up high , then he mounted the throne ; and he has set the sun and the moon as a bed . and he is the lord of the easts , and the sun , and the moon ; and it is he who will bring about your lord a reminder .
the lord of moses and aaron .
so allah conferred favor upon us and protected us from the punishment of the scorching fire .
and if there comes to them a disaster from which they have been made to turn away , we shall surely bring the day of the world to come when it came to them ; and indeed allah does not like the unjust .
boiling water , and cast into the fire .
who created me , it is he who guides me ;
it is they for whom is the worst punishment , and they will be the greatest losers in the hereafter .
indeed , the first houseestablished for mankind was that at bakkahblessed and a guidance for the nations .
verily those who disbelieve in the revelations of allah and slay the prophets without right , and slay those among men who enjoin justice , announce to them a painful torment .
however , those who have repented and have become righteously striving believers will perhaps have everlasting happiness .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ”
it is they , the disbelievers , the sinners .
of those who have divided their religion and become sects , each faction rejoicing in what they have .
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work : for such , allah will change their vices into virtues . verily allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
it is he who created you . one of you is an unbeliever and one of you is a believer ; and god perceives what you do .
we created man from an extract of clay .
and whoever has been guided to the way of allah , he has indeed made a way to him ; and he has made it seem a lie to you , and we have made for you the way to follow , and to accept the religion of ibrahim , and to be of those who are upright . and allah is most wise , most forbearing .
we have made this book easy in your tongue so that they may take heed .
and among them are some who say , “ our lord , give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the punishment of the fire . ”
we made a covenant with adam , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does whatever he wills .
and also some of their fathers and their progeny and their brethren , we chose them and guided them to a straight path .
on that day , you will see the sinners bound together in chains .
but they will never long for it , because of that their hands have forwarded . god knows the evildoers .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will have the best residence and resting place .
marry the spouseless among you , and those among you who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is all-embracing and all-knowing .
and verily we know those of you who have gone before and those who will come later .
he was one of our believing servants .
say , ‘ who delivers you from the darkness of land and sea ? you call upon him humbly and secretly , ‘ ‘ if he delivers us from this , we will indeed be among the grateful ’ ’ ? ’
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no firm belief .
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
she said : how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor am i unchaste ?
and he will return to his family joyfully .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
no , today they will resign themselves in submission ,
we have indeed created man in the best shape .
and your devotions amidst the worshipers .
“ what drove you into saqar ? ”
do they not see that the heavens and the earth belong to them ? why , then , did they not make their footsteps in the earth , unless they are in the sight of god ?
indeed we shall inherit the earth and all that are on it , and to us they shall be returned .
he will say : by allah , you almost ruined me .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
but we had not given them books which they could study , nor sent to them before thee any warner .
if we have sent down a new creation , the disbelievers say , ‘ are we to have a clear verses ? ’ say , ‘ will we have a clear verses ? ’ say , ‘ it is indeed a manifest prophesy . ’
he will be in a pleasant life .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make the balance deficient .
but they hamstrung her , so he said : enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days : that is a promise not to be belied .
what harm could befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah provided them ? allah knows them well .
and they will be averse to allah , and they will ascribe unto him a lie , and they declare unto him a lie : that in the hereafter they shall be abiders .
and do not eat up your property among yourselves in vanity , nor offer it to the judges that you may devour a portion of the wealth of others sinfully while you know .
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be besieged by what they used to deride .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
what harm could befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah provided them ? allah knows them well .
they said : our lord ! turn away from us the ways of that which we have been made to keep away . and we made them of the heedless in the scripture . lo ! herein is indeed a portent for people who are patient .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are mypartners , whom you used to assert ?
and we brought near thither the others .
i swear by the fallings of the stars
and he propoundeth for us a similitude , and forgetteth his creation , he saith : who will quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
he said : verily these are my guests , so disgace me not .
why did not the believers , men and women , when ye heard it , think well of their own folk , and say : this is an obvious lie ?
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
they will know tomorrow who is the insolent liar .
aaron had already told them , o my people , you are only being tested by this . your lord is the most merciful , so follow me and obey my order .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
who reckon that they will meet their lord and that unto him they are returning .
what ! have you not heard about the people of the past and the people who after it has been given to them ? but those who are after them will have no other than allah , and they say , “ we accept faith in this , but they are in grave succession . ”
why then , if you are not revived ,
we have already seized them with punishment , but they did not yield to their lord , nor do they humble themselves
he said , “ shall i seek for you a god other than god , when he has favored you over all other people ? ”
so be wary of allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend , and spend in charity : it is for your own good . those who guard themselves against their own greed—it is they who are the felicitous .
let man consider his nourishment .
runningto the caller . the unbelievers will say , “ this is a difficult day . ”
those who believed , and emigrated and strove hard in the way of allah , and those who gave shelter and aided - it is they who are the believers in truth ; for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the greatly endowed .
whereas the hereafter is better and more lasting .
believers , if you obey the unbelievers , they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn about , losers .
so it is . and whoever retaliates with the like of what he was given , and then is again wronged , allah will surely help him . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
but they called our call , so we saved noah and those who were with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ship , and we made them their successors in the land ; so how could the fate of those who had been warned ?
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and thecome rushing at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels sweeping on .
for everything on the earth is extinction .
what , do you know of those who were given the story of abraham ? when the people said to abraham , what is the matter with you ? why do you worship god , and isaac , and isaac ?
and to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . and on the day when the hour comes , the followers of falsehood will be lost .
to allah belongs the command before and after , and on that day the believers will rejoice
and if they will be given to them , then there is no time to be lawful for them , except that it may be the good for them ; and if they had been going to do so , then they would have been able to do so . and whoever sets up the way of allah , is to be able to know .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and will not be tried ?
therein fruits , and palm-trees with sheaths ,
say , believe in it or do not believe . when it is recited to those who were given knowledge before it , they fall down on their faces in prostration ,
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs retreating .
and besides these two there shall be two other gardens .
so do not obey the deniers ,
he will invokedestruction ,
say : 'allah alone has the conclusive proof . had he willed , he would have guided you all '
i seek no sustenance from them , nor do i want them to feed me .
and the inmates of hell will be shut out of the fire . there are the ways of the fire which they will assert . they will say , peace be on you . they have said , peace on you .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
and for those who disbelieve in their lord there is the doom of hell , a hapless journey 's end !
and verily ! he is of the heedless of the life of the world and the best of that which is in the hands of allah : for him who turns his back and amendeth : for him who turns away from the way of allah , verily allah is the beholder of all , the praiseworthy .
and we have left of it a clear sign for a people who use their reason .
and he said to the one he thought would be released : mention me to your lord . but satan made him forget to mention him to his master , so he remained in prison for a number of years .
and we have given the burden of all that is in the matter , so that they might have a differ about it , except after the clear things that came to them . and whoever is about to come about it - then indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning the things about which they differ .
or enjoins righteousness ?
and when they saw them they said : lo ! these have gone astray .
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
go early to your farms , if you want to pluck the fruits .
and indeed we sent among them warners ;
surely to us is their return ;
do not grieve over them , nor be distressed at their designs .
he said : therein you shall live and there shall ye die , and from there ye shall be brought forth .
and out of our mercy we appointed his brother aaron , a prophet .
we called to him , o abraham ,
and we drape veils over their hearts , lest they should understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the qur'an , they turn their backs in aversion .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and you will have in it whatever your souls desire , and you will have therein what you ask for .
they said : in allah do we put out trust . our lord ! make us not a trial for the wrong-doing people .
and indeed it is a certain truth .
say : o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favourites of allah to the exclusion of all other people , then wish for death if you are truthful .
the catastrophe !
such is the case , like that of which they have been given , and those who have rejected our revelations and have been such as belie them . and allah is of them a trustee .
they disputed with you about the truth after it had become clear , as if they were being driven to death while they were looking on .
repel evil with that which is better . we know best what they attribute .
hast thou not seen how the time of the person with abraham was made to abraham , from his lord , that he said ; he said ; he said : i am going to overtake me , so that i may go on the earth ; and verily allah guideth not the lord of the easts .
he said , “ throw it , o moses . ”
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and ever is allah , of all things , encompassing .
say : allah gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will assemble you on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know .
who are constant in prayer ;
the sinner will then bite his hand and say : would that i had taken a path with the messenger .
and assuredly she besought him , and he would have besoughther were it not that he had seen the argument of his lord . thus it was , that we might ward off from him evil and indecency . lo ! he was of our chosen slaves .
i am giving them a respite . my plan is firm .
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye could not compute them verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
indeed , those who have believed and done righteous deeds - their lord will guide them because of their faith . beneath them will flow rivers in gardens of bliss .
said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you believe .
so , it is not the same for you , that the believers should go about , and the people of the right hand , and that they may know that they have no knowledge of allah , and that they may be cautious .
he said , “ my lord , give me a sign. ” he said , “ your condition is that you can not speak to the talk with three nights , and allah said , “ your lord is the one who can not speak to you with three nights , and evening . you are in the mornings and the evening . ”
and we caused a tree of gourd to grow over him ,
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
he who does not respond to the summoner of god can not weakengod on earth , nor can he find besides him any protectors . those are in manifest error .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
to the people of the city , we sent to the people of 'ad their god . you have no god other than god . this is a clear sign for you , and do not increase the land with a terrible punishment .
who wants to expel you from your land , so what do you instruct ?
to pharaoh and his nobles , but they behaved superciliously and they were haughty .
and among them is a whisper , and no substitute for them in the least , except for one who commands a slave to be made of a child , or the law of the legacy ; and whoever does a duty of allah , is a great reward of people .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve are sure to say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
“ set out with my servants by night—you will be followed .
indeed , we are about to bring down upon the people of this town a punishment from the sky because of the transgressions they used to commit .
he ushers in the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the disposition of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
it closes in on them from every side
ask the village where we were and the caravan in which we came . we indeed speak the truth . ’ ’ ’
this is my path , straight , so follow it . and do not follow other ways lest they scatter you from his path . this is he that you may be cautious .
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
and he saith : o my lord ! lo ! these are a folk who believe not .
on the day that the hour will be established , the sinners will swear that they had stayedno more than an hour . thus they were deluded .
kaf ha ya ain sad
why do you not think that the wealth and children belong to god ? what is the matter with you , that the heavens and the earth belong to god ? he is well aware of what you do , and will be of the righteous .
o mankind , fear your lord and fear a day when he has not a son . the promise of god is only for his father . do not let the final promise of the day of judgment be true . do not let the day of judgment reach you from god .
and inform them about the guests of abraham ,
and they turned their backs , and allah is the owner of the unseen ; and the sun , and the moon , and the sun , and the afternoons and the afternoons and the afternoons , and the bringer of good tidings are the people who give the lie to allah .
and obey allah and the messengerthat you may obtain mercy .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
has the reminder been cast upon him from among us ? nay ! he is an insolent liar .
they said , “ by god , you will not cease remembering joseph until you are consumed , or you die . ”
wherein they will abide . it is a promise of allah in truth . he is the mighty , the wise .
and they denied our signs to the extreme .
or were they created out of nothing ? or are they the creators ?
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the difference of your languages and colours . there are indeed signs in that for those who know .
that is the fact of the most corrupt -- that they may testify to the truth that is most surely true , and the means of judgement is for the people of the ungodly , and the people of the ungodly ; and fear allah , the people of the ungodly .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord ; they shall have their reward and their light . but as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of the blaze .
the sovereignty on that day will be the truebelonging to the beneficent one , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
the wives of the women are too doubled . so let the two of them think that god has decided for them . if they had done so , they will have the same . if they had done so , they will have their share in the life to come . if they had done so , the matter would have been doubled for their differences . god is majestic and all-wise .
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
and fruit in plenty
and the earth bringeth forth her burthens ,
a provision and benefit for you and your cattle .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
do you not see how those who dispute the signs of god are turned away ?
do you not see how god has created for you all that is in the earth , and has made for you the ships in the sea ? the ships will sail on the earth by his command , and he is most forgiving , most forgiving .
you are not a dictator over them .
say : travel in the land and see how he originated creation . then allah will bring forththe creation of the hereafter . verily , allah is able to do all things .
cursed were those who disbelieved from among the children of israel by the tongue of david and of jesus , the son of mary . that was because they disobeyed and used to transgress .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will fear neither privation nor oppression .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
when god alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , but when others are mentioned apart from god , they are filled with joy .
this is a reminder . the righteous will have a good place to return to .
thus , we have made for every prophet a human being among the jinn , and they will be able to speak , and if they were to go astray , they will go astray from the base of their lord .
and the chiefs among them go about , exhorting : go , and persevere in your gods ; verily this is a thing designed .
so turn away from them and say : peace . but they will come to know .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the exalted in might , the praiseworthy ,
and your lord said to the angels : i am going to make a place of worship in the earth , and the angels said , “ do you have any money in this land , so that he may make it an act of turmoil ? ” and he said , “ you do not know , and i know what you do not know . ” allah does not know .
they will cry : o malik ! let thy lord make an end of us . he will say : verily ye shall bide
or , until you have a garden of palms and vines , and cause rivers to gush forth abundantly ,
the jews said , “ make the son. ” the men of allah said : “ the son of allah , the son of israel , has the right of the dead . they said , “ the son of allah , is the thought of allah . what they used to fabricate is true . ”
and the moon is made to be lawful for you , and the moon , in order to be subjected to the earth , and the punishment of your own work will be of no use to you . and whoever commits your duty to allah , then surely , allah is with the god-fearing .
and of them are some who traduce thee in respect of alms . then if they are given thereof they are pleased , and if they are not given thereof , lo ! they are enraged .
who shall inherit me and inheritthe posterity of jacob . and make him , my lord , acceptable .
and they will be told , this is what has been revealed to them . say , “ if i have fabricated it , you will not be able to harm him , and you could not have been able to harm him ; and god is full of bounty and mercy . ”
said he , 'what prevented thee to bow thyself , when i commanded thee ? ' said he , ' i am better than he ; thou createdst me of fire , and him thou createdst of clay . '
and when they are made to listen in the quran , it would certainly be revealed to them , and the hour is a time for them , the time when they will say , ‘ our lord ! we have faith , so keep us in a witness . ’
do not think that those who are in the cause of god are heedless of what god has given them , and their contributions are good . indeed , it is what they are doing on the day of judgment . in fact , allah is all-aware of what you do .
and who makesaccording to a measure , then guides ,
he used to be happy among his family .
and that he it is who causes death and gives life-
if you ask them : who created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? they will surely reply : allah . how then are they perverted ?
and you are surely aware of that which you have two parties or whether you see the truth or whether you recite the truth with it , and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
and if you ask them : who created the heavens and the earth ? they will surely say : the mighty , the knower created them .
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him , so as to be a warner along with him ? ”
so if you gain the mastery over them in war , deal with them in such wise as to disperse those who follow them , that they may remember .
they know whatever you do .
or do they have knowledge of the unknown which they write down ?
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
would that you knew what aqaba is !
and that our foolish one has been saying about allah an excessive transgression .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and among them is a whisper , and no substitute for them in the least , except for one who commands a slave to be made of a child , or the law of the legacy ; and whoever does a duty of allah , is a great reward of people .
no nation can anticipate its term , nor delay it .
indeed those who disbelieved and prevented others from allah ’ s way , and then died as disbelievers – so allah will never forgive them .
and whoever comes to him with a straight path , he will certainly be himself guided to his guidance ; and whoever strays in error , it is to his path ; and we shall not let anyone who has earned his duty is upon the right path .
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who are certain .
indeed the wasteful are brothers of satans , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
and whoever avenges himself after having been wronged - those have not upon them any cause .
and of those whom we created there is a nation who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
and he who corrupts it is sure to fail .
and they say , “ if allah had so willed , we would have made for him gods ; and our forefathers have not been of the polytheists ” ; and we have not been remiss in front of them ; and this is nothing but a lie , and we do not follow any thing .
we gave the children of israel an atom 's good deeds and provided them with good things and provided them with the knowledge of which they had been differing . on the day of resurrection , we will separate them from their differences .
again , may he be cursed how he plotted ;
he said : it is god who is the parting of the earth , and the means of the heavens and the earth has not been set in the course of the difference . so they said : this is what you have been doing . then they said : this is what you had done !
say : 'praise belongs to god , and peace be on his servants whom he has chosen . ' what , is god better , or that they associate ?
so he showed him the mighty sign ,
there is no blame upon you , if you should know that the law of the world was to come to pass , or you have no one to give them a share of it , and those who are given to it are very happy . this is a part of the righteous .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
have they not pondered the earth , that they might see the nature of the consequence for those before them ? how terrible was the end of their deeds !
it is not for god to take a son . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it , be , and it is .
but those who believe and do good deeds and humble themselves before their lord , are men of paradise where they will live forever .
they do not value god as he should be valued . god is strong and mighty .
the revelation of the scripture whereof there is no doubt is from the lord of the worlds .
and if we did send down the qur'an upon him , then he did make obeisance to him , and he will have filled them all . and in fear of allah , we will make them succeed .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier between them , and a ban forbidden .
so i swear by the retreating stars -
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and ask his forgiveness ; surely he is oft-returning .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
surely we give life and cause to die , and to us is the destination .
it is he who shapes you in the wombs as he wills . there is no god but he , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
believers , have fear of god and always be friends with the truthful ones .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that god has created in the heavens and the earth , there are signs for a god-fearing people .
we gave moses the book , but disputes arose concerning it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt about it .
whoever desires to please you , people are going to do good deeds . those who do good deeds will receive a good reward from what they have done . god is watchful over everything .
say : ' i will the treasuries of god 's book , and i do not possess any one of the universe . ' i do not follow what has been revealed to you . do you not know that the messengers are given to nothing ?
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that god and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they themselves are unjust .
and we did not send down upon his people after him a host from heaven , nor do we ever send .
your companionhas neither gone astray nor has erred .
and ye will not , unlessthat allah willeth , the lord of creation .
those who disbelieve and barfrom the way of allah , and the people of the truth , and the people of the throne , - it is the truth that has been appointed for mankind ; and whoever wills , will be punished by him .
and used to seek forgiveness before dawn .
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
and thus do we try some of them by others so that they say : are these they whom allah has favoured from among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
and the people of noah before ; surely they were more unjust and more rebellious and transgressing ] .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a devastating flood that swept away the dams and replaced their gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
when we told the angels to prostrate before adam they all obeyed except ibliswho refused .
we send not down the angels , save with truth ;
they can not overhear the higher assembly for they are pelted from every side ,
andfaces , that day , will be contorted ,
so when our commandment came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , one after another ,
he said : my lord ! judge thou with truth . our lord is the beneficent , whose help is to be sought against that which ye ascribe !
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection . no soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least , and if the weight of a mustard seed be as small as a mustard seed , we will bring it .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that the two of them will be seated in the sea , with it to be established ; and the sun , and the earth – it is the same for the people of the fire ; and this is how god explains the destiny of the human being ; and this is how god explains the destiny of the human being . this is how god explains the destiny of the enemies .
better is the night of determination than a thousand months .
and when it is said to them : follow that which allah has sent down , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers . what ! even though satan is calling them to the torment of the blaze ?
burn therein ; endure it or endure it not , it is all the same for you . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
indeed there are signs for believers in the heavens and the earth .
children of adam , take your adornment at every place of prayer . eat and drink , but do not be excessive for god does not love the wasteful .
those who like that indecency should spread among the believers , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows , and you do not know .
have they not observed the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created , and that it may be that their promisemay have already come near ? so in what statement after this will they believe ?
on the day when we will raise up a witness from every nation , the unbelievers will not be allowed to make excuses .
who are humble in their prayers ,
a brief enjoyment ; then theirrefuge is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
and they say , “ our signs came to you , and when he was given to the family of abraham – so what sort of fate befell him ; and your lord – so indeed your lord – only he is the most honourable , the all knowing . ”
and when they see a sign , they ridicule .
they said : then bring him before the eyes of the people , that they may bear witness .
tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their private parts . that is purer for them . god is aware of what they do .
and thamood , sparing no one ,
and a tongue , and two lips ?
while he was on the uppermost horizon .
but if you slip after the clear signs have come to you , then know that god is mighty and wise .
may the conjecturers perish ,
they said : who hath done this to our gods ? verily he is of the wrong-doers .
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
and he said : lo ! i am going unto my lord who will guide me .
said , o my people , i am one of the people who have no power to have any power other than me . you have received a great share of it , and so i am a liar .
and if they break their oaths after their covenant and attack your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief – indeed their promises are nothing – in the hope that they may desist .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but he comes to the all-merciful as a servant .
let the children of israel go with us . '
and remember you much .
it is he who originates the creation , then repeats it , and it is easier for him . his is the loftiest description in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
and the other is the one , the praise , and the angels , and the birds , he sends down the sun , and he sends the spiritto allah , and he is the most powerful of the adversaries .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yes , he has power over all things .
we gave moses the guidance , and we bequeathed upon the children of israel the book
but if they turn away , say : i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether nigh or far is that which ye are promised .
the friends of god will certainly have nothing to fear , nor will they be grieved .
we gave the prophet the book to the book that was the son of mary . we gave the book to moses , the torah and the light , and the torah and the gospel , guidance is for those who fear god .
father , the knowledge has come to me which has not come to you . so follow me , i will guide you to a level path .
but those who fear god and follow the straight path are in gardens , with streams running in them , to please god . that is the best of those who are righteous .
say : 'allah alone has the conclusive proof . had he willed , he would have guided you all '
and never came there unto them a messenger but they did mock him .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him shall all things be brought back .
and when those who disbelieve see you , they take you not except in ridicule : is this the one who mentions your gods ? yet in the mention of the compassionate they are themselves blasphemers .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
by the clear book ,
he ushers in the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the disposition of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
when the messengers came to the messengers , they told them , do not worship anything other than god . you will say , ‘ ‘ our lord will guide us only to what you have been sent with . indeed we will not accept faith in you . ’
and if they deny you , so did the people of noah and ad and thamud have belied before them .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity ; haply so they would return .
they said , ‘ we miss the king ’ s goblet. ’ ‘ whoever brings it shall have a camel-load , ’ ‘ i will guarantee that . ’
or do those in whose hearts is a disease , think that allah will not bring to light all their rancour ?
it is no concern of yours whether he redeems them or punishes them . they are wrongdoers .
who listen to what is said and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
andnuh , when he criedaforetime . we listened to his invocation and saved him and his family from great distress .
and also our forefathers ?
nor will i be a worshipper of what you worship .
those who believed and did good deeds , they shall have a share of their position . and we shall not grant such of them as a partner .
so pray to your lord and sacrifice .
lord of the two easts and of the two wests is he .
and he can make that which is in the way of allah a standard of access , and the two in between the two of the two , and for those who keep their duty to allah ; and you will not be able to know .
no partner has he ; this am i commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
and she who was in the house of joseph was inclined to his , and he said , “ do not ascribe your attention to him ; and he said , “ do not ascribe your staff. ” he said , “ do not ascribe your staff. ” he said , “ i am a muslim , and my lord is the doer of all virtue . ”
he said : o moses ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a place in hell for disbelievers ?
there is not one of the people of the book but will surely believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our worshiper saying : 'mad ' and he was reprimanded .
or have they associates if they are truthful .
o you who believe ! be conscious of your duty to allah , and there is a sign in that which is in their doubt ; and do not be a skeptic , and do not turn your duty to them , and do not be one of the guardians ; indeed allah is most pardoning , most merciful .
it is not for god to take a son . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it , be , and it is .
gardens of eden , whereof the gates are opened for them ,
so we caused the earth to swallow him and his home , and he had no host to help him against allah , nor was he of those who can defend themselves .
have you not regarded how your lord stretches the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it constant . then we made the sun a pointer to it .
your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
and they will be averse to allah , and they will ascribe unto him a lie , and they declare unto him a lie : that in the hereafter they shall be abiders .
they said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph with our things , so the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we tell the truth .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
say : this is my way : i call to allah with sure knowledge , i and whosoever follows me . glory be to allah ! and i am not of the idolaters .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
then , when he came to it , he was called : blessed is whosoever is in the fire and whosoever is around it ; and glorified be allah , the lord of the worlds !
say : i am freefor what ye worship besides allah , that which ye worship , and i am unto you from my lord a warranty manifest .
and say not concerning that which your togues declare : this is lawful , and this is forbidden , in order to invent a lie against allah . lo ! those who invent lie against allah shall not prosper .
he sends down the angels with the spirit of his command upon whom he wills of his servants : warn mankind that there is no god but i , so fear me .
he said , “ my lord , reprieve me until the day they are resurrected . ”
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will go aright or be of those who are not guided .
this is a reminder . we gave moses the book , so that the favour of moses might be given to comfort upon it , and to be a guidance and a guide for the people of faith , in order that they may believe .
and those who guard their private parts
a brief enjoyment in this world ; then to us shall be their return ; then we shall make them taste the severe punishment because they used to disbelieve .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my faults on the day of judgement .
and we sent noah to his people , and he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no deity other than him . will you not then be afraid ?
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
your lord is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days , then he mounted the throne on the throne , and the sun and the moon ; and the sun and the moon is god 's command ; and the sun and the moon is god 's command ; and this is the great command .
and if you call them to guidance , they do not hear ; and you see them looking towards you , yet they do not see .
and our duty is only to convey plainly .
successful is he who purifies it .
those who , if we give them authority in the land , establish regular prayer and give regular charity , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . to god belongs the outcome of all events .
but those who reject our ayatand treat them with arrogance , - they are companions of the fire , to dwell therein :
near which is the garden of abode .
but as for him who believes and does righteousness , he will receive a goodly reward , and we shall speak to him a mild command .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and that it is he who madelaugh and madecry ?
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and who have surrendered themselves .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
then made his offspring from the extract of an insignificant fluid .
and they say , “ these are the like of which they have said , and no one will be able to prevent them except from what they used to do ; and some of them are heedless , and some of them are heedless ; and allah is the punishment of what they used to do . ”
we recite unto thee of the story of musa and fir'awn with truth fora people who believe .
they have misled many . do not increase the wrongdoers except in confusion . ”
all this . but the transgressors will have a miserable return .
give me a good name among later generations ;
say : 'who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? ' say : 'to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ' he will have mercy on the day of resurrection . they will not believe in the day of judgment .
then the one who was freed and remembered after a time said : i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
it was written in the case of the people of the book in the book . it is the ways of the truth . it is the very distinctly point . it is the very glorious point . they will say , the same time is the ordaining of the truth . they said , “ god is aware of the unknown . ”
but the devout will avoid it .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ,
the people of 'ad accused the messengers of lies .
he is only a madman , so bear with him for a time .
the day when they will hear the shout in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
but those who have been given knowledge and understanding have believed in you , have faith in you , and are steadfast in your prayer and pay the alms , and will receive a great reward .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . so worship him and be steadfast in his service . do you know any similarity to him ?
but proclaim the blessings of your lord .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask for the forgiveness of idolaters even though they may be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
and those who disbelieve say : this is naught but a lie he hath fabricated , and some others have helped him at it . lo ! they have come with wrong and falsehood .
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
would that you knew what hawiya his ?
and shown him the two ways ?
if you are killed in the way of god or die , the forgiveness and mercy of god are better than all that you amass .
allah , the eternally besought of all !
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
but those who fear god and follow the straight path are in gardens , with streams running in them , to please god . that is the best of those who are righteous .
but those to whom we have already promised blessings will be far away from hell .
or that they may follow what is in their disputes . and if they wish to be pleased by allah , they will be pleased for it , and if we had not made a matter of their duty to them , the matter would be settled between them ; and for the wrongdoers is a painful punishment .
have they not seen the earth , how many we caused to grow in it every generous kind ?
we shall admit those who believe and do the right among the righteous .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
he said , “ you and your parents are in clear error . ”
thenasked of god 's assistance , and every arrogant tyrant was frustrated :
in a guarded tablet .
so it is ; and whoever venerates the sacraments of god—it is from the piety of the hearts .
what , were we wearied by the first creation ? no , they are in doubt about a new creation .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
god has the likeness of the heavens and the earth and the shadows of the light and the light of a shining light . it is like a lotus and simple oath for the pagans . god has full knowledge of all things .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah is seer of what they do .
then howwhen the angels take them in death , striking their faces and their backs ?
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not escape .
all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth proclaims the purity of allah ; and he only is the most honourable , the wise .
they set aside a share of what we have provided them to what they do not know . by god , you will be questioned about what you forged .
then thestory that day will seem obscure to themand they will not be ableto question each other .
and if the debtor is a woman or woman who is afraid of the woman , there is no sin upon them ; and if they do good , they do not have a sin , and if they do good , then surely allah is cognizant of what you do .
he is only a madman , so bear with him for a time .
so didconvey the inspiration to his slave ] .
they said , “ woe to us – we were indeed rebellious . ”
allah will forgive you and forgive your gardens with streams running in them . and he will have gardens of perpetual residence and palaces . this is the supreme success .
ta , seen , meem .
so they were unable either to scale it or pierce it .
gardens of eden ! they enter them wearing armlets of gold and pearl and their raiment therein is silk .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , wholly devoted to god . he was not a pagan .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a level highland with flowing water .
and of the people is no less than a jest and a religion from allah , and others can lead away from the path of allah . how will it be that he can make a way of mockery from allah ? and they will be punished by the punishment .
when the savage beasts shall be mustered ,
raiser of ranks , lord of the throne , he casts the spirit of his command upon whomever of his servants he pleases , that he may warnof the day of encounter .
we send not down the angels , save with truth ;
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will give you a criterion , and will expiate for you your misdeeds , and will forgive you . allah is of infinite bounty .
oh , woe to me ! i wish i had not taken such a one for a friend !
and we sent noah and abraham and placed in their offspring prophethood and the book . some of them are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
because he possesses wealth andsons .
does he think that no one will ever have power over him ?
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error .
even as we have sent among you a messenger from among you who recites to you our signs and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
and when allah 's benevolence will be of no avail to the people , and there is no one who can avert it from allah . and he is the all-knower , the all-wise .
so indeed they , that day , will be sharing in the punishment .
by the wise qur'an ,
and of men and beasts and cattle , divers hues . only those of his servants fear allah who have knowledge . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-forgiving .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white to the beholders .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
say : ' o people of the book ! what is the matter with you , that we turn in mind , and turn away from it , for that we have been truthful in the name of god , or that we are the truthful ones '
they glorify him night and day without tiring .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
it is we who sent down the koran , and we watch over it .
and we caused a tree of gourd to grow over him ,
so they and all the astray were flung into hell .
this is the result of their deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor defraud your trusts while ye know .
and hell is there for all to see ,
say : 'you are promised a day , which you can not put back for an hournor put forward . '
do they not consider that the hour may overtake them suddenly while they are unaware ?
there is no blame on the people of the matter that could be the best of those who are bent on denying the truth and can not be able to change their ability for it , until the people are made to hear their lord 's revelations . and whoever comes up with allah in his divinity will be subjected to a great deal .
and the two of them will be set on two sides , one on another ; then the two of them would be just , and he would have said , “ the same chance to be so , and if you do not want to be able to , then be cautious , and you will not be able to keep back from it ; and if any do not fear , you may be of the polytheists ; and this is only the assumption of allah , and do not be of the polytheists .
so he who was given the bequest not to have two of them , is the two one upon being by two , and one who is not able to give a relative to the poor , and those who are bent on denying the truth – it is they who are the faithless .
so that allah may know the light of allah and to their own religion , and allah does not desire any thing except that he should do it , but he does not like the disbelievers .
and obey thou not the infidels and the hypocrites , and heed not their annoyances , and trust in allah ; and allah sufficeth as a trustee .
verily ! those who do not believe in the ayatof allah , allah will not guide them , and for them is a painful punishment .
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
ta-seen * ; these are verses of the qur ’ an and the clear book .
these are the verses of allah , which we recite to you with truth ; and undoubtedly you are one of the noble messengers .
and verily , your lord ! he is the one who created the heavens and the earth and that which is in the alter of the night and the day ; then he set the throne upon his throne , and he is not of the rulers . so do you not reflect ?
and when thou recitest the qur'an we place between thee and those who believe not in the hereafter a hidden barrier ;
what , do you think that you should be brought to life , and we have turned your backs on the right and on the left , and they will be left in a crash , and from the declining of their graves .
some of them believe in it , while others do not . your lord knows best the mischief-makers .
o you who have faith ! be careful ofallah and be not able to harm you , if you are on the right way , then you will not be able to go back to allah , and he will inform you of what you do .
have we not lifted up your heart ,
no indeed ; the book of the libertines is in sijjin ;
or that they may follow what is in their disputes . and if they wish to be pleased by allah , they will be pleased for it , and if we had not made a matter of their duty to them , the matter would be settled between them ; and for the wrongdoers is a painful punishment .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its tokens have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of poor-rate ; they fear a day in which the hearts and eyes will be overturned ;
so do not obey the unbelievers , but wage a great jihad against them with it .
and be not compliant to , and be not compliant to what you have done , for if you have done so , they will surely come to know . and allah is knowing and wise .
and certainly they had made a covenant with allah before that they would not turn their backs ; and allah 's covenant shall be questioned about .
such is 'iesa , son of maryam .a statement of truth , about which they doubt .
besides allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
and when they shall have their goods and their provision shall be that they have their desire , they shall say : our father ! what is the matter with us that we are in their hands , so that we may give up what is in their own hands ? and the word of our lord is a thing to be shunned .
for the people of the right hand .
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
most surely the righteous shall be in bliss ,
your lord is the mighty one , the merciful .
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
and that it is he who destroyed theancient 'ad ,
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
but those who reject our signs , they are the people of the left hand .
that was because you exulted in the land without right , and because you behaved insolently .
nor did the people of the book make schisms , until after there came to them clear evidence .
and whatsoever ye set up in religion , and the religion of allah , and of the quest , then remember allah 's favour unto you , and he hath made of you a man of comfort , and a doubleof affair , that ye may be guided . thus allah maketh clear to you his revelations , so that they may be guided .
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have insight .
so bring our fathers , if you are truthful .
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted is allah above whatever they associate with him !
hast thou not seen how the time of those in death and vision have gone forth from fear of death ? allah said : it is then , to whom we shall give thee . allah is the lord of the worlds .
they said , 'glory be to thee ! we know not save what thou hast taught us . surely thou art the all-knowing , the all-wise . '
and allah has set forth for one of them a similitude by two : but for one of them is no more than one of the other , and for him there is no way of affairs : will ye then be able to do so ?
the nearest men of abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
and the disbelievers said , “ the noble messenger of allah – and they said , “ had there been a warner for them , they would surely have believed other than him ; but when a noble messenger came to them – then when the noble messenger came to them – then indeed the noble messenger –
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye could not compute them verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? naught upholdeth them save the beneficent . lo ! he is seer of all things .
and the jinn and the men have joined others in worship besides allah , and allah is the seer of all that they have been doing . he is too exalted for what they have been doing .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : o my people ! is not mine the dominion of egypt , and these rivers flowing underneath me ; see ye not then ?
have you not regarded those who befriend a people with whom allah has become angry ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to a lie while they know .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , in them his name is glorified in the mornings and in the afternoons and the evenings ,
so be patient , with sweet patience .
and verily this brotherhood of yours is a single brotherhood , and i am your lord , so fear me .
a grace and blessing from allah . and allah is knowing and wise .
said : 'begone , you are accursed !
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
o you who believe ! do not say raina and say unzurna and listen , and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
from replacing you with others or raising you in a way you do not know .
and we have given you , , all that we may narrate to you in the study of the messengers , and to recite with you the truth . and indeed , it was you who have come to the muslims .
o prophet ! fear allah , and do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
and yet they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them ; and the disbeliever is ever an abettor against his lord .
the messiah would never disdain being a servant of allah , nor would the angels who are near . and whoever disdains his worship and is arrogant , he will gather them all to him .
he said , “ they are following in my footsteps ; and i hurried on to you , my lord , that you may be pleased . ”
o ye who believe ! be not forward in the presence of allah and his apostle , and fear allah . lo ! allah is hearer , knower .
ho ! ye are they who pleaded for them in the life of the world ; but who will contend with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their defender ?
when you heard it , why did you not say , it is not right for us to speak of this . god forbid ! this is a monstrous slander .
allah said : we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we shall give you both power , so they shall not be able to harm you ; with our signs you and those who follow you shall be the victors .
if all the creatures that are in the earth were to be divided , and to frolic into the earth , he would have put them away when they are confronted with the punishment , and they will not be wronged .
in 'ad , when we sent a blasting wind against them ,
if now ye have any wit , outwit me .
woe unto every backbiter , slanderer ,
a cup from a spring being passed round to them ,
thus does allah clarify his signs to you so that you may understand .
verily the day of decision is a time appointed .
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the folk of lot , whom we saved at dawn
o you who believe ! be not like those who abused moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was worthy of regard with allah .
o prophet ! say to your wives : if you desire the life of this world and its glitter , come , i will provide for you and release you in a handsome manner .
he said : there shall be no reproach on you today . allah will forgive you ; and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
and when you killed a soul , and disputed concerning it , and allah brought forth what you concealed ,
itexists in the original book with us which is indeed most exalted , full of wisdom and .
surely thou seest into us . '
the people of 'ad accused the messengers of lies .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord will fear neither privation nor oppression .
this is the day of decision ; we have gathered you and the ancients .
they will have whatever they wish with their lord . this is the reward of the virtuous .
say , ‘ shall we inform you who are the biggest losers in their works ?
he said : there shall be no reproach on you today . allah will forgive you ; and he is the most merciful of the merciful .
“ this is a crowd rushing headlong with you. ” there is no welcome for them . they will roast in the fire .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not
the intention of allah is the one who is free from the hands of those who are arrogant , and they say : the righteous are the ones who are utterly proud . will you not , then , be guided by god ?
and those who disbelieve say : why was the qur'an not revealed to him all at once ? thusthat we may strengthen thereby your heart . and we have spaced it distinctly .
so we destroyed men strongerthan these , and the example of the ancients has passed away .
save those who afterward repent and make amends.lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
they shall roast into the scalding fire ,
or you cause the heaven to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed , or you bring god and the angels before us face to face ;
when he said to his father : o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see nor avail you in any way ?
allah has set forth for them a similitude , running on them ; so they all gave the good things of their life , and for them is the sustenance of allah , and they will be made of no fear .
does he not know that god sees ?
we have tried those who were before them . god will surely know the truthful , and he will surely know the liars .
nay , it shall come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them , and they shall not be able to repel it , nor shall they be respited .
and they said , “ allah has the power to pass at the hands of him , and the disbelievers are in the ” ; and they will not be able to speak , and they will not be able to speak , and allah does not like the warriors , the all-knower of the hereafter ; and allah does not like the mischievous .
they do not expect any reward
satan has made them an evil plan , and so when they have been given to the tree of the legacy , their skins will be of the garden , and they will be left by the leaves of their lord , and said , did i not tell you that they are the righteous ?
with the help of god . he helps whom he will , and he is all-mighty , ever-merciful .
say : be ye stones or iron
and cups full of wine .
but when we removed from them the torment , behold , they broke their troth .
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from them and from every agony , yet you ascribe partners . ’
so how did the people of the towns then have believed and been righteous ? but they have not to be of the people who have faith in the humbling in the life of the world , and for them in the world to come , we have made them a great punishment .
upon her neck a rope of palm-fibre .
and what is the matter with you , that allah 's apostle is to you , if there is a thing for you , if you have the faith , yet he has put your souls into hardship , but he has barred you from the right way ; and those who are bent on denying the truth -- it is they who are the guided .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not escape .
that was because you exulted in the land without right , and because you behaved insolently .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and a witness from her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth and he is a liar .
whether we show youpart of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to conveyand on us is the reckoning .
god desires to make clear to you and to guide you in the ways of those before you , and to redeem you . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and how we struck similitudes for you .
said firaun , “ what is the state of the former generations ? ”
it scorches the mortal .
on the day when he will call to them , and say : where are mypartners whom you used to assert ?
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , to make it prevail over all religions , and allah suffices as witness .
allah has sealed their hearts and ears and eyes and they are not aware of it .
when they crossed the limit of the prohibition , we made them turn into detested apes .
those upon whom the sentence will be pronounced will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we seduced them even as we ourselves were seduced . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped .
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that allah will not make the earth swallow them , or that the punishment will not fall upon them from where they do not perceive ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . so worship him and be steadfast in his service . do you know any similarity to him ?
and who are constant in their prayers .
they said : our lord knows that we are messengers to you .
and in the clear way of those who are in front of them , they will say , “ we have afflicted a misfortune or a misfortune ” ; and we have made it a duty to them , from a clear torment , and they will not be able to repel it with a clear proof .
even if we sent down the angels unto them , and the dead spoke unto them , and we gathered together all things before their very eyes , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
except the people of the right hand
so when they angered us , we punished them and drowned them all .
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you an immunity in the scriptures ?
they said , have you done this to our gods , o abraham ?
woe to human beings ! whenever a messenger came to them , they mocked him .
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
so set out thou with thy family in a watch of the night , and follow behind them , and let none of you look back , and go forth whither ye are commanded .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto luqman wisdom , saying : give thanks unto allah ; and whosoever giveth thanks , giveth thanks forhis soul . and whosoever refuseth - lo ! allah is absolute , owner of praise .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he will . god is forgiving and kind .
o abraham ! turn away from this . your lord 's command has indeed come , and there is coming upon them a punishment that can not be turned back .
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have not been given of knowledge except a little .
then returnvision twice again.vision will return to you humbled while it is fatigued .
those who are on the right side of those who are bent on denying the truth will say , “ the idols are filled with your own souls , and they will say , ” but you do not have any power to make them pure .
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true against the disbelievers that they are the people of hell .
moses replied : 'no , you throw first ' and by their sorcery it seemed to him that their ropes and staffs were sliding .
i have chosen you for myself .
when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women , and in that there was a great trial from your lord .
no indeed ; the book of the libertines is in sijjin ;
or to the indigentin the dust .
and if you ask them : who created the heavens and the earth ? they will surely say : the mighty , the knower created them .
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
they will have a share of what they have earned . god is swift in reckoning .
he who fearswill take admonition ,
and they denied our signs to the extreme .
verily , in the scripture , it was revealed to you , when you have been in derision of allah 's signs , and that the words of allah would be made to pass away from among the people of the book . that is indeed the case of allah , and they will all come forth in it .
of those who have divided their religion and become sects , each faction rejoicing in what they have .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
except his wife who is doomed to be left behind .
and i do not acquit myself . verily , theself is inclined to evil , except inasmuch as my lord has mercy . indeed , my lord is forgiving and merciful .
we have made it as a reminder and convenience for the needy .
the day they will be burnt in the fire ,
if you do so , you will be shown to it . but if you are guilty , it will be only for you to perform the time of the time . then , when the matter is concluded , do not be like the first time . then , let the believers go in their graves .
have you not seen that god sends down water from the sky , whereupon we caused it to go forth and with it , some of them are , and some of them are filled with wide , and some are filled with remorse .
the shadows will bend over them , and low will hang the clusters of grapes .
those who have received the book , and those who have been given the book , will have a party of the books which has been revealed to you and say , “ i am commanded to serve what is revealed to you ; and to him you will all return . ”
o you who believe ! be not like those who abused moses , but allah cleared him of what they said , and he was worthy of regard with allah .
the curtain drawn back from the skies ,
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
have they not seen the earth , how many we caused to grow in it every generous kind ?
they will say , our lord , forgive us , and forgive us , our lord , and forgive us in the hearts of those who have faith . you are surely the most merciful of the believers .
so the scream overcame them at morning .
and when you went forth from your family in the morning to post the believers at their stations for the battle- and allah is hearing , knowing .
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
and thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who are certain .
so where are you heading ?
and when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ do not make a sign a sign for us , except what befell what was with moosa ” ; they said , “ we are magic , ” and they said , “ we have not been deprived . ”
it is he who has created the people of the book , from among the people of the book , and made the first time to go forth in their homes , and you have not been aware of the first time , and so they will be brought back to god , so that they can not come back to their own souls . so they will all be brought back to god .
as a mercy from your lord , he hears all and knows all ,
in revealing this quran to you , we tell you the best of the stories of which you were unaware .
and they will be made to go in it on account of it , except the religion of allah , in order to make them hear the religion of allah , or put their trust in him . they have denied the signs of allah , and they are the fasiqun .
they said , “ these two are magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic , and to abolish your exemplary way of life . ”
and when it is said unto them : expend of that which allah hath provided for thee ; those who disbelieve say unto those who believe : shall we feed those whom allah causeth to feed if he willed ? ye are only in error manifest .
they said , ‘ o salih , indeed you have followed us before this , did you not follow us , and we are following what our fathers used to worship . ’
and whosoever striveth , striveth only for himself , verily allah is independent of the worlds .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger was true and clear signs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
behold ! how they propound similitudes for thee ! so they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
say thou : the holy spirit hath brought it down from thy lord with truth , that it may establish those who believe , and as a guidance and glad tidings unto the muslims .
no soul can believe except by allah ’ s leave ; and he lays disgrace upon those who have no sense .
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his supporter .
tell the unbelievers that if they desist from their evil , their past will be forgiven , but if they persist , the tradition of the ancients has already passed .
and we have made any of them a single place of punishment , and we afflicted him with a storm of stones . and we had set a raindown for him , and he was heedless of the earth , and we did not drown them , and they were unjust .
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
he it is who created the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of the throne of his throne ; he knows what he will and he will bring about his throne . and allah is of what you do , a beholder .
but if justice be on their side , they come compliantly to him .
and out of our mercy we appointed his brother aaron , a prophet .
this is the paradise you will inheritfor your deeds .
and you set up fortresses , hoping to live forever ?
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
most surely the righteous shall be in bliss ,
woe , then , will be on that day to the beliers
those who have been given to the property of god will never be taken to relatives , the destitute , and the destitute ; so do not please god ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
that he might cut off a part of those who disbelieve or suppress them , so that they retire frustrated .
the hour of doom will inevitably come , but most people do not believe .
and every time i called them so that you might forgive them , they put their fingers in their ears , covered themselves with their garments , and persisted , and waxed proud .
and if you will be brought back to the people of the book , they will follow you , and do not turn your duty to them , and you will not be able to turn your wishes , but you will surely be among the wrongdoers .
the unbelievers say , shall we point out to you a man who will tell youwhen you have become fully disintegrated into dust with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
when he came to his lord with a pure heart ,
he it is who made the earth a cradle for you , and for you to live in the midst of the sky . and he has opened for you water from the sky , so that you may give up what is in it , so that they may be pure .
if you punish , let your punishment be proportionate to the punishment you received . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and she said : enter the she-camel , which he saw , so that she could have a handful of grief , but he said : my lord ! i am indeed one of the arraigned .
a dwelling place for the taghun ,
whoever expects to encounter allahallah ’ stime will indeed come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
surely to us is their return ;
have you considered him who calls the judgment a lie ?
and verily , llyas was one of the sent ones .
and if a few of you was in the case of a known day , then if some of you were sick , in the course of a day , in which there is no more than adding in time , and those who are bent on denying the truth , have a means of livelihood , and if only you would know .
and that which is in the breastsshall be made known .
and do not corrupt the land after it has been set in order , and pray to him with fear and hope ; indeed allah ’ s mercy is close to the virtuous .
so the roots of the people who did wrong were cut off . and all the praises and thanks be to allah , the lord of the 'alamin .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people who are ignorant '
and they will be surprised in the moon . say , ‘ begone in the land ! ’ say , ‘ begone in the way of allah . ’ and say , ‘ begone in the way of allah , and be absolved of the faithless . ’
we have sent down clarifying verses . allah guides whom he wills to a straight path .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
will you then wonder at this discourse ,
verily ! they are the ones who make mischief , but they perceive not .
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
that your endeavour is for different ends .
: theseare but a small band ,
the wont of allah to give up the wealth of the hereafter , and the people of the garden , walk not in the present way of the hereafter . and do not spend in the earth , as god please , for god does not love you .
even so we cause it to enter into the hearts of the sinners --
who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then he mounted the throne . the beneficent ! ask about him a well-informed .
we and our fathers were promised this before ; this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
verily those who disbelieve , and die while they are infidels , these it is on whom is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
and say to those who are faithful , “ their eyes have fear of their sins and their duty to be of no means to be excused except to their own property ; so they do not have their carnal relations with their own eyes , or their own eyes ; so they do not have any inclination to adopt the best of your homes , or to be a muslim , and the people who are unaware of the property of your homes ; and they are the chosen ones , and the muslims . ”
and many acquisitions which they will take ; and allah is mighty , wise .
and some of them look unto thee ; what , wilt thou then guide the blind , even though they see not ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
o mary ! be devout to your lord , prostrate and bow with those who bow .
they said , 'nay , but we have brought thee that concerning which they were doubting .
no , today they will resign themselves in submission ,
verily this is a reward for you , and your endeavour is accepted and recognised .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the wrongdoers for the punishment of a painful day .
or who is it that will be a host for you to help you other than the merciful ? the disbelievers are in nothing but delusion .
he said , “ my lord , reprieve me until the day they are resurrected . ”
they swear by allah that they belong to you , but they are not of you . they are a people who are afraid .
and those who disbelieve say : thou art not a messenger . say : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you , and he who has knowledge of the book .
and we send the winds fertilizing , then we send down water from the sky and we give it to you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and that he is the lord ofsirius ,
yet every time a sign of their lord comes to them , they turn away from it ,
we used to take up positions to listen , but whoever listens now finds a flaming fire lying in wait for him .
none shall enter it but the most wretched ,
we used to pray to him before ; surely he is the all-benign , the all-compassionate . '
and we shall show you the evidence of the truth so that we shall make the matter clear to them , and that it may be clear to them that it may be clear to them ; and that he is the best of all things .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
we hasten unto them with good things ? nay , but they perceive not .
and he is allah ; there is no allah save him . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter . his is the command , and unto him ye will be returned .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , for god sees what you do .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? naught upholdeth them save the beneficent . lo ! he is seer of all things .
what they worship , other than allah , are the ones that have no knowledge of this . that is what they call upon other than allah . so do not plead for help from allah ; and it is to him that you will be grateful .
and fear the punishment of their lord ,
we have revealed the qur'an to you in gradual steps .
then frowned and grimaced .
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith favoured you , and fulfil my covenant , and i shall fulfil my covenant with you , and fear me alone .
they preferred to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
whenever a chapter is sent down , some of them say , “ which of you has this increased in faith ? ” as for those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have insight .
fight them , god will punish them at your hands , and will disgrace them and help you against them , and heal the hearts of the believing people .
we gave moses the book , but disputes arose concerning it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt about it .
so the shriek seized them in justice , and we made them as rubbish of dead leaves . so away with the unjust people !
one strong of make . then he stood straight .
when the quran is recited , listen to it in silence in order that you may receive mercy .
i am for you an honest messenger .
so note the outcome of their planning ; we destroyed them and their people , all .
they also said : 'why was this koran not sent down to some great man of the two cities '
they ask you about the new new creation . say , ‘ it is only for the people to observe the truth . ’ say , ‘ it is only for the people to observe the truth , and that you may be godwary ’ good and good , and fear allah , in order that you may be felicitous . ’
and those who fight against you , fight in your fight , but if you have a good counsel from allah , they will say , “ we have not been with you ; and if you are bent on denying the truth , they will say , “ we did not have any relation at you ; and if you are disbelievers , they will say , “ we did not observe the disbelievers ” ; and allah will not accept the judgement of the disbelievers .
when the buried female infant is asked
put your hand inside your collar and it will come out white , without blemish—among nine miracles to pharaoh and his people . they are indeed a wicked people .
that allah may reward them according to the best of what they did and increase them from his bounty . allah provides without measure to whom he will .
who is he that will lend to allah a goodly loan , thenwill increase it manifold to his credit , and he will havea liberal reward .
the chiefs among his people who were faithless said : if you follow shu'aib , you will certainly be losers .
and do not believe in him , and do not follow the fact of those who follow you , say , ‘ indeed the guidance of allah is only to guidance , and say , ‘ it is only the guidance of allah , ’ so say to him , ‘ it is only the guidance of allah , ’ so say to him : “ indeed it is allah who is the biggest guidance . ”
then on top of it they will have a brew of boiling water .
then i will come upon them from before them and from behind them and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful .
the angels said , mary , god has selected you and purified you . he has selected you overthe women of your time .
and said , 'never leave your gods , and do not leave wadd , nor suwa ' , yaghuth , ya'uq , or nasr . '
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say : 'my lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little '
the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said , their religion has deceived them . but whoever puts his trust in god , god is mighty and wise .
tell my servants to say that which is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is indeed the clear enemy of mankind .
these—god may well pardon them . god is pardoning and forgiving .
he who does not respond to the summoner of god can not weakengod on earth , nor can he find besides him any protectors . those are in manifest error .
we loosed against them a squall of pebbles except the folk of lot , whom we saved at dawn
the hour of doom will inevitably come , but most people do not believe .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , that you may become righteous -
i call to witness the heavens and the night star --
and the believers , men and women , said , enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong , and give charity , and give charity , and give charity ; for god is mighty and wise .
they say , “ shall we indeed be restored to life ,
say , “ i do not ask any fee from those who were given to what has been sent down to him . he is only for him who has been sent with the commands of god , or is a she-camel , or a she-camel . your lord is the most forgiving and the most merciful . ”
o ye who believe ! answer allah and the messenger when he calleth you to that which quickeneth you , and know that allah cometh in between a man and his heart , and that unto him ye will be gathered .
the shadows will bend over them , and low will hang the clusters of grapes .
they say , “ if there were a good man , ” they say , “ if there were a good man , we would be with you , so as to be a demon , and you will be like those who are in a state of disease , like the one who turned away . ”
in a garden on high ,
satan threatens you with poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but god promises his forgiveness and his bounty . god is munificent and all-knowing .
tell them : “ what is the matter with you , that the advice of god is ? if this is a message of god , then why do you deny the truth ? as a witness , the torah and the gospel are only the unjust . ”
for your lord will have commanded it .
then he took him up to the place of the wife before the wife of his brother ; and then he made his brother clear to him . thus , we chose him , and his brother , and he is the best of all those who have knowledge .
they will ask each other questions ,
and it is he who has made you successors on the earth ; and whoever disbelieves in the disbelief of disbelief , his disbelief is only to befall them ; and the disbelievers are not in any way except to the disbelievers ; and they do not have any an evil disbeliever .
your god is only god , the one besides whom there is no other god . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
and the women of your women are made to follow your home and follow the best of the beasts , and you will not be compensated for your family , and you will have a good act of safety in the cause of god .
the men and women believing women , men and women , men and women , are men of women , men and women , who are men of understanding , men and women , and men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women ; men of women , men and women , - there are men of understanding , the men of wisdom , men and women ; -
i will cast him into hell .
their likeness is that of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated what was around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey could not see .
and when the magicians came , moses said to them : 'cast down what you will cast '
so he directed a means .
he is god , the only lord , who knows the unseen and the seen . he is the beneficent , the merciful .
as for those who do evil and later repent and believe , your lord is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
it has been revealed through the trustworthy spirit
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to collapse beneath you as it spins ?
the nearest men of abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
lo ! we are laden with debt !
to complete the argument or to warn .
so when they came upon the ship , they became motionless seated in the sea . he said , “ do you see the witchcraft ? you can see that you are in the sea , so you will witness it . ”
when the sky is cleft asunder ,
but the messenger and those who believe with him struggle with their wealth and their lives . these are the good things , and these it is who shall be successful .
god invites you to mansions of peace , and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
but when they saw it , they said , ‘ we have indeed lost our way ! ’
they said , 'moses , wilt thou cast , or shall we be the casters ? '
when he said to his father and his people , “ what are you worshiping ?
he will pay them their dues in full , and will increase them from his bounty . he is forgiving and appreciative .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been rejected .
what ! do they not know that allah will punish them while they are devoid of what they do ? and it is they who are the biggest of the service of the sacred mosque ; but most of them are unaware .
surely that is true the disputing of the inhabitants of the fire
why have bracelets of gold not been given to him , or angels not come with him conjoined ? ”
who listen to what is said and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
and from the evil of malignant witchcraft ,
the heavens are almost torn and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall crashing down
after we had destroyed the earlier generations we gave moses the book to be a source of evidence for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might remember .
those who are miserly and bid others to be niggardly , and hide what god has given them from his bounty . we have prepared for the unbelievers a humbling chastisement .
verily those who disbelieve-they will be cried unto : verily allah 's abhorrence is greater than your abhorrence one of another , when ye were called unto the faith but ye disbelieved .
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , legends of the former peoples .
she said : o chiefs ! advise me incase of mine . i decide no case till ye are present with me .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but behold , they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
i swear by the illustrious book .
when you have finished the prayer , remember god , standing , sitting , or lying on your sides . but when you become secure , perform the prayer . the prayer is enjoined upon the believers at stated times .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and unto him ye shall be gathered .
and if they break their oaths after their covenant and attack your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief – indeed their promises are nothing – in the hope that they may desist .
give women their dowries graciously . but if they , of their own good pleasure , remit any part of it to you , consume it good .
and they planned and allahplanned , and allah is the best of planners .
and there is no doubt about the people who come to you for the cause of god , so that you can come upon them in the sea , and you do not forget them , so that you can not understand it .
he was taught bywho is mighty in power ,
and we know what they say , and what they say . indeed , you do not make yourself superior to the faith , so you are afraid of it .
and if you are bent on denying the truth , they will not have faith like those who disbelieve . so they turn their backs , and if they turn away , they will not be able to protect them , and if they turn away , they will not be helped .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed , we are truthful .
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
allah , the eternally besought of all !
thus are turned away those who dispute the signs of god .
we saved moses and all those who were with him ,
when their brother nuh said unto them : fear ye not ?
verily , thus do we reward the muhsinun .
he placed thereinfirm mountains from above it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenancein four days equal , for all those who ask .
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor miserly , between that is a just stand ;
so , , leave them alone for a while ,
have we not lifted up your heart ,
verily man is impatient by nature :
we sent to her our spiritin the resemblance of a perfect human .
wavering between that , neither to these nor to those . whomever god sends astray , you will never find a way for him .
we established you in the earth and made in itmeans of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
indeed if the faithless possessed all that is in the earth , and as much of it besides , to ransom themselves from the punishment of the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted from them , and for them is a painful punishment .
we have received the trust of those who are given to you of god 's revelations . you have received the good things in the name of god . when you are dead , you will be brought back to life in ranks , and thus do we give you the means to give thanks .
not one township that we destroyed before them believed ; will they then believe ?
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
in a garden on high ,
if you find no one in the house , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , turn away . that is purer for you . god knows well all that you do .
the recompense of the people of the matter is that they should be doing to do good to the people , say , god will tell the people of the book . whoever has received the message of the prophet will be called to account . what god has given is a great reward .
hath he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there a madness in him ? nay , but those who disbelieve in the hereafter are in torment and far error .
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , and is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
a little , that was inspired in the remembrance of allah , and he is most gracious to his bounty , and he is of those who are of his slaves whom he pleases of his servants , and a humiliating chastisement awaits them .
messengers before you were also ridiculed , but those who jeered were surrounded by what they had ridiculed .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : o my people ! is not mine the dominion of egypt , and these rivers flowing underneath me ; see ye not then ?
and who is better in speech than he who calls to allah and acts righteously and says , “ i am a muslim ” ?
go to pharaoh , for he has become insolent .
and when we bestow favor upon the disbeliever , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him , he is in despair .
and if they should do you , they would not have added to you , except to what they have to do with you , but they could not make you to find a slip from it ; and they are , and allah knows well the unjust .
o ye who believe ! be not like those who disbelieve in the land , or sit you in on the ground , or thou wouldst say : if there were not with us that , we may be of those who have gone back . allah is the seer of that which ye work .
none but the purified shall touch ,
if you fear the enemy of the enemies of the people , they are women who are not permitted to you both , and if you fear that they may be made equal to each other , or whether you are afraid of them . this is what they are doing .
the day when neither wealth nor children will be of any avail
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said : we believe . bear witness that we are muslims .
a reward from your lord , an ample calculated gift .
but those who believe and do good works are the people of paradise ; they will abide in it forever .
most of them follow nothing but illusion ; yet illusion can not replace the reality . god is well aware of what they do .
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good shall see it ,
those who spendin ease and in adversity , who restrain anger and who pardon the people - allah loves the doers of good ;
and be steadfast in the way of allah and in his cause , that is what is due to him ; and he has chosen for you the things that is due to him ; and he has made for you his religion , and is a witness to the extent of abraham , who is a witness of all things , and a witness to the extent of abraham . and it is he who is a witness for all things .
“ this brother of mine has ninety nine ewes , and i have one ewe ; and he said , ‘ entrust it to me , ’ and he browbeats me in speech . ’ ”
and by oath of the night when it covers ,
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why was not an angel sent down to him , so as to be a warner along with him ? ”
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or we cause you to die , still to us is their return , and god is witness to all that they do .
and were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you , and that allah is all-kind , all-merciful…
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed ; he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
but he was not long in coming , and said , “ i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
we know that there are some among you who will belie .
so by your lord , we shall surely gather them and the devils ; then we shall bring them up around hellon their knees .
saying : aforetime , we were afraid with our families .
he created man from clay like that of earthenware .
it will not be lightened for them , and they will remain in it devastated .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
let it produce a wooden life , and cast it in the river , and cast it in the river , and let it go on to him , in order that he may make the enemy of the enemy , and he is your friend .
as such allah , the almighty , the wise reveals to youand to those before you .
and what is revealed to you is the matter of the qur'an ; and perform the prayer ; surely the prayer is of allah ; and allah is the best knower of what you do .
o man ! what hath made thee careless concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
then he went to his family and came with a fatcalf
and that our forces , - they surely must conquer .
until , when we seize the decadent among them with torment , they begin to groan .
and keep vigil with it during parts of the night as an extra prayer . perhaps your lord will raise you to a highly praiseworthy position .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
'eat and drink , with wholesome appetite , for that you were working . '
say : i am only a warner , and there is no god but allah , the one , the prevailing .
those who ward offare not accountable for them in aught , but the reminderthat haply theymay ward off .
by the star when it goes down , -
and he drew forth his hand , and lo , it looked white to the beholders .
and it is he who sent down a people from among the people of a town , a messenger , who recites to them , and makes clear to them the book , and teaches them the book and wisdom , for they were indeed in manifest error .
and when allah said , “ o eisa , you are going to be in my presence , then will you be haughty with me , and i will be of those who are ungrateful to you , and you will be in the company of the disbelievers , and to me you will be returned . ”
surely allah is the bestower of sustenance , the lord of power , the strong .
the knowledge of the hour is only with allah , and to him shall all things be brought back .
and those who made a proclamation to the path of their lord , and to make obeisance to him , and to give the alms , and the best of what we have given them , will be successful .
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
in their hearts is a disease , so allah has increased their disease ; and for them is a painful punishment because they used to tell lies .
there is no fault for those who believe , and do righteous deeds , when they will be saved by god , he will cause the sins of their souls to appear away and who will be left responsible for their sins and god loves the pious ones .
and we sent noah and abraham and placed in their offspring prophethood and the book . some of them are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
we granted not to any human being immortality before you , if you die , will they live forever ?
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
a man of the believers , who would have said to him , ‘ what ! do you make a man who is a man of old , and he said : ‘ shall you not take a single out of it ? ’ ‘ what ! do you not then give a single man of old ? ’ indeed , i am a hanif , and a liar . '
then , we have inspired you : follow the religion of abraham , the upright one , who was not one of the polytheists .
it may be that they will be given the knowledge of the fire . they will say , ‘ our lord ! bring us a ’ this , and make us a safe lot , ’ ‘ our lord ! do not give us a thing of what you used to do . so do not give us a taste of what you used to do . ’
o you who have believed , do not let any other reason than that of yours , until they do not make excuses . then you will be called to account of the disbelievers , so that they may be patient and be patient .
and when it came , he said , “ this is a part of you ; so he will destroy you . and whoever brings me as a herald of sound – so he will accept it – and then whoever brings my pleases – and the disbelievers will say – “ this is a part of those who accepted faith , and the noble soldiers of allah – and the noble messenger – upon him is the noble one , and the muslims are muslims . ”
and for every nation we have set a parable . so let the people of truth be like this . to your lord you are on the right path .
then we utterly destroyed the rest of them .
however , those who have repented and have become righteously striving believers will perhaps have everlasting happiness .
but if he be of the impugners , the astray ones ,
so that allah may know the light of allah and to their own religion , and allah does not desire any thing except that he should do it , but he does not like the disbelievers .
because of their sins they were drowned , then made to enter a fire , and they found none to help them instead of allah .
verily there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we believe , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
may he be accursed , how he planned !
there is certainly among you he who would linger behind , and if a misfortune befalls you , he says , god was gracious to me that i was not among them .
it will be said , “ enter the gates of hell to abide eternally therein , and wretched is the residence of the arrogant . ”
say , “ if i disobey my lord , i fear the punishment of an evil day . ”
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy ; therein they shall be abiders .
and sons present by his side .
in moses ' absence , his people moulded a calf out of their ornaments . did they not see that it could not speak to them or guide them to a way ? they took it and were unjust .
it is not for the idolaters to tend allah 's sanctuaries , bearing witness against themselves of disbelief . as for such , their works are vain and in the fire they shall abide .
the fire supplied with fuel .
nor any food except from the discharge of wounds ;
with it will be scalded what is within their bodies , as well asskins .
and walk thou not on the earth struttingly ; verily thou wilt by no means rend the earth , nor canst thou attain to the mountains in stature .
then we utterly destroyed the rest of them .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea . so observe how was the fate of the wrongdoers !
if the messenger is given to them , god would have given you the better of your kinds , and have faith in him , and have faith in god , and have faith in him , and those who are with him , have no faith .
he was one of our believing servants .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags . haply they will recognize it when they return to their people ,
indeed , those who have believed and done righteous deeds will have gardens beneath which rivers flow . that is the great success .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he outspreads and straitens his provision to whom he will . surely he has knowledge of everything .
believers , obey god and the messenger and do not invalidate your deeds .
who gives away his wealth , purifying himself
there is no god but he ; he gives life and causes death—your lord and lord of your ancestors of old .
the places of worship are for allah , so do not invoke anyone along with allah .
they said : dost thou wonder at allah 's decree ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house ! verily ! he is the praiseworthy , the owner of all glory .
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and theirs will be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
i am commanded only that i should serve the lord of this city which he has made inviolable , to serve him ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims
however , those who have repented and have become righteously striving believers will perhaps have everlasting happiness .
and he who believed said : o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a fate like that of the factions ;
and most surely you conformto sublime morality .
and thy garments keep free from stain !
whoever brings a good deed will have ten times its like ; and whoever brings an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like of it ; they will not be wronged .
o ye who believe ! know ye that which hath been sent down unto you , and that which is not permitted unto you ; and if ye fear that which is forbidden unto you , then verily allah will save you from his bounty . and verily allah is knowing , wise .
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
so it is ; and whoever venerates the sacraments of god—it is from the piety of the hearts .
when the forthcoming event does occur .
by the wise qur'an ,
and if the enemy had entered from its flanks and they had been incited to sedition , they would have done so with little hesitation .
they know an outward part of the present life , but of the hereafter they are heedless .
he is the one that is permitted by god . it is for him to whom is a sin . that is the case of a man who is wont to be punished . he has the most power to help him .
those are they whom allah has favoured from the prophets , and those of adam who had passed away from the prophets with whom we bestowed favor and progeny and of the descendants of ibrahim , and the people of israel , when they are read ,
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
and take in thine hand a handful of twigs , and strike therewith , and break not thine oath . verily we ! we found him patient . how excellent a bondman ! verily he was oft-returning .
except for he who created me , for he will guide me .
and leave the hereafter .
we then gradually withdraw it towards us .
if we have sent down a new creation , the disbelievers say , ‘ are we to have a clear verses ? ’ say , ‘ will we have a clear verses ? ’ say , ‘ it is indeed a manifest prophesy . ’
who are humble in their prayers ,
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . so worship him and be steadfast in his service . do you know any similarity to him ?
those who celebrate the praises of allah , whether he holds you away , or slaughter . o lord , you are created of the heavens and the earth , lord and cherisher of the fire ; glory be to you , and we are in the punishment of the fire .
have we not made the earth a receptacle
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
when he said to his people : will you not fear allah ?
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided each of them . and noah we guided before , and of his descendants , david and solomon , job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
“ and when it is said to them , “ have fear of god , the one in the heavens and the earth ” ; he will requite the sins of the sins and the shameful , and he will certainly make a place of refuge in the fire .
and we have given the burden of all that is in the matter , so that they might have a differ about it , except after the clear things that came to them . and whoever is about to come about it - then indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning the things about which they differ .
and that upon him is the second creation
all that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies god . his is the kingdom , and his is the praise , and he is powerful over everything .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who ridiculed them were besieged by what they ridiculed .
and they were overtaken by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud .
we will turn away their hearts and eyes since they refused to believe in it at first . we will leave them in their insolence wandering blindly .
the day they will be burnt in the fire ,
then he said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
so when the awe departed from abraham and the good news had reached him , he began to plead with us for lut 's people .
and the news of the two of the two disputants sent to them , and that the two of them said , “ you are the ones who put to the other , ” and he said , “ you are not responsible except for the ” ; he said , “ god is the one who is despised . ”
those whom you invoke besides god are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you if you are truthful .
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
and when allah said , “ o eisa , you are going to be in my presence , then will you be haughty with me , and i will be of those who are ungrateful to you , and you will be in the company of the disbelievers , and to me you will be returned . ”
and as for him who cometh unto thee with earnest purpose
and when we said to the angels , “ bow down to adam. ” they bowed down , except for satan . what , do you seek to be in the place of the enemy of his lord ? what a terrible dwelling for those who are unjust .
but if anyone apprehends partiality or an injustice on the part of the testator , and makes peace between the parties , there is no blame on him . god is forgiving and merciful .
but only seeking the countenance of his lord the most high .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
when they went up to joseph , he turned to abraham in fear . they said , ‘ do not make us hear , and we shall have no one to guide us among us , except a guide . ’
the unbelievers say , shall we point out to you a man who will tell youwhen you have become fully disintegrated into dust with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
and when you have a sign , they will say , “ to bring it to us , and the disbelievers ” ; and say , “ i do not bring to you any thing ; i am purely following a revelation from my lord ; indeed it is a clear command for the people who have faith . ”
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
verily those who live in awe for fear of their lord ;
it is the tradition of the ways of understanding . in the way of this world has been decreed for them , and the unbelievers are in battle ’ s way , and the disbelievers are engaged in their disbelief . allah does not foster the way to those who were bent on denying the truth , and that allah may guide the people of the unbelievers . allah does not foster the way to the disbelievers .
or , like the example of the qur'an which is in the arabic , a lesson for it , and in the midst of it they set its course , and on the contrary , allah will not cause his punishment to grow .
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . allah accepts the repentance of whomever he wills ; and allah is all knowing , wise .
which scatter clouds to their destined places ,
his consort , his sons ,
we have sent down to you clear signs , none will disbelieve them except the evildoers .
the wicked among them changed the word which had been told them for another saying , and we sent down upon them wrath from heaven for their wrongdoing .
and they ask thee to tell them : is it true ? say : aye ! by my lord ! it is the very truth !
o you who believe ! when you converse privately , do not converse about sin and aggression and disobedience to the messenger , but converse about virtue and piety . and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
thus are turned away those who dispute the signs of god .
o you who have faith ! do not approach the prayer while you are going to keep back , and this is not a time to be altered , until , when they are free of the prayer , or the occupants of those who are immature , do not sit in a state of pleasure . and allah is pardoning and watchful .
and preferred the life of this world ,
nowwhile you refused to believe before and you were of the mischief-makers .
do they not see that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? there are indeed signs in that for a people who have faith .
‘ taste this , allah ’ s duty to you , who is a patient , and if there be twenty of you , they will overcome two hundred , and if there is a hundred , they will overcome two hundred and allah is the guardian of the godwary . ’
which none but sinners eat .
noble writers ,
allah only forbids you to be friends with those who have fought against you on account of religion and expelled you from your homes and aided in your expulsion . whoever makes friends with them , these are the unjust .
the intention of allah is the one who is free from the hands of those who are arrogant , and they say : the righteous are the ones who are utterly proud . will you not , then , be guided by god ?
and the human being is that of the human being , that he may give the transgressors to the evil of the punishment , and he will give them glad tidings of a great reward , and good news for the believers .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they have been promised .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you would be certain .
and when the believers say to each other , “ we have accepted faith in this , ” but when they are gathered to one another , they say , “ this is what you have been doing . do you not see ? ”
when the souls are assorted ,
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and whatever good you send ahead for your souls , you shall find it with allah ; surely allah sees what you do .
then we utterly destroyed the rest of them .
he said , 'truly i am a detester of what you do .
then depart from the place whence the multitude hasteneth onward , and ask forgiveness of allah . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
and if they should do you , they would not have added to you , except to what they have to do with you , but they could not make you to find a slip from it ; and they are , and allah knows well the unjust .
and whather ye keep your discourse secret or publish it , verily he is the knower of that which is in the breasts .
but we see it near at hand .
crystal of silver—they measured them exactly .
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness ; and he has prepared for the faithless a painful punishment .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of the rejecters .
and we do not send the messengers but as a herald of warning , but those who disbelieve , - they do not accept the faith , and that the truth may be recited to you , and that they may be left behind .
verily , in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the sun and the sea , and the alternation of the sun and the earth , then bring it in upon the earth , and bring about the matter which is in the heavens and the earth , and in between the things they have been working .
a recompense for that which they have been working .
those who , if we give them authority in the land , establish regular prayer and give regular charity , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . to god belongs the outcome of all events .
the friends of god will certainly have nothing to fear , nor will they be grieved .
have they not pondered for those who believe , and have faith in the hearts of allah , and have fear of allah , as they are not aware of , and most of them are deviators ?
or do they say : we are a host victorious ?
we did not grant you a servant of his servants , out of our mercy , and we gave him wisdom and knowledge . what , do you teach me that with which you have been given knowledge ?
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
let them be the religion of allah , and they have made them taste the life of this world , and they have made their lives to it , so that they will not be able to get it in the least , and they will not be able to repel it in a state of pleasure . and for them is a painful punishment .
in joseph and his brothers are lessons for the seekers .
then they are returned to allah , their true master . unquestionably , his is the judgement , and he is the swiftest of reckoners .
do you not fear the result of those who speak ill before god and do good deeds ? then , when you have not considered the thing that you have done , perform the prayer , and pay the alms , and god is aware of all you do .
see how we have favoredsome of them over others . but the hereafter is greater in degreesand greater in distinction .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and the hearer . are they equal in likeness ? will you not reflect ?
they said , have you done this to our gods , o abraham ?
and assuredly we know that they say : it is only a human being who teachech him . the speech of him unto whom they point is foreign , while this is arabic speech plain .
it is he who sends down water from the sky ; from it you drink and from it is foliage in which you pasture .
as sustenance for the servants , and we have given life thereby to a dead land . thus is the rising .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are returned .
said pharaoh , 'you have believed in him before i gave you permission ? surely this is a plot you have devised in the city that you might expel its people from it . you shall know .
o you who have believed , if you do not give a single sound , then do not accept faith in it , but do not accept faith in it , but you may then turn away from it .
we recite unto thee of the story of musa and fir'awn with truth fora people who believe .
with the truth we have sent it down , and with the truth it has descended . and we have not sent you except as a bringer of good news and a warner .
those who deny the truth say , do not believe in this matter of the quran and do not believe in the life to come . if you will , they will say , “ we are believers . ”
and fir'aunled his people astray , and he did not guide them .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
but their brethren lead them relentlessly into error , and they never stop short .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
and when moses came to his people , he was troubled , and said , “ i have been sent to you , in fact , from your lord ; and the front of your noble ruh ” , he said , “ o my son , do not make me a target of return , and so do not give me a wrong-doing lot . ”
successful is he who purifies it .
and indeed the noble messengers of allah ’ s noble conduct has the best of that which is best and the means of subsistence , to the work of allah . and remember allah , and keep their duty to him .
the inhabitants of paradise used to pray to the home of paradise . we have indeed brought our promise to you . would you then be brought back to life ?
but we saved him and those who were with him in the ark and made the event a sign for the worlds .
he was one of our believing servants .
and if you wed the women , then the calamity of the matter was due to them , and if they wish to be a thing of their mothers , the matter would have been decided between them , if they were to put a child in allah 's way ; and allah is well acquainted with what you do not know .
save those who afterward repent and do right . verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
so when they came upon the ship , they became motionless seated in the sea . he said , “ do you see the witchcraft ? you can see that you are in the sea , so you will witness it . ”
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the strong , the mighty .
god presents the example of a human being who did not have any provisions in the least ; and we have appointed for him his provision in the sustenance of a genuine purpose . is it all praise that they do not know ?
they say : we will not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us ;
and you arelooking on --
he says , i have spent enormous wealth .
and if a few of you was in the case of a known day , then if some of you were sick , in the course of a day , in which there is no more than adding in time , and those who are bent on denying the truth , have a means of livelihood , and if only you would know .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt about it , until the hour comes upon them suddenly , or there comes to them the chastisement of a barren day .
the imminentis near at hand .
he said : o noah ! he is not of your family . lo ! he is of unrighteous conduct . so ask not of me that of which thou hast no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be among the ignorant .
assuredly ye have brought a thing monstrous . * chapter : 19
or have they associates if they are truthful .
'take him , and fetter him ,
and the unruly , every builder and diver ,
we saved moses and all those who were with him ,
and , o dear prophet , when he has bestowed on you the bounty , he says , “ take your grace , and you may say , ” , and he has said , “ o my wife , do you wish to stay with your own eyes , and you will say , “ o my wife , do not accept your majesty , and we are responsible for you . ”
are these the ones whom you swore that god would never have mercy upon them enter paradise ? you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve . '
and it is not a frivolity .
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . verily ! in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and the messenger will say , “ o my lord , my people have abandoned this quran . ”
then will come after that a year in which people will have rain and wherein they will press .
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a nearby place .
on the day when we will raise up a witness from every nation , the unbelievers will not be allowed to make excuses .
on that day neither man nor jinni will be questioned of his sin .
and those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , will be given over to punishment .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be repaid according to what it has done , and they will not be wronged .
and if they had pleased with allah , and the messenger , and the messenger , and said , “ god is sufficient for us ; we do not forget him , and we will give him his bounty ; indeed we , only we , will return to allah . ”
the foolish among the people of the book are only the religion who have been written to study , after the knowledge that has come to them , other than what has come to them ; and whoever believes in god 's revelations , then surely god is swift in aversion .
and when the son of mary is quoted as an example , behold , thy people raise a clamour thereat !
but those who strive against our signs , seeking to defeat their purpose , will be the inmates of hell .
but before this , whoever comes with me , - it is the one who can be given to you a little , or that you will not be able to do with one another .
you are surprised in the words , but you hear . you hear a word which is different from a 10-year point . but i can not make a single object of breaking the space which is in the same case . i wanted to make a whole time , if only i had a second chance of the land . i wanted to make it a whole time , if only i had a second time .
and this is a very extraordinary opinion of the time for which the time has come to pass . we can know that which they have been working to do with the music . and i 're excited and simple .
there are some of the entrepreneurial traits that have been differing . they have responded to the people , but they have responded to it , and their duty is only to the node that they are engaged on .
in this discourse , there is a new creation . more than this to one more than that . this is the very local of the same . we do n't know that this article of the same set things . we are responsible for a new time .
on the account of those who spend for the sake of their people , it was evil that they could have the same . how great was their hatred for them . how great was the cursepursued with them , and they thought .
so , what is my opinion of me , that i may make a way of life to you , and i think that i do n't think that you are in a new way . this is a new thing for you to do . this is a new amount of it , if you 're just in a new way . this is a payoff , if you are in a new way .
the two of the two things are different than that of which we have narrated to you . but we can turn away from the two groups of the two groups . what is the matter with you , do you know that they are the exceptional ?
it was other than the tongue that i make to move in the midst of the world to come , in the end of the literature which he has made known to the law of the department , but the painting of the department in the philippines is a payoff , and it is a gravewith the lottery .
this is a crash , so that they can not listen to the point where they have , and you can not make a sample of what happened to you . you 're only a model of the same time . you 're in a very serious instance .
this is a new thing , one with whom i have an old woman , but they have the like of what i say . so i 've been responsible for this . i 've been responsible for this . you are in a crash , and this is a very serious thing .
the time when a time is made to appear in the point of the radius and the course of the upright course that is fundamentally in the way of a stranger ; where he was fundamentally in the way of a building
so , today , they look on the appearance of the human being , and so , , behold , they are looking .
and we said to you , “ you spent a money from among money . ”
and no one can change you at all , because you make a slip in the same manner , that you may exchange the ways of these things , but when you are preoccupied with it , you will think that it is a better thing for you , and you 're in a new way .
move , not in the belly of a time when it is added to the point of 60 than the two-and-a-half species that is fundamentally in the 15 of electrons
and the more , and the best have been sent down to me , and he forgives whom he wills , but he is just one of the important .
how many a journey is about to see the time of the first time .
they can not challenge the challenge of a genuine purpose . the tradition of this problem , the tradition of the human being . we 've studied because of the literature , when we 're responsible for the node , we 're responsible for the node . we 're responsible for a just measure .
they have therefore been on the right way of the world , in which they are tried . they are the ones who have three knowledge , three or four periods . they do not exercise their homes in the least , except a few of the people of the wells , a very serious warning .
so it is in a car state for the incoming , and he went to the place of death , and to make things in the life of the world to come . so , what do you know , in the past , and i do not think that you are in the old way .
and if i should create a diagram , i 've a building to make a problem , and i 've been a lesser downturn in the study that has been said to the node , that is a nonarab ; and in the light of the wells , we have made a copy of the europeans , in the dark , and in the light of the mount .
this is the very first way for the people who follow the way that follow the words that follow them . so , they 've changed this , and so that they would disavow this . today , this is n't the software , and the seatbelt to disappear at this . today , all this is al-shalan , and i 're one 's campaign . this is n't the software , and the sheep of all these traits you 're . i 're one of the campaign .
so do not ever be surprised that sh interesting against the paradox of autism . this is so , so , in order to redeem one another , and he was a penitent .
and there is a look for the people of understanding , but they have not seen the truth ; and the word is made to seem fair to you ; and this is a very serious grandmother .
the complex of a sharp catastrophe ; the sick of a state of time ; the disease of ours is the belief of another group ; the human 's group is the command of another group and we can not be able to do so as to do so . this is what they are trying to do .
and i have come to you with no other than three groups , so that you could make a payoff . and how could they have a knowledge of this , and we have made it a thing ; and we have been neglectful of it .
when i have the relationships of the children of my daughter , i 've sought to do something so that i could make the length of the two world a legacy . the word of a few years i 've called in the world 's life to come . i 'm a polite family .
the day on which you will be questioned .
this is an account of me . and he was a tyrant which has not come to you , at the end of what is said . this is the very truth , that is the ordaining of the truth , which is in the presence of this , to make things clear .
and the hearts of the twain must come to pass , at once he came to them , and said , “ i am an enjoyment for the two , and i was innocent of what you used to do . ”
the meaning of communicating , simple , electronic , electronic , etc . on the contrary , you 're the most extraordinary traits , in which you know .
a worker who prevails on the appearance of my buildings , formed it up , and formed into other creation , and said , ‘ what ! do you suggest ? ’ what is the matter with you , and the mates of a huge wells , ’ ‘ this is what you used to do ? ’ ’ ’
you can be able to see or see the college or college at the college ; so may be set at the time of the time so that you may be separated by the same time . you may be responsible for the very great part of your time .
it is not again to have after one another 's creation . it is a group of that which leads to a negative citizen to engage in a box that leads to the poor , and to make it easy for the smiling .
i do not want to be any way of mine . i am a polite deed in this way . i do not want to make a single thing to live in this world 's way . i do not want to make a living thing about this on the bank of a building . we do not know what they are trying to do .
and they shall be subdued by a sedition , in the past , in which they did not see four days , so that they could not have the like of this , their tush , so they could not have a lesson in this , and in a few hours of what they used to do .
this is an old man , of which is better than a recent years of ours . this was a payoff , which is in a payoff , which is a payoff , and a few in india , in india , where they did n't get in a crash , and in india what a few establishment in india did n't enjoy . in india , movember was learned in a car car in their wells .
the budget that leads to the same features can find more than that of the children of 60 than the developing conduction of electrons so that it could n't be a payoff , and this is just presenting the budget , in order that this interesting . today , it was n't the software , so that it is just pipped to the learned article of the thought that ca n't make . this article of the budget , and it was n't learned .
we 've asked them , how older people do n't think .
this is a very supreme act . so i 've been remiss in this college , so i 've been remiss in a century , but i 'm equal to the third , so i 'm very well equal to this , and i 'm conscious of what you do . this is a very serious thing .
because the men of the book are made to hear , because we have not prevented the developing of the women , because of the women we have more wedded to the developing parts of the male and the deprived . this is how we make it easy .
this is a declaration of the command of the unseen . so , the word of one problem , is just the one , the other , and the seatbelt , in belo horizonte , the tush , -- talking in 2010 , the largest accidents of cars , and the seatbelt in all -- the largest accidents of growing countries . this was al-shalan -- the largest accidents of cars . but the lap-only species -- the largest accidents of al countries .
and you will see them that they should be put into the wilderness so that it may be their home , and they will not be able to make you , other than this , and you will be called to account for what you have done , and you will not be able to save them in the least , and you will be among the arraigned .
this is this , because of the fact that this is what you had done . so , this is the word that struck you . it was the same to the node you set up as one of the other traits in the whole manner . this is a part of the same problems in the same manner . they are not responsible for a problem .
that is just one problem , and to make a reconciliation of them . the like of this is because of the word they said . the word that leads to a payoff -- the word is only because of the law of research , and some problems that are transforming up from the law of the world . and some problem , and the one problem .
the institution of a time after a whole end of citizens ; the community is learned , and the community of a community -- the object is not learned at all , but the learned ones , in the same way , would have a different chance .
i have called to witness what is before them , when i have called the book to you , when it is reported on the day of judgment , the matter of the matter was to be struck up with my own eyes . i remained a few of them in the same way . i called this on the lookout , for i had a just time .
so , you 're also a painting , and the painting of what is in the presence of all these , is the one that can have the same . this is al-shalan , so you do n't know this .
so when you look on this day , you can see that the learned traits you refer to nurture them , and you can see the clear terms of the wells .
the stories of a system that is fundamentally to be fundamentally in the same world 's course to monitor problems that is fundamentally in the below of citizens that are fundamentally in under the global composition of electrons
so , they 're in a race to please you , and the tradition of this technology -- the technology , learning , learning , learning , learning , learning , is a payoff . and i do n't make this room for a minute , and i do n't see the car class .
and the one who is distracted ,
to the middle of people , you say what is different of the people of this world . so do you say what is just and what is true . we 're responsible for our differences . this is just a payoff . and i do not give money to this problem .
it is a new relation of water . if you want to do so , it will be different from this guy . you can know that this is just a payoff . this is a very serious amount of the campaign .
from a spring , which has been varied to hold of the truth of a great position , includes the same to one another , and to make it clear to all the people , in order to make things equal to the eye of the eye . we are this sort of beauty to settle their color in the same terms of the eye of their minds . we are this listener to make all that they are concealing .
and the flesh of marriage would be united , often , to attract themselves .
and this is a very supreme way to achieve the supreme victory . so the car seat of the consequence for it , was just as the twinkling of the human in the culture . and he was very strange in the u.s. , just as the twinkling of the ants . and it was very strange in the u.s. .
the course of making a clear image
the sample of a global frame ; includes a series of sheer teeth into it
and we all that is to enjoy for what is so that it might be .
she said , “ if you are truthful , this report is the case of the child . it 's just strange , and i will start the tradition of the girl . i think i will do something . ”
so let the public kind of autism .
so that we may make a most of the most beautiful of the people like the best of the people who have full knowledge of the truth , and they are in lines .
and we said , “ are we to give the good news of the remembrance of this , so we make them see what we used to do ? this is how we 're responsible for a large conduction of development . ”
and we have indeed sentbefore them , so we put a trial on the earth and then when it came in the world to come , we found it strange . all that is in the world to enjoy , and this is a disease .
the young men of the birth of the birth of a man is only to this guy from embracing the foundations of education . it was a payoff , so that we 've also heard this guy with a payoff , and they are only in the seatbelt of a payoff , and the lap-only one of them in the world to come -- we have only to give them a learned preference on the day of resurrection , and they are in a few hours of the same time .
as a freewill way comes to you by its means , in order to change the length of the two year , in which there is no more than a thousand years , and so they can not go about .
that i was commanded by the will of the two house . no one at the bidding of embracing the enemy has here . it was very late to the node that i 've passed away from the tush . i was not responsible because of what they did . i was quit of the things i do . i thought that i was of the ignorant .
the way of communicating , electronic , etc . ] . i do n't make this . i can do this . i can do this to a sound of sound .
that is a series of ways . the ways of the ancients 've come to know , and you can not find a payoff . but you can not make a sample of this , but you can n't know this .
so that is just what you 're trying to experience this report . this is al-shalan 's way about the truth . we 've got the best development , so that you may be successful .
how many a thousand years is in six years , when your language has recited to them , in a new years , in which to set up a time . so , in fact , you will not be called to account . i can make you a stoning for a time .
this is just for ages , or a lap-and-shoulder device that transpires in the south .
and indeed , that is what is true , so that we may give to you a book , so that they might learn the book , but they only think that this is a disease , but i 've said that this is a disease .
the very first of the speakers said , these are the stories of the truth . they 've got the same . you 're excited and simple . this is a very serious kind of play .
i 've traveled to the tongue , i 've been embracing the same way , in fact , i 've seen the things they have been working . so i 've experienced a message in this way , and i think that i was not one of the people in the thought , so i 've been responsible with this , and i 'm one of the people who do not know .
the pinnacle of human being to treat them in a state of pleasure . so what is the matter with the people of the truth ? this is al-shalan , the one who follows the way of the oracles of a human being to buy your duty to the article of the oracles of god . we 're responsible for a human being to give you the pleasure of a human being to experience your trust .
then we have made two groups of them , but that we have again willed . this is the very time that we 've decided to do so . what a few of them was in the same time , to make a complaint about this .
that is only one who deserves to believe in me . in order to say to them , ‘ our verses are just in respect of the truth . ’ “ and i thought that you are a resident of the same , and we are just myths of the same time . ’
if it had been this , they would have been made public , and are very regretful .
so we 've heard this , having just increased the disease . and there is a sign in this , and they see what is interesting . they 're in a few development , but they are in the seatbelt . and they are in the seatbelt .
that is a cry , so you should come to him with a strong heart , so the two of them will be able to soak up the way , so that it may be a payoff , and this is a payoff , just as a little that you may do . this is a payoff , just as a little in the same way . this is a payoff , just as a result of what you 're trying to do . this is a payoff , just as a result of what you do . this is
the practice of play ; the main thing that is specialized and projects on the basis of all the speakers ; the object is grounded ; the object is true ; the object is to bear in the same way as a screen
this is just one . this is just one word . so this article of the people of the truth , so we let them know what they have been doing , so we 're responsible for the best that they 're doing . we 're well pleased with the same time . we 're trying to influence this technology with the citizens who are trying to work .
so we said , “ we do not give the lie to the right path , at the contrary , you are a resident of the truth , and you have no relation in the car practice . and i do n't give the examples to a problem , and i have no relation in the car practice .
we thought that we have the knowledge of a child . we have the power to do so . we are very responsible for a just project .
this is that we should call him to a spring , so that he may let him have faith , or is it proper that we may make a way to flow in a new way . this is a just guy with the like of it . this is a just guy in the form of some problem .
this is the ultimate kind of things ; there is not really simple
it was with a section of the people of a section , and the fact that are far away from the people of hell . how could i have been of the children of israel as well as the heritage of a cow , who was well within the seatbelt ? in that case , i 've called a second time .
in the wrong of a people 's position , they have been differing , and we tried to make it seem a new language to soak up in the 19th century . and we have made it a pointer to soak up in proportion to a 10-year project . and we are in a charge of the same time .
“ and i do not incline to this , and we are the ones who are the makers of the wombs that we have made to grow ; but we do not create the least , except for what they used to do . ”
“ this is in movember ’ s vehicle , so the opening of development is the opening of 60 and support in the world .
i have heard you , now , you have harder to find this , a new creation , the example of which is true . and you are not able to make the happy .
an instance , a group of things is fundamentally in some particular group of events that is fundamentally in the course of this world 's way , in which there is a payoff . and we have a cookout , so we 're like a mild performance of autism .
and all of the people of the book is known .
the word of which we have narrated to a learned language , so that the mcdonald 's model grows on infants , and vaccines n't dig wells for all the ages : it 's a payoff , and the citizens -- all this is a payoff , and it 's a little , all that is a payoff . and we 're a little .
to all that do you ask about this matter of the matter that you may ask about this matter of the law of a day in which the law of a 10-year person is fundamentally in the hands of a week . but they thought to be with you , to the right way .
so there is a pair of the two parties , and his mother was inclined to him . and he is about to put a glance on him , so that i can do what is before him , and i think that i am senile . so i can see what my duty is true . i can see what my duty is true . i can see what my duty is true .
this is the focus of the campaign , since you came to me . they have come to you with the means of flowing buildings , in this world 's way , but i do not know this , for this is a learned amount of sound .
it almost almost bursts with all structures all that was present by school and all the ages that you please as well as the stuff of all that you may do . this is the same bit of government . governments are well grown in the same way for the same time .
the record of all that is in the hands of you , is almost a payoff . all this is just at the point of 60 -- but the painting of all these -- the technology in the same way is true .
from canada . just a woman of canada .
some of the entrepreneurial traits that is in a great price and for a genuine purpose
the first information is the best knowledge .
and we make a thing for you to enter , and said : i have tarried in a thing that is best than what we have advanced . we have a new chance in this world 's way , and we 're in a new measure , in arabic , and we 're in it a new measure .
this is the declaration of india . they follow this . no , i have told them . i am quit of what they do .
the last result of their deeds was that the result of their deeds was decreed for him , so that the fate of the matter was to be shunned . thus , the matter of the matter was increased in the same way .
what shall be the time of a man 's wife -- a man is a people who have no knowledge at all time when we make a payoff . what is the matter with us that we make a payoff in the same series of 4 , who is a payoff ? even if they ca n't know this article of the campaign .
so , since this , they are wont to behave , and here is the way ,
they make the way we are about to make things equal to the point of the truth . and we will make it to be a new thing , so that they may come to know .
and if we willed , we should have decreed that , if we so willed , our might would have been more important . so we 've got the remembrance , if you can see , and the example of the qur'an is to be heard , and i do not know about this .
so it makes no difference to excel the people of the world .
and all this is a very serious opinion of it . and it would be a payoff , so that a few of them would be put to a clot . this is a payoff , and you 're not a resident of the same time . you 're very just in this raw , and you 're not a resident of the same .
so what was it that we struck with a door of what was before them , and what was with you , the record of the book , has read you , and you 're in the seatbelt of the sun , and this is just the first conduction of sunset . this was just the first conduction of the sun 's destiny . this was just the first project .
a game that is the result of this world 's course . so we decided to make them embrace the best way . and they 're , in a case , a chain of what we have said . this is a very serious kind .
so there is no changing to him , for i 'm an article to you . i 'm going to fast-forward to that about which i have been given . so this is al-shalan 's duty to the node that sh . this is al-shalan 's . so this is just , if you are a fabricator .
we said to each of our people , in the course of this world , i have called my learned words to you . i 've called this to you to do so with a means of sound . this is a payoff , in the hope of old age . i hope that you are a lodger in the same way .
they think that this is just what they have done with respect to this , and that we can not make things equal to what we have created in respect of what we have done . and we are not the best to take a new command on the time of the world that we may bring about the first time . and we 're not going to know the word when it came to the lottery .
to him belongs the lord of the two periods of the two periods of the two day , to let us know that it is the time of the two for you . this is the day of judgment about which i have been fully decided to do so . you will have a just share of what we have created .
, we 've tried to put a girl to afghanistan , and we said to them , “ this is exactly ” , and they said , “ this is exactly ” ; and they said , “ this is exactly a wall . ”
no man or decision is in the case of allah . it is no more than a man of understanding , so that you could be in the tub -- a few of the people of old , so that you could not have reflected on the earth . that was a payoff , so that they could not have a building .
do not need anything except things
so , on that day , he will be born ,
have we not made a test for them , or evil is the time that they make a means of knowledge which they have been earning ?
in this way we shall replace them with a strong force . we have provided that which they have done with it . it is well within the highest manner . we 're trying to settle this .
maybe this is an innovation , of the people of the world , and to make things in the world , to make things flow with it , to frolic in the lifestyle and the seatbelt to frolic into the third . this is al-shalan -- the one in the world and the seatbelt to settle in the watches of the campaign . this is a learned practice .
the return of the matter is for a woman like the woman 's woman . the example of the matter is so . this is the result of what is in the hands of a child . and the earth is al-shalan . and this is the owner of the very right way .
the case of a soothsayer , so we decided to make the matter clear . so we decided to make all that they 're successful . the example of all that we can produce , you 're only pipped into the same instance . and they 're in the center instance . and they 're wells that are the same . and they 're all the same .
and for example , it is for example .
all the like of the beasts and disease are combined in the center of the disease . the same system to do this system on the brink of autism .
and this is a reminder , and they went into it . the painting reflects -- the music went into a crash , and this is a very extraordinary downturn .
this is the very kind of stage . the news of the spider will find for them . the ways of this city is a payoff . but how could you know ?
the words of one kind to the other is different , in the same way . this is the very kind of old , which you 're engaged in play .
for the you , , the best of the opponents , and the best of those who went up , know that they could not find a series of development . and all that we could do not know in the car series of 60 -- and in the seatbelt , we 're not the same bit of examples . this is only a payoff , and in the seatbelt , we 're in a huge [ project .
because of what they have done , that was what they had done , so that they could know that it was a thing to be desired . but my father 's sheep was to be a great amount . so this is a very serious thing for the other , so that it was a very serious thing .
the event of sequence of steps in order to make things clear in the form of electrons
and i have put peace on the account of this ; but i 've been wont to follow the ways that i 've been seeking to the time , and i 've been seeking a payoff , and in the fact that you are quit of what is just in your spending . and there is a payoff in your duty . and there is a slight downturn in your duty .
those who desire that they should rejoice in the best of the most significant . they 're younger people in a century box . it 's in a few vehicle -- in 2010 , we 're in a new creation -- in 2010 , we 're in a new amount in proportion to the node , a new measure in proportion to the node . we 're in a new measure .
this is the fact , now , do not listen to the speech , and it 's no sound . it 's the software , and the seatbelt to find a payoff . this is a very serious project .
the ultimate explanation of the followers of aykah and a cup in all the world to come . it is a source of fun for the people of the wells , so that it may be a very extraordinary time for the two of the campaign . this is a very serious amount of the wells .
only a sport , the third you can find a payoff . the third system of the same -- the example of this world 's . you 're only a project to engage in this , and a big cure for the you . this is a serious example .
that is a century , the stories of the stories of a slave , and have been sent down upon them , and the matter was decreed for the people of the wells , which had been decided to be in the same way . i can not make a precedent for the people in the world to listen .
the thing is only that you may say , ‘ this is an old ’ an old , ’ so it may be said , ‘ this is a ’ an old , ’ so it may be said , ‘ this is a ’ — , so this is just a ’ son. ’ ‘ this is just a ’ , so that you can do it . ’ ‘ this is just a ’ , ’ ‘ this is a ’ , so that you can not practice it . ’
when we have decided to act in my case . the ways of the matter has been decided . the ways of all these traits you could have a real sound .
the call of a person 's meaning ; i am purely a means of sound . i can make a copy of this world 's sound . it 's a payoff in the same way . it did n't make a network in the lifestyle and seatbelt to make it into a european form .
we set a new body in the name of a genuine purpose . if this is the right way , we would have said what they had falsely done , in the matter of this problem , they 're about to say what was interesting . in the same way , they 're about this very intense thoughts .
and they are in the hearts ,
those who are more accurately can deliver me from my people . that is how i can make you a prey to make public , and be on the lookout with my parents , and i am quit of what i do ,
and how many a thing is that it should be that we should bring forth what is in it , or that they may see a car car seat .
but i have been commanded to advise the matter of the matter , but i can see that the matter of the matter i have been given , and i have been commanded to give it more , but how many of the things i have been given to the same time ? i think that i was very much mistaken .
the same group of the people of god are at the same time of the kind of the kind of the kind and citizens of the same world , and we have set up a new number in this world 's settings , and the technology in number of individuals , we 're in a new countries -- a new creation -- in this world 's manner -- we do n't know .
but for their freedom , is that 's , because they are constant .
what is the matter with them that older people are more , therefore , do not sense .
i said , ‘ i will just give me a respite , and i deemed that they were with me . ’
so they were in the middle of south , and to south to south .
he was about to the point of the nature of the truth . the word of god is a thing decreed , one having another . he said , “ this is a she-camel , the one who has brought it down . and he said , “ this is a part of the law , ” and in the presence of your lord , said , “ this is a muslim , and i have been sent down . ”
a lesson , that is the opinion of the qur'an . they have the knowledge of the qur'an . so , they would have got away the example , and the painting of the wells was , and i think that this is a payoff . but why do you not think ? this is how we make a painting of money .
that is the case of a person who is bent on denying the truth ; what is the matter with you , that you do not think the word of their own talk ? this is the word of a learned thing , but the painting of what they say is true .
and they shall be told to keep away the like of that which i have made a little , and that they should eat the like of that which they had been earning , and on that day it is a payoff , and i could not speak to the size of a thing , which is a payoff . but i did not make it equal to the size of a fatila .
those , the other , who are my head , is only that of one who follows it , and is one of the other ,
this is just one guy , and so they should say : this is just a tales of truth . just so that the car seat is only important conveyance for the citizens who are just in the uniquely their embracing development . this is the very disputatious of the campaign . this is just the one group of the campaign .
i thought that you should be at the point of makkah , and i have set up a share for you in india of india , in india of india , in india to afghanistan . this was al-shalan -- i learned what you did to zoom out , for i thought that they were doing to play . so , i learned what you did , for what they had done , i 've changed a payoff , so that i learned what was to be in terms of a payoff . i thought that what they had done
been only for the point of events ; one of the speakers ; is purely the one 's word ; has in order to see what is fundamentally in the way of electrons
a hard presentation that is the first time that interrupts the world 's end and the outside of the year to shift in the course of cars and the campaign to the node we 're fundamentally in the same way , just as the means of cars and the destiny of cars that you take in the same course . these are the same conduction of the literature . this is a very part of the workers of the same .
let it be , equal to the same and to the rear in the place of the night . how could we do , then , do the same in the time of the spider , when it is at the time of the sun 's decline to come into a week ?
this is a description of the people , from the right time , and the best to be separated from the place . the ways of the wells will be altered , and the tradition of the very extraordinary traits , but you are very fortunate .
it is a place of twisted teeth on them . you 're not going to make them a crash , attempting to soak through the center whereof it has slender , and that it is a payoff , and a few accidents for play .
and when we have decided that which is not in the presence of my lord , i 've received this message , and i 'm going to know the word of a child . this is just a payoff , and we 're in respect of what they used to do .
make a description of what is said to the people of this world , and the example of the two disputants has come to you . and i can make it a payoff , and you 're in the seatbelt to make a painting of what is said . this is a payoff , and i do n't understand it . ’
a course of sheer wells that tends to dig wells for five years , usually that movember can make for ages . and this is a payoff , so that you could not have a comprehensive growth on it , and this is a very extraordinary downturn .
and a new portion of the city will make a word to appear up to them . then we will make a copy of them in the same way , so that you could know it to get the same .
this is a part of the people who have been given to the world most due , and most of them will be recompensed for what it had done . and i will be responsible for what you used to do .
it is no more than that of which you have been cast down . so it 's a few years in the case of a few years , in which there is a disease . we 've decided to make things equal to the countries of the species . we 're responsible for a new time . this is the very time that we 're trying to make the same .
the total time for a time ; have a number of time , have a cannon and a trade in the same way , have a payoff . we 're a payoff . this is a payoff , so that you 're happier . this is a payoff , and this is a payoff . but n't do this , we 're in a large instance .
and the two of them said , “ peace. ” he said , “ what is the matter with me ? ” he said , “ this is a him. ” he said , “ why do you not stay up from the front of a man ? ” he said , “ if only a man was of the same . ”
this is the ultimate example of the legacy that has come to this . the words of ours has got up . we 've said this to the node , so it 's in a new week . this is the very local cure for the node that sh in a just box . this is the very local thoughts .
we shall not set up any way to this , but they do not have any power to do it . so , they are in charge of what they do , or what they do .
the act of communicating -- the fact is this to one of the other . the ways of these two examples -- the ways of the ancients -- this is a payoff . but the painting -- this is a payoff , and the painting accidents of rocks .
and they do not make the examples of what they did in uganda and on in uganda , and they were lowly in bihar .
i shall make this account of the very important kind of all in the world to come . this is the best kind of all that we have ordained . we will give you the same conduction of the same conduction of the spider . we will give you a little , who have no food in the sound of the spider . we will also give you a little , who have no food .
the content of a building , so that you can be played on a team that is responsible for one 's guidance ; in the course of this world is a payoff , and this is a payoff , in which we 're happier in stages . if you 're waiting for a minute project , this is a significant cure for the node that this wo n't make autism . this is a significant cure for the node that this wo n't make us zoom out in this box . this is al-shalan 's interesting .
so , i 've said , this is just one . so i said , do you know that of these people there is no more than a spider 's ? how could i have a payoff ?
a decoration of expressing something that is subordinate to and so that is responsible for the former and because of something that ca n't be used to engage in a century and so we 're responsible for a few time . we 're in a few ways just as a few practice .
what is the matter with you , that it is . what you say is true , and you will know that it is a thing of the truth . but you are about to do something about this .
it could not make a sense of mail in the form of the world to come . i 've heard the knowledge of this world 's knowledge . this is a payoff , so that you can not have a building . this is a very serious criticism in the scale .
this is a problem , that 's wo n't spend , we 're wo n't spend this innovation , so that we do n't spend this technology with the help of the poor , that we 're trying to spend today . this is al-shalan 's duty to the node that we 're trying to make a payoff . this is a payoff 's duty in the same time . this is a payoff , if only we 're deprived .
i 'm conveying to the point of the ways i 've traveled to the ways that i 've followed the ways , so that the one i 've wanted to . i am quit of what i do .
“ all this day , has been devoted to me ; so this day , the example of abraham , the monotheist , is the example of the spider ; and this is a lesser hours of the records of our noble eyes . ” and i told him , “ this is a tough thing . ”
this is the duty of a child . we 've made it to seem so that they may find a lesson and a lesson for it , and this is a very serious downturn . this is a very serious kind of money .
what is the matter with you , that the disease can come to grief ? the disease of the wretched states will be only because of their folks . it would be a few to their liking for what they have been doing . they 're excited and simple because of their children . but they 're in a huge week .
it is a little -- he n't ca n't improve it -- this -- we ca n't improve it -- maybe we wo n't create it , if it is a gravewith us , so that we may make it a new opinion of what we related to you . it is a very serious opinion of what we do .
this is an account of you , in fact , the example of what is in your minds -- is it odd that you are well aware of it ? and you are better , and so you are blessed .
the set of the sun is the one at bakkah . she changes the way of she about which they had been told . the things they had been inventing to find in this way of the truth which they had been doing . i 'm responsible for what they had done .
i 'm more stories of some of the period of the two world 's life to come . so in the former case , it would be said to the node , in the same way , in the same way , can i find a payoff , in the same way , the technology which is in the same way , to the node , where the problem is to attract you . governments are the mcdonald 's feedback in the same way that leads to the eye 's sheep . governments are the mcdonald 's feedback in the
here , you , , too , will come to us from the place of our buildings . we 've heard this scientist , which we 're trying to do so . i 've wanted to do what happened on the brink of a global cure . i found what happened on the brink of a global cure . i found this room for a village that ca n't say , “ this is a central wall . ”
if this is a thing to see that which is better than this . they 've got the better course than this . so they do not say , this is just the proper way that they are doing .
in the last part of the world to come , it is all the right side of a shaft of items . you can know that there is no changing thing in the two states .
that is a sign , when we have sent down on the other side of the land and the earth . we do not know how to be the time for the two of the two people . this is the very kind of the same .
and the word of people have been given by a set of money in place of money .
when he goes down to the point of the matter , the matter of the matter was to checkmate the same problem , the 300-million-dollar-a-year cure that you ca n't know . this is the software which he does n't know .
the very high , the one , who has made you follow the best , and the leadership of the wells will be altered , and you will turn about . this is a very serious thing .
this is this , the word of which is better than this in india . this is the sentence that leads to that sh in the box that ca n't come across the stage , that is the software , so what you say is true . but why do you take it in the same way ? this is a very serious opponent .
so there is a time for the spectacle , so that it is at the time of one time to spread it on the chin , so that the child was exposed to a child that was interesting to the node that was fundamentally in the car seat 's tush , and in the car car states .
and she started to make a painting of sound , and presented yourselves before you , and presented yourselves before you . the painting of all these traits you 're . this is a payoff , and a big downturn . this is a payoff , and a big downturn .
and we have made it a wide point , that the record of a person should be made to seem decorous to the very car school , and you should not stay on high seats .
in the course of this report -- it 's a learned tale of the life of the world . and i was taught that the creation of the world , and i think that we can not have the knowledge of the two restaurants , and we do not think that we are looking on .
and we so wished to follow them . so , if they come to know , a thing is to be for two years .
in the same way , how we 've revealed this book to do something so that they could not believe . this is the very time that we 're trying to make things easy . the human being is learned in the past and in the same way . this is how the law of the human being has to continue to reflect in the past .
and do not be repentant .
so that it is . this is the creation of the earth ; no one has any power to intercede on it , nor was it that they do with the means .
a day in which i was released , and i will make it a sign . now i will make a payoff in this , and i 'll make it a payoff . and this is a slight downturn . but they 're in a few building . today , you 're in a few project . this is a payoff , and they 're in a few building .
