creative companies do often have symbols in the workplace that remind people to be playful , and that it ’ s a permissive environment . so , whether it ’ s this microbus meeting room that we have in one our buildings at ideo ; or at pixar , where the animators work in wooden huts and decorated caves ; or at the googleplex , where it ’ s famous for its [ beach ] volleyball courts , and even this massive dinosaur skeleton with pink flamingos on it . don ’ t know the reason for the pink flamingos , but anyway , they ’ re there in the garden . or even in the swiss office of google , which perhaps has the most wacky ideas of all .
but you drop 25 of those veterans in joplin , missouri , they get that sense of community back . again , you have an 18-year-old boy who graduates high school in kansas city . he joins the army . the army gives him a rifle . they send him to iraq . they pin a medal on his chest . he goes home to a ticker tape parade . he takes the uniform off . he 's no longer sergeant jones in his community . he 's now dave from kansas city . he does n't have that same self-worth . but you send him to joplin after a tornado , and somebody once again is walking up to him
of course there 's health consequences to this , scary ones , besides the waist .
so it should look like this . you should be looking at something like this . so what i ’ m going to do is , i ’ m going to give you minute , and i want you to adapt as many of those circles as you can into objects of some form . so for example , you could turn one into a football , or another one into a sun . all i ’ m interested in is quantity . i want you to do as many of them as you can , in the minute that i ’ m just about to give you . so , everybody ready ? ok ? off you go . okay . put down your pencils , as they say .
human universal -- so you spend money on other people , you 're being nice to them . maybe you have something in mind , maybe not .
mr : thank you very much indeed . why do so many people reach success and then fail ? one of the big reasons is , we think success is a one-way street . so we do everything that leads up to success , but then we get there . we figure we 've made it , we sit back in our comfort zone , and we actually stop doing everything that made us successful . and it does n't take long to go downhill . and i can tell you this happens , because it happened to me . reaching success , i worked hard , i pushed myself . but then i stopped , because i figured ,  oh , you know , i made it .
and take stock of your miserable existence . now that was the advice that st. benedict gave his rather startled followers in the fifth century . it was the advice that i decided to follow myself when i turned 40. up until that moment , i had been that classic corporate warrior -- i was eating too much , i was drinking too much , i was working too hard and i was neglecting the family . and i decided that i would try and turn my life around . in particular , i decided i would try to address the thorny issue of work-life balance . so i stepped back from the workforce ,
the wireless institute , the west wireless health institute , is really the outgrowth of two extraordinary people who are here this evening : gary and mary west . and i 'd like to give it up for them for getting behind this . their fantastic philanthropic investment made this possible , and this is really a nonprofit education center which is just about to open . it looks like this , this whole building dedicated . and what it 's trying to do is accelerate this era : to take unmet medical needs , to work and innovate -- and we just appointed the chief engineer , mehran mehregany , it was announced on monday --
when you 're not in the room , the saying goes . hyperconnectivity and transparency allow companies to be in that room now , 24/7 . they can listen and join the conversation . in fact , they have more control over the loss of control than ever before . they can design for it . but how ? first of all , they can give employees and customers more control . they can collaborate with them on the creation of ideas , knowledge , content , designs and product . they can give them more control over pricing , which is what the band radiohead did with its pay-as-you-like online release of its album  in rainbows .  buyers could determine the price ,
and you suppress play -- they squeak , they wrestle , they pin each other , that 's part of their play . if you stop that behavior on one group that you 're experimenting with , and you allow it in another group that you 're experimenting with , and then you present those rats with a cat odor-saturated collar , they 're hardwired to flee and hide . pretty smart -- they do n't want to get killed by a cat . so what happens ? they both hide out . the non-players never come out -- they die . the players slowly explore the environment , and begin again to test things out . that says to me , at least in rats --
almost all our effort goes in this box , sustaining innovation in formal settings , getting a better version of the essentially bismarckian school system that developed in the 19th century .
because i 'm writing a book about all this , i 'm still looking into it , so i do n't have the answer . but in the mean time , i 'm going to call on the worldwide education expert , who 's my 10-year-old daughter , noa , to talk to you about why the boys in her class do worse . noa : the girls are obviously smarter . i mean they have much larger vocabulary . they learn much faster . they are more controlled . on the board today for losing recess tomorrow , only boys . hanna rosin : and why is that ? noa : why ? they were just not listening to the class while the girls sat there very nicely .
all right ? now one thing about art is , art is discovery , and art is discovering yourself through your art . right ? and one thing about cars is we 're all a little bit like pygmalion , we are completely in love with our own creations . this is one of my favorite paintings , it really describes our relationship with cars . this is sick beyond belief . but because of this , the intimacy with which we work together as a team
i sold newspapers . and he would n't buy a newspaper from me ever . but i was convinced i was going to get him to buy a license plate protector . and he 's like ,  well , we do n't need one .  and i said ,  but you 've got two cars ...  -- i 'm nine years old . i 'm like ,  but you have two cars and they do n't have license plate protectors .  and he said ,  i know .  and i said ,  this car here 's got one license plate that 's all crumpled up .  and he said ,  yes , that 's my wife 's car .  and i said ,  why do n't we just test one on the front of your wife 's car and see if it lasts longer . 
i felt like saying ,  you know what ? if you had gotten five , this dinner would have been a lot more interesting .  there is now a kind of sleep deprivation one-upmanship . especially here in washington , if you try to make a breakfast date , and you say ,  how about eight o'clock ?  they 're likely to tell you ,  eight o'clock is too late for me , but that 's okay , i can get a game of tennis in and do a few conference calls and meet you at eight .  and they think that means that they are so incredibly busy and productive , but the truth is they 're not ,
in the guts of these children and protect them the way that it needed to . now at that time , there was a great , as you can imagine , frustration -- let 's call it frustration -- it started to grow very , very quickly . and all of a sudden , some very important voices in the world of public health started to say ,  hang on . we should abandon this idea of eradication . let 's settle for control -- that 's good enough .  now as seductive as the idea of control sounds , it 's a false premise . the brutal truth is , if we do n't have the will or the skill ,
makes any sense . here 's the computer of the future , because this screen is already there and they 're ubiquitous . all right now let me show you just a little bit about advanced devices . and we 'll start by posing a little problem . what you see here is another centimeter-sized device , and the different colors are different colors of dye . and you notice something which might strike you as a little bit interesting , which is the yellow seems to disappear , get through the blue , and then get through the red . how does that happen ? how do you make something flow through something ? and , of course the answer is ,  you do n't . 
and the free cure is adult seatbelts , and the expensive cure -- the 300-million-dollar-a-year cure -- is child car seats .
where they work long , hard hours at jobs they hate to enable them to buy things they do n't need to impress people they do n't like . it 's my contention that going to work on friday in jeans and [ a ] t-shirt is n't really getting to the nub of the issue . the second observation i 'd like to make is we need to face the truth that governments and corporations are n't going to solve this issue for us . we should stop looking outside . it 's up to us as individuals to take control and responsibility for the type of lives that we want to lead .
success story .
and the engineers told the designers ,  if you go in with all your stuff , we 'll walk out , we 'll walk right out of the project .  so i did n't know any of this , and we got a presentation that had an agenda , looked like this . there was a whole lot of dialog . we spent four hours being told all about vocabulary that needs to be built between engineers and designers .
and that are a very important part of sleep and dreams . the next step of evolution in mammals and creatures with divinely superfluous neurons will be to play . and the fact that the polar bear and husky or magpie and a bear or you and i and our dogs can crossover and have that experience sets play aside as something separate . and its hugely important in learning and crafting the brain . so it 's not just something you do in your spare time . jh : how do you keep -- and i know you 're part of the scientific research community , and you have to justify your existence with grants and proposals like everyone else --
so the more you step back , embrace complexity , the better chance you have of finding simple answers , and it 's often different than the simple answer that you started with .
and this outer layer , this is the vasculature , which is incredible , around a human brain . this is the blood vessels . 20 percent of the oxygen coming from your lungs , 20 percent of the blood pumped from your heart , is servicing this one organ . that 's basically , if you hold two fists together , it 's just slightly larger than the two fists . scientists , sort of at the end of the 20th century , learned that they could track blood flow to map non-invasively where activity was going on in the human brain . so for example , they can see in the back part of the brain ,
this is a ring of cobalt atoms . so this whole world , the nano world , this area in here is called the nano world , and the nano world , the whole micro world that we see , there 's a nano world that is wrapped up within that , and the whole -- and that is the world of molecules and atoms . but i want to talk about this larger world , the world of the micro world . so if you were a little tiny bug living in a flower , what would that flower look like , if the flower was this big ? it would n't look or feel like anything that we see
you hear about it all the time .
they 're not very good swimmers -- and we know what 's happening to the ice . these are camels moving across the rift valley in africa , photographed by chris johns . shot straight down , so these are the shadows of the camels . this is a rancher in texas , by william albert allard , a great portraitist . and jane goodall , making her own special connection , photographed by nick nichols . this is a soap disco in spain , photographed by david alan harvey . and david said that there was lot of weird stuff happening on the dance floor . but , hey , at least it 's hygienic . these are sea lions in australia doing their own dance ,
and one of their projects was to see what makes meetings boring , and to try and do something about it . so what will follow is a student-made film about just that . narrator : flow is the mental state of apparition in which the person is fully immersed in what he or she is doing . characterized by a feeling of energized focus , full involvement and success in the process of the activity . an important key insight that we learned about meetings is that people pack them in one after another , disruptive to the day . attendees at meetings do n't know when they 'll get back to the task
these are what people often refer to as the renewable sources .
it 's a color sensor that detects the color frequency in front of me — — and sends this frequency to a chip installed at the back of my head , and i hear the color in front of me through the bone , through bone conduction .
and the newly emerging diseases may make h5n1 and bird flu a quaint forerunner of things to come . it 's a destabilized world . and unlike destabilized world in the past , it will be broadcast to you on youtube , you will see it on digital television and on your cell phones . what will that lead to ? for some , it will lead to anger , religious and sectarian violence and terrorism . for others , withdrawal , nihilism , materialism . for us , where does it take us , as social activists and entrepreneurs ? as we look at these trends , do we become despondent , or will we become energized ? let 's look at one case , the case of bangladesh .
and science to give us a feel of how future technologies might be experienced . you 've probably all heard of google 's project glass . it 's new technology . you look through them and the world you see is augmented with data : names of places , monuments , buildings , maybe one day even the names of the strangers that pass you on the street . so these are my illusion glasses . they 're a little bigger . they 're a prototype . and when you look through them , you get a glimpse into the mind of the cyber-illusionist . let me show you what i mean . all we need is a playing card . any card will do .
 i took my girlfriend out for dinner . we went to a movie , we left early , and then went back to her room for ...  only cake -- just a piece of cake .
and the stated goal was to increase popular support for the afghan government .
we then had autonomy drivable with hy-wire , and we showed hy-wire here at this conference last year . hy-wire is the world 's first drivable fuel cell , and we have followed up that now with sequel . and sequel truly is a real car . so if we would run the video -- but the real key question i 'm sure that 's on your mind : where 's the hydrogen going to come from ? and secondly , when are these kinds of cars going to be available ? so let me talk about hydrogen first . the beauty of hydrogen is it can come from so many different sources : it can come from fossil fuels ,
it 'll pick you up , and then we 're going to call your doctor , tell him about it . we 're going to send him the signal that we have , that says you have a heart attack , and we 're going to send the signal to the hospital and we 're going to have it analyzed there , and there you 're going to be with your doctor and you 'll be taken care of so you wo n't die of a heart attack .  that 's the first invention that i wanted to describe . and now i want to talk about something entirely different . at first i did n't think migraine headaches were a big problem
and i 've broken it down into four-bar groups here , so you would know how you would trade . now what we did was we brought a musician into the scanner -- same way -- had them memorize this melody and then had another musician out in the control room trading back and forth interactively . so this is a musician , mike pope , one of the world 's best bassists and a fantastic piano player . so he 's now playing the piece that we just saw just a little better than i wrote it . cl : mike , come on in . mike pope : may the force be with you .
so someone tells us the story about supertaskers , so this two percent of people who are able to control multitasking environment . but what about ourselves , and what about our reality ? when 's the last time you really enjoyed just the voice of your friend ? so this is a project i 'm working on , and this is a series of front covers to downgrade our super , hyper —
which is a cell phone . in this particular case , a camera phone . they 're everywhere , six billion a month in india . and the idea is that what one does , is to take the device , you dip it , you develop the color , you take a picture , the picture goes to a central laboratory . you do n't have to send out a doctor , you send out somebody who can just take the sample , and in the clinic either a doctor , or ideally a computer in this case , does the analysis . turns out to work actually quite well , particularly when your color printer has printed the color bars
so what happens when people win the lottery is , number one , they spend all the money and go into debt , and number two , all of their friends and everyone they 've ever met find them and bug them for money . and it ruins their social relationships , in fact . so they have more debt and worse friendships than they had before they won the lottery .
other people have surely thought of it .  and the answer is , of course , yes . those half of you , roughly , who are women , at some point may have had a pregnancy test . and the most common of these is in a device that looks like the thing on the left . it 's something called a lateral flow immunoassay . in that particular test , urine either , containing a hormone called hcg , does or does not flow across a piece of paper . and there are two bars . one bar indicates that the test is working , and if the second bar shows up , you 're pregnant . this is a terrific kind of test in a binary world ,
or , we decide that we 're going to prevent dementia , and it will never happen to us because we 're going to do everything right and it wo n't come and get us . i 'm looking for a third way : i 'm preparing to get alzheimer 's disease .
that i 've just been assuming are sacrosanct , and they 're not . people with dirty jobs are happier than you think . as a group , they 're the happiest people i know . and i do n't want to start whistling  look for the union label ,  and all that happy worker crap . i 'm just telling you that these are balanced people who do unthinkable work . roadkill picker-uppers whistle while they work . i swear to god -- i did it with them . they 've got this amazing sort of symmetry to their life . and i see it over and over and over again . so i started to wonder what would happen
i think we should be raising kids to be entrepreneurs instead of lawyers . unfortunately the school system is grooming this world to say ,  hey , let 's be a lawyer or let 's be a doctor ,  and we 're missing that opportunity because no one ever says ,  hey , be an entrepreneur .  entrepreneurs are people -- because we have a lot of them in this room -- who have these ideas and these passions or see these needs in the world and we decide to stand up and do it . and we put everything on the line to make that stuff happen . we have the ability to get those groups of people around us
though he was no lawyer , he argued the case in court himself the next day . he won the ruling , but later that very evening , he fought till the end , increasingly passionate that to combat corruption and poverty , not only did government officials need to be honest , but citizens needed to join together to make their voices heard .
and i think this is n't just chance .
there are many more than that on the planet -- 10 million soles , 180 billion dollars and 10 years . we could change everything . thanks . some of you have heard the story before , but , in fact , there 's somebody in the audience who 's never heard this story -- in front of an audience -- before , so i 'm a little more nervous than i normally am telling this story . i used to be a photographer for many years . in 1978 , i was working for time magazine , and i was given a three-day assignment to photograph amerasian children , children who had been fathered by american gis
we ca n't have anything to do with you .  so i paid for coffee that day — — and his parting comment as we shook hands was ,  listen , if you happen to raise any money out of this , we 'll gladly take it .  so my lesson that year was persistence .
but i want to give two examples from music . this is joshua bell , a very famous violinist . and the washington post reporter gene weingarten decided to enlist him for an audacious experiment . the question is : how much would people like joshua bell , the music of joshua bell , if they did n't know they were listening to joshua bell ? so he got joshua bell to take his million dollar violin down to a washington d.c. subway station and stand in the corner and see how much money he would make . and here 's a brief clip of this . after being there for three-quarters of an hour ,
finally , i wanted to show you this is my gang at princeton , new jersey . everything i told you about was discovered by someone in that picture . i hope when you learn things , like about how the natural world works -- i just want to say that whenever you read something in the newspaper or you get to hear some talk about something ridiculous in the natural world it was done by a child . science is done by that demographic . all of those people are between 20 and 30 years old , and they are the engine that drives scientific discovery in this country .
they 're more accepting of sadness than younger people are .
this is the sound of purple . for example , this is the sound of grass . this is red , like ted .
to hear color all the time . at the start , though , i had to memorize the names you give for each color , so i had to memorize the notes , but after some time , all this information became a perception . i did n't have to think about the notes . and after some time , this perception became a feeling .
to television images and photographs , a one-hit image . these were big , complex things , almost like cartoons with multiple narratives . we had to draw our audience in , get them to slow down , to explore the objects . there was a lot of skepticism . on the opening night , i overheard one of the senior members of staff saying ,  this is going to be a bomb .  but in reality , in the course of the coming weeks and months , hundreds of thousands of people came to see the show . the exhibition was designed to be an experience , and tapestries are hard to reproduce in photographs . so i want you to use your imaginations ,
when these girls sit , you unlock intelligence , you unlock passion , you unlock commitment , you unlock focus , you unlock great leaders . today , we 've worked with over 300. and some of those girls who walked in the room very shy have taken bold steps , as young mothers , to go out there and advocate for the rights of other young women . one young woman i met , teen mother of four , never thought about finishing high school , graduated successfully ; never thought about going to college , enrolled in college . one day she said to me ,  my wish is to finish college and be able to support my children . 
and certainly automobiles have been around for 100 years and have made our lives functionally a lot better in many ways ; they 've also been a real pain in the ass , because automobiles are really the thing we have to solve . we have to solve the pollution , we have to solve the congestion -- but that 's not what interests me in this speech . what interests me in this speech is cars . automobiles may be what you use ,
but he said ,  we will partner with you , but we 're not going to invest in it . you need to figure a way to bring this campaign across here and make it work .  so what we did was , we took some of the money that we raised in australia to bring the campaign across to this country , the u.s , and the u.k. , and we did that because we knew , if this was successful , we could raise infinitely more money globally than we could just in australia . and that money fuels research , and that research will get us to a cure . and we 're not about finding an australian cure
and we just asked them to make it go . and sure enough , the four year-olds used the evidence to wave the object on top of the detector . now there are two things that are really interesting about this . the first one is , again , remember , these are four year-olds . they 're just learning how to count . but unconsciously , they 're doing these quite complicated calculations that will give them a conditional probability measure . and the other interesting thing is that they 're using that evidence to get to an idea , get to a hypothesis about the world , that seems very unlikely to begin with . and in studies we 've just been doing in my lab , similar studies ,
take geomapping . in this map from kenya , the red dots show where all the schools financed by donors are located , and the darker the shade of green , the more the number of out-of-school children .
these effects were all unanticipated ,
all of these girls went to the gold mine , and they were predominantly prostitutes doing other things . we took 50 of those girls and we worked with them . and this was at the beginning of elections . this is one place where women were never -- even the older ones barely sat in the circle with the men . these girls banded together and formed a group and launched a campaign for voter registration . this is a real rural village . and the theme they used was :  even pretty girls vote .  they were able to mobilize young women . but not only did they do that ,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease . depression , there 's a great approach to that in mood disorders . diabetes i 've just mentioned . heart failure we already talked about . hypertension : 74 million people could have continuous blood-pressure monitoring to come up with much better management and prevention . and obesity we already talked about , the ways to get to that . and sleep disorders . this is effective around the world . the access to smartphones and cell phones today is extraordinary . and this article from the economist summed it up beautifully about the opportunities in health across the developing world :  mobile phones made a bigger difference to the lives of more people ,
and these voices will be accompanied by photographs that they took for us of their lives , of the things that they value and care about .
with no props but with a lot of , you know , passion , and hashish as well , and it was amazing . you know , the folk tales of mahabharata and ramayana , the two holy books , the epics that everything comes out of in india , they say . after seeing that jatra , the folk theater , i knew i wanted to get on , you know , and perform . julie burstein : is n't that a wonderful story ? you can see the sort of break in the everyday . there they are in the school fields , but it 's good and evil , and passion and hashish . and mira nair was a young girl
that 's right ,
jpl we heard this morning -- jpl is an incredible place . they have located two consultants , frank wilson and nate johnson , who are -- frank wilson is a neurologist , nate johnson is a mechanic . he taught mechanics in a high school in long beach , and found that his students were no longer able to solve problems . and he tried to figure out why . and he came to the conclusion , quite on his own , that the students who could no longer solve problems , such as fixing cars , had n't worked with their hands . frank wilson had written a book called  the hand .  they got together -- jpl hired them .
and it 's something women do n't have with miscarriage . rg : which is too bad because , of course , it 's a very common and very traumatic experience . fifteen to 20 percent of all pregnancies result in miscarriage , and i find this astounding . in a survey , 74 percent of women said that miscarriage , they felt , was partly their fault , which is awful . and astoundingly , 22 percent said they would hide a miscarriage from their spouse . so taboo number four : you ca n't say that your average happiness has declined since having a child .
across the globe . there are two things that can really accelerate this whole process . one of them -- we 're very fortunate -- is to develop a dedicated institute and that 's work that started with the work that scripps with qualcomm ... and then the great fortune of meeting up with gary and mary west , to get behind this wireless health institute . san diego is an extraordinary place for this . there 's over 650 wireless companies , 100 of which or more are working in wireless health . it 's the number one source of commerce , and interestingly it dovetails beautifully with over 500 life science companies .
the complexity and the excitement of the way we all live today . thank you very much . well , that 's kind of an obvious statement up there . i started with that sentence about 12 years ago , and i started in the context of developing countries , but you 're sitting here from every corner of the world . so if you think of a map of your country , i think you 'll realize that for every country on earth , you could draw little circles to say ,  these are places where good teachers wo n't go .  on top of that , those are the places from where trouble comes .
our participants would carry electronic pagers for a week at a time , and we 'd page them throughout the day and evenings at random times . and every time we paged them we 'd ask them to answer several questions -- on a one to seven scale , how happy are you right now ? how sad are you right now ? how frustrated are you right now ? -- so that we could get a sense of the kinds of emotions and feelings they were having in their day-to-day lives .
your reputation , what would you say ? how would people describe your judgment , your knowledge , your behaviors , in different situations ? today i 'd like to explore with you why the answer to this question will become profoundly important in an age where reputation will be your most valuable asset . i 'd like to start by introducing you to someone whose life has been changed by a marketplace fueled by reputation . sebastian sandys has been a bed and breakfast host on airbnb since 2008. i caught up with him recently , where , over the course of several cups of tea , he told me how hosting guests from all over the world
up by buildings currently , and 60 percent of the world 's population will be living in buildings in cities with a population of over one million in the next 15 years . and there is a growing preference for living and working in air-conditioned places .
to identify an infant at risk . this particular infant , you can see , making very good eye contact with this woman as she 's singing  itsy , bitsy spider ,  in fact is not going to develop autism . this baby we know is going to be in the clear . on the other hand , this other baby is going to go on to develop autism . in this particular child , you can see , it 's not making good eye contact . instead of the eyes focusing in and having that social connection , looking at the mouth , looking at the nose , looking off in another direction , but not again socially connecting ,
but there are testicles in this bucket and that 's not how we do it .  and he said  well , that 's how we do it .  and i said ,  why would you do it this way ?  and before i even let him explain , i said ,  i want to do it the right way , with the rubber bands .  and he says ,  like the humane society ?  and i said ,  yes , like the humane society . let 's do something that does n't make the lamb squeal and bleed -- we 're on in five continents , dude . we 're on twice a day on the discovery channel -- we ca n't do this . 
in 2003 , i started a project with computer scientist adam montandon , and the result , with further collaborations with peter kese from slovenia and matias lizana from barcelona , is this electronic eye .
it 's really interesting when you try and figure a way to fund a fundraising organization built off growing mustaches . let me tell you that there 's not too many people interested in investing in that , not even the prostate cancer foundation , who we 'd raised about 1.2 million dollars for at that stage .
extinction can come slowly , but sometimes it arrives fast . an asteroid hits , and the world went down in flames . but there were witnesses , survivors in the dark . when the skies cleared , a new world was born . a world fit for mammals . from tiny shrews [ came ] tenrecs , accustomed to the dark . new forms became bats . civets . new predators , hyenas , getting faster and faster still . grasslands created opportunities . herd safety came with sharpened senses . growing big was another answer , but size always comes at a price . some mammals turned back to water . walruses adapted with layers of fat . sea lions got sleek . and cetaceans moved into a world without bounds .
the vocabulary used in those books and the style of writing . i mean like once i pick up one book i can not put it down until i finish the whole book . even if it takes me four and a half hours , or three and half hours to finish my book , i do it . boy : i did good research and i got the information [ on the ] world 's fastest cars . i like ducati zz143 , because it is the fastest , the world 's fastest bike , and i like pulsar 220 dtsi because it is india 's fastest bike . shukla bose : well , that girl that you saw ,
and what you do when you go to any new site is you kind of roll out a franchise .
in donor one and donor four , which are the exceptions to the other two , that genes are being turned on in a very specific subset of cells . it 's this dark purple precipitate within the cell that 's telling us a gene is turned on there . whether or not that 's due to an individual 's genetic background or their experiences , we do n't know . those kinds of studies require much larger populations . so i 'm going to leave you with a final note about the complexity of the brain and how much more we have to go . i think these resources are incredibly valuable . they give researchers a handle
and i realize the next day that castration is going to be an absolute part of this work . so , normally , i never do any research at all . but , this is a touchy subject , and i work for the discovery channel , and we want to portray accurately whatever it is we do , and we certainly want to do it with a lot of respect for the animals . so i called the humane society and i say ,  look , i 'm going to be castrating some lambs , can you tell me the deal ?  and they 're like ,  yeah , it 's pretty straightforward .  they use a band -- basically a rubber band , like this , only a little smaller .
we 're more appreciative , more open to reconciliation .
that is why we need really radical thinking , and why radical thinking is now more possible and more needed than ever in how we learn . thank you .  why ?   why ?  is a question that parents ask me all the time .  why did my child develop autism ?  as a pediatrician , as a geneticist , as a researcher , we try and address that question . but autism is not a single condition . it 's actually a spectrum of disorders , a spectrum that ranges , for instance , from justin , a 13-year-old boy who 's not verbal , who ca n't speak , who communicates by using an ipad to touch pictures to communicate
the brazilian company semco group famously lets employees set their own work schedules and even their salaries . hulu and netflix , among other companies , have open vacation policies . companies can give people more control , but they can also give them less control . traditional business wisdom holds that trust is earned by predictable behavior , but when everything is consistent and standardized , how do you create meaningful experiences ? giving people less control might be a wonderful way to counter the abundance of choice and make them happier . take the travel service nextpedition . nextpedition turns the trip into a game , with surprising twists and turns along the way .
we 've asked whether it may be that the current generations of older people are and always have been the greatest generations .
across time , across space , whose lives may have been very different to our own , but who , like us , had hopes and dreams , frustrations and achievements in their lives . and i think this is a process that helps us better understand ourselves , helps us make better decisions about where we 're going . the great hall at the met is one of the great portals of the world , awe-inspiring , like a medieval cathedral . from there , you can walk in any direction to almost any culture . i frequently go out into the hall and the galleries and i watch our visitors coming in . some of them are comfortable . they feel at home .
which was about building goods and products , and now we have a service economy and an information and creative economy . those two economies require very different skills , and as it happens , women have been much better at acquiring the new set of skills than men have been . it used to be that you were a guy who went to high school who did n't have a college degree , but you had a specific set of skills , and with the help of a union , you could make yourself a pretty good middle-class life . but that really is n't true anymore . this new economy is pretty indifferent
have to understand that this is about us , that we can make a difference here . now i do n't know if any of you out there invented chicken nuggets , but i 'm sure you 're rich if you did . but whoever decided that a chicken should look like a heart , a giraffe , a star ? well , tyson did , because there 's no chicken in the chicken . and that they could figure it out , that we could sell this stuff to kids . you know , what 's wrong with teaching kids that chicken looks like chicken ? but this is what most schools serve . in fact , this may be what a lot of parents serve ,
and as i said , the trouble with this is that , in the developing world there just are n't teachers to make this model work . you 'd need millions and millions of teachers in china , india , nigeria and the rest of developing world to meet need .
but the message was very clear . polio is still a devastating , explosive disease . it 's just happening in another part of the world . and our big idea is that the scientific miracle of this decade should be the complete eradication of poliomyelitis . so i want to tell you a little bit about what this partnership , the polio partnership , is trying to do . we 're not trying to control polio . we 're not trying to get it down to just a few cases , because this disease is like a root fire ; it can explode again if you do n't snuff it out completely . so what we 're looking for
conceived that i had the devil inside of me . and what -- i should say this here , because this is how they engineered my leaving . they sat me at a table , my foster mom , and she said to me ,  you do n't love us , do you ?  at 11 years old . they 've had three other children . i 'm the fourth . the third was an accident . and i said ,  yeah , of course i do .  because you do . my foster mother asked me to go away to think about love and what it is and to read the scriptures and to come back tomorrow and give my most honest and truthful answer .
decided to buckle down once again and try and find innovative new solutions , new ways to get to the children that we were missing again and again . in northern india , we started mapping the cases using satellite imaging like this , so that we could guide our investments and vaccinator shelters , so we could get to the millions of children on the koshi river basin where there are no other health services . in northern nigeria , the political leaders and the traditional muslim leaders , they got directly involved in the program to help solve the problems of logistics and community confidence . and now they 've even started using these devices --
so in every car crash in which at least one person dies , they have information on all of the people .
this is n't $ 10,000 , it 's the local currency .
nakilia invited reuben too , but --
and i ca n't get that vision out of my sight , so i did what i had to do . i went in and i took them . i took them like this , and i yanked my face back . and i 'm standing there with two testicles on my chin . and now i ca n't get -- i ca n't shake the metaphor . ok , i 'm still in  poetics ,  in aristotle , and i 'm thinking -- out of nowhere , two terms come crashing into my head that i have n't heard since my classics professor in college drilled them there . and they are anagnorisis and peripeteia . anagnorisis and peripeteia .
how is it used ? and these were important lessons to me when i subsequently became a professional art historian . my kind of eureka moment came a few years later , when i was studying the art of the courts of northern europe , and of course it was very much discussed in terms of the paintings and the sculptures and the architecture of the day . but as i began to read historical documents and contemporary descriptions , i found there was a kind of a missing component , for everywhere i came across descriptions of tapestries . tapestries were ubiquitous between the middle ages and , really , well into the 18th century ,
and one of the things i 'm going to spend a lot of time focusing on are the genes that can cause autism . i 'm focusing on this not because genes are the only cause of autism , but it 's a cause of autism that we can readily define and be able to better understand the biology and understand better how the brain works so that we can come up with strategies to be able to intervene . one of the genetic factors that we do n't understand , however , is the difference that we see in terms of males and females . males are affected four to one compared to females
as i said , he swore too much . there was an important lesson for me in that . pietro was suspicious of formal art training , art history training , because he feared that it filled people up with jargon , and then they just classified things rather than looking at them , and he wanted to remind us that all art was once contemporary , and he wanted us to use our eyes , and he was especially evangelical about this message , because he was losing his sight . he wanted us to look and ask basic questions of objects . what is it ? how is it made ? why was it made ?
across all these different diseases and more . it 's really taking individualized medicine to a new height and it 's hyper-innovative , and i think it represents the black swan of medicine . thanks for your attention . ten years ago , on a tuesday morning , i conducted a parachute jump at fort bragg , north carolina . it was a routine training jump , like many more i 'd done since i became a paratrooper 27 years before . we went down to the airfield early because this is the army and you always go early . you do some routine refresher training , and then you go to put on your parachute and a buddy helps you .
people would come [ from ] all over the world to see it -- was actually a forgery . it was not that painting , but that painting . and when that was discovered , it lost all its value and was taken away from the museum . why does this matter ? i 'm a psychologists -- why do origins matter so much ? why do we respond so much to our knowledge of where something comes from ? well there 's an answer that many people would give . many sociologists like veblen and wolfe would argue that the reason why we take origins so seriously is because we 're snobs , because we 're focused on status .
one of my most touching movember moments , and it happened here in toronto last year , at the end of the campaign .
and maybe finding some new functionality . this is a watch we made for mini cooper , the car company , right when it launched , and it 's the first watch that has a display that switches from horizontal to vertical . and that allows me to check my timer discretely , here , without bending my elbow . and other projects , which were really about transformation , about matching the human need . this is a little piece of furniture for an italian manufacturer , and it ships completely flat , and then it folds into a coffee table and a stool and whatnot . and something a little bit more experimental : this is a light fixture for swarovski ,
and so we all remember as children , the tiniest little thing -- and we see it on the faces of our children -- the teeniest little thing can just rocket them to these heights of just utter adulation , and then the next teeniest little thing can cause them just to plummet to the depths of despair . and it 's just extraordinary to watch , and we remember it ourselves . and then , of course , as you get older , it 's almost like age is a form of lithium . as you get older , you become more stable . and part of what happens , i think , in your '20s and '30s ,
does n't actually exist , but rather , that people do care , but that we live in a world that actively discourages engagement by constantly putting obstacles and barriers in our way .
and one of the good things about this cure was that it was free , virtually free , and was very easy to use .
big broadband connections , but in groups . if they want , they can call the granny cloud . this is a sole in newcastle . the mediator is from pune , india . so how far can we go ? one last little bit and i 'll stop . i went to turin in may . i sent all the teachers away from my group of 10 year-old students . i speak only english , they speak only italian , so we had no way to communicate . i started writing english questions on the blackboard . the children looked at it and said ,  what ?  i said ,  well , do it .  they typed it into google , translated it into italian ,
when our species first arose and acquired social learning , that this was really the beginning of our story , not the end of our story . because our acquisition of social learning would create a social and evolutionary dilemma , the resolution of which , it 's fair to say , would determine not only the future course of our psychology , but the future course of the entire world . and most importantly for this , it 'll tell us why we have language . and the reason that dilemma arose is , it turns out , that social learning is visual theft . if i can learn by watching you , i can steal your best ideas ,
for four or five hours to get into the show , but no one really complained . i heard over and over again ,  wow , that was worth it . it was a such a visceral , emotive experience .  now , i 've described two very immersive exhibitions , but i also believe that collections , individual objects , can also have that same power . the met was set up not as a museum of american art , but of an encyclopedic museum , and today , 140 years later , that vision is as prescient as ever , because , of course , we live in a world of crisis , of challenge , and we 're exposed to it
and lakes with fish have more mosquitos , even though they eat them .
which is a very fancy way of saying , bad-minded , murdering -- what 's the word i 'm looking for ? murdering -- audience : bee ? dennis vanengelsdorp : bee . okay , thanks . what these bees do is , they sit there . these solitary bees , they drill a hole in the ground or drill a hole in a branch , and they collect pollen and make it into a ball , and they lay an egg on it . well , these bees hang out at that hole , and they wait for that mother to fly away , they go in , eat the egg , and lay their own egg there . so they do n't do any work .
one of them is martin luther king 's  i have a dream ,  and the other one is hitler . and i like to exhibit these paintings in the exhibition halls without labels , and then i ask people ,  which one do you prefer ?  and most people change their preference
the average score when i 'd done it with the computers and the groups was 76 percent . when i did the experiment , when i did the test , after two months , the score was 76 percent . there was photographic recall inside the children , i suspect because they 're discussing with each other . a single child in front of a single computer will not do that . i have further results , which are almost unbelievable , of scores which go up with time . because their teachers say that after the session is over , the children continue to google further . here in britain , i put out a call
now , the story behind taskrabbit starts like so many great stories with a very cute dog by the name of kobe . now what happened was , in february 2008 , leah and her husband were waiting for a cab to take them out for dinner , when kobe came trotting up to them and he was salivating with saliva . they realized they 'd run out of dog food . kevin had to cancel the cab and trudge out in the snow . now , later that evening , the two self-confessed tech geeks starting talking about how cool it would be if some kind of
so it 's a very small amount of money , in fact .
but we can change all those things i mentioned . we can open up city hall . we can reform our electoral systems . we can democratize our public spaces . my main message is , if we can redefine apathy , not as some kind of internal syndrome , but as a complex web of cultural barriers that reinforces disengagement , and if we can clearly define , we can clearly identify , what those obstacles are , and then if we can work together collectively to dismantle those obstacles , then anything is possible .
i would encourage you to become a cyborg .
prevention is good , and i 'm doing the things that you can do to prevent alzheimer 's . i 'm eating right , i 'm exercising every day , i 'm keeping my mind active , that 's what the research says you should do . but the research also shows that there 's nothing that will 100 percent protect you . if the monster wants you , the monster 's gon na get you . that 's what happened with my dad . my dad was a bilingual college professor . his hobbies were chess , bridge and writing op-eds .
we have uploaded unaids data on the gapminder site . and we hope that when we act on global problems in the future we will not only have the heart , we will not only have the money , but we will also use the brain . thank you very much . how often do we hear that people just do n't care ? how many times have you been told that real , substantial change is n't possible because most people are too selfish , too stupid or too lazy to try to make a difference in their community ? i propose to you today that apathy as we think we know it
there are no contracts , no written contracts .
we don ’ t know , but it may be . we need to ask some of the ceos whether they were involved in this mescaline experiment . but really , it wasn ’ t the drugs that were important ; it was this idea that what the drugs did would help shock people out of their normal way of thinking , and getting them to forget the adult behaviors that were getting in the way of their ideas . but it ’ s hard to break our habits , our adult habits . at ideo we have brainstorming rules written on the walls . edicts like ,  defer judgment ,  or  go for quantity .  and somehow that seems wrong .
we 've lived with the term  glass ceiling .  now i 've never really liked this term . for one thing , it puts men and women in a really antagonistic relationship with one another , because the men are these devious tricksters up there who 've put up this glass ceiling . and we 're always below the glass ceiling , the women . and we have a lot of skill and experience , but it 's a trick , so how are you supposed to prepare to get through that glass ceiling ? and also ,  shattering the glass ceiling  is a terrible phrase . what crazy person would pop their head through a glass ceiling ?
is that in some cases , pain under the right circumstances can transform into pleasure . humans have this extraordinarily interesting property that will often seek out low-level doses of pain in controlled circumstances and take pleasure from it -- as in the eating of hot chili peppers and roller coaster rides . the point was nicely summarized by the poet john milton who wrote ,  the mind is its own place , and in itself can make a heaven of hell , a hell of heaven .  and i 'll end with that . thank you . many times i go around the world to speak , and people ask me questions
with the most out-of-school children , provoking new questions . is development assistance targeting those who most need our help ? in this manner , the world bank has now geomapped 30,000 project activities in 143 countries ,
trust me on that one .
report feelings of loneliness . of those , 67 percent are most lonely when their kids are zero to five -- probably really zero to two . in the process of preparing this , we looked at how some other cultures around the world deal with this period of time , because here in the western world , less than 50 percent of us live near our family members , which i think is part of why this is such a tough period . so to take one example among many : in southern india there 's a practice known as jholabhari , in which the pregnant woman , when she 's seven or eight months pregnant ,
not just us primates , but also including other mammals , birds , even marsupials like kangaroos and wombats , it turns out that there 's a relationship between how long a childhood a species has and how big their brains are compared to their bodies and how smart and flexible they are . and sort of the posterbirds for this idea are the birds up there . on one side is a new caledonian crow . and crows and other corvidae , ravens , rooks and so forth , are incredibly smart birds . they 're as smart as chimpanzees in some respects . and this is a bird on the cover of science
so existence is temporarily suspended .
we wanted to see if this holds true everywhere in the world or just among wealthy countries .
when we started parikrma we had no idea which direction we were taking . we did n't hire mckinsey to do a business plan . but we know for sure that what we want to do today is take one child at a time , not get bogged with numbers , and actually see the child complete the circle of life , and unleash his total potential . we do not believe in scale because we believe in quality , and scale and numbers will automatically happen . we have corporates that have stood behind us , and we are able to , now , open more schools . but we began with the idea
they were yelling at him , they were -- it got to be really ugly . and we went outside , and he was just furious . and i knew i had totally blown this whole thing . here i was again , trying to figure out what to do . and he started yelling at me , and i said to the translator ,  ok , tell him to calm down , what is he saying ?  and she said ,  well , he 's saying , 'who the hell are you to walk into my house , some rich american with your cameras around your neck , accusing me of enslaving my niece ? this is my niece , i love her , she 's my sister 's daughter .
that rabbit hole and saw that door to a whole new world . that 's just how i felt as i had those conversations with the students . i was amazed at the ideas that they had , and i wanted others to experience this wonderland as well . and i believe the key to opening that door is great communication . we desperately need great communication from our scientists and engineers in order to change the world . our scientists and engineers are the ones that are tackling our grandest challenges , from energy to environment to health care , among others , and if we do n't know about it and understand it ,
you know , could we have it for a second ? do you have that ? ok. i taped my -- my aunt used to swim in the ocean every day of the year until she was about 85. so -- and that 's a song about how everybody 's miserable because , you know , we 're from russia . i went to visit kitty carlisle hart , and she is 96 , and when i brought her a copy of  the elements of style ,  she said she would treasure it . and then i said -- oh , and she was talking about moss hart , and i said ,  when you met him , you knew it was him . 
is a permanent solution . we want a world in which every child , just like you guys , can take for granted a polio-free world . so we 're looking for a permanent solution , and this is where we get lucky . this is one of the very few viruses in the world where there are big enough cracks in its armor that we can try to do something truly extraordinary . this virus can only survive in people . it ca n't live for a very long time in people . it does n't survive in the environment hardly at all . and we 've got pretty good vaccines , as i 've just showed you .
so , many times when you try to do research on data , it records complicated stories -- it 's hard to find in the data .
i felt like i was a vessel of the future of humanity . that continued into the the hospital . it was really exhilarating . i was shower with gifts and flowers and visitors . it was a really wonderful experience , but when i got home , i suddenly felt very disconnected and suddenly shut in and shut out , and i was really surprised by those feelings . i did expect it to be difficult , have sleepless nights , constant feedings , but i did not expect the feelings of isolation and loneliness that i experienced , and i was really surprised that no one had talked to me ,
with polio it 's almost completely different . the vast majority of people who are infected with the polio virus show absolutely no sign of the disease . so you ca n't see the enemy most of the time , and as a result , we 've needed a very different approach to eradicate polio than what was done with smallpox . we 've had to create one of the largest social movements in history . there 's over 10 million people , probably 20 million people , largely volunteers , who have been working over the last 20 years in what has now been called the largest internationally-coordinated operation in peacetime . these people , these 20 million people ,
about eight hours later , we found this kid . to the right is this eight-year-old child who -- and to his left is a six-year-old girl , who is not very tall . and what he was doing was , he was teaching her to browse . so it sort of raised more questions than it answered . is this real ? does the language matter , because he 's not supposed to know english ? will the computer last , or will they break it and steal it -- and did anyone teach them ? the last question is what everybody said , but you know , i mean , they must have poked their head over the wall
in our studies , we represent the everyday life of people in this simple scheme . and we can measure this very precisely , actually , because we give people electronic pagers that go off 10 times a day , and whenever they go off you say what you 're doing , how you feel , where you are , what you 're thinking about . and two things that we measure is the amount of challenge people experience at that moment and the amount of skill that they feel they have at that moment . so for each person we can establish an average , which is the center of the diagram .
we might learn something unexpected .
so , what we did for the first two and a half years was four things : we did an extensive review of the literature in related fields , like cognitive psychology , spatial cognition , gender studies , play theory , sociology , primatology .
it was in places like this . this a school set up by some nuns in another slum called nakuru . half the children in this classroom have no parents because they 've died through aids . the other half have one parent because the other parent has died through aids . so the challenges of education in this kind of place are not to learn the kings and queens of kenya or britain . they are to stay alive , to earn a living , to not become hiv positive . the one technology that spans rich and poor in places like this is not anything to do with industrial technology .
even before they have symptoms so we can save their life . then we tried it with my son , dr. tim fischell , we tried it on some human patients who had to have a stent put in . well , he kept the balloon filled to block the artery , to simulate a blockage , which is what a heart attack is . and it 's not hard to see that -- the baseline is the first picture on the upper left . next to it , at 30 seconds , you see this rise here , then this rise -- that 's the st elevation . and if we had a computer that could detect it ,
he came up to me and said ,  thank you for starting movember .  and i said ,  thank you for doing movember .  and i looked at him , and i was like ,  i 'm pretty sure you ca n't grow a mustache .  and i said ,  what 's your movember story ?  and he said ,  i grew the worst mustache ever .   but i went home for thanksgiving dinner , and pretty quickly the conversation around the table turned to what the hell was going on .   and we talked -- i talked to them about movember , and then after that , my dad came up to me , and at the age
the mcdonald 's model scales .
so i just packaged them . i 'm like 12 , right ? i packaged them up three ways . i had the pinnacles and ddhs and the really cool ones back then . those sold for two dollars each . and then i had all the good ones that did n't look crappy . they were 50 cents each . and then i 'd sell 50 at a time of all the crappy ones . and they could use those for practice balls . i sold sunglasses , when i was in school , to all the kids in high school . this is what really kind of gets everybody hating you is because you 're trying to extract money from all your friends all the time .
he 's turning 50 this year , and he 's convinced that the rich tapestry of reputation he 's built on airbnb will lead him to doing something interesting with the rest of his life . you know , there are only a few windows in history where the opportunity exists to reinvent part of how our socioeconomic system works . we 're living through one of those moments . i believe that we are at the start of a collaborative revolution that will be as significant as the industrial revolution . in the 20th century , the invention of traditional credit transformed our consumer system , and in many ways controlled who had access to what .
is sleep . this is a room of type-a women . this is a room of sleep-deprived women . and i learned the hard way , the value of sleep . two-and-a-half years ago , i fainted from exhaustion . i hit my head on my desk . i broke my cheekbone , i got five stitches on my right eye . and i began the journey of rediscovering the value of sleep . and in the course of that , i studied , i met with medical doctors , scientists , and i 'm here to tell you that the way to a more productive , more inspired , more joyful life is getting enough sleep .
beyond just drugs , we 're going to use educational strategies . individuals with autism , some of them are wired a little bit differently . they learn in a different way . they absorb their surroundings in a different way , and we need to be able to educate them in a way that serves them best . beyond that , there are a lot of individuals in this room who have great ideas in terms of new technologies we can use , everything from devices we can use to train the brain to be able to make it more efficient and to compensate for areas in which it has a little bit of trouble ,
and if we want to cure ourselves of ndd , or nature deficit disorder , i think this is a great way of doing it . get a beehive and grow a meadow , and watch that life come back into your life . and so with that , i think that what we can do , if we do this , we can make sure that our future -- our more perfect future -- includes beekeepers and it includes bees and it includes those meadows . and that journey -- that journey of transformation that occurs as you grow your meadow and as you keep your bees or you watch those native bees there -- is an extremely exciting one .
a dismal , depressing landscape of burnt and half-abandoned buildings . and this has been true for 30 years , and the handover in 1979 , 1980 , between one jamaican leader who was the son of a rhodes scholar and a q.c . to another who 'd done an economics doctorate at harvard , over 800 people were killed in the streets in drug-related violence . ten years ago , however , the promise of democracy seemed to be extraordinary . george w. bush stood up in his state of the union address in 2003 and said that democracy was the force that would beat most of the ills of the world . he said ,
she walked out of the plane and spoke to the whole press as if she was a veteran . she handled the national press , and she was a star . and when i went back six months later , i said ,  where 's your husband ?   oh , somewhere . it does n't matter . 
and it marched every year , westwardly . do you remember no one had heard of ebola until we heard of hundreds of people dying in central africa from it ? it 's just the beginning , unfortunately . there have been 30 novel emerging communicable diseases that begin in animals that have jumped species in the last 30 years . it 's more than enough reason for pessimism . but now let 's look at the case for optimism . enough of the bad news . human beings have always risen to the challenge . you just need to look at the list of nobel laureates to remind ourselves . we 've been here before , paralyzed by fear , paralyzed into inaction ,
it would be because i had a deep kafkaesque existentialist revelation , or that maybe cate blanchett would play me and she would win an oscar for it . but that 's not what happened . i had my breakdown during my daughter 's sports day . there were all the parents sitting in a parking lot eating food out of the back of their car -- only the english -- eating their sausages . they loved their sausages . lord and lady rigor mortis were nibbling on the tarmac , and then the gun went off and all the girlies started running , and all the mummies went ,  run ! run chlamydia ! run ! 
so they identified that as a priority , and then they 've got and recruited now 300 researchers from around the world that are studying that topic , essentially the same topic .
and what you find when you go to these schemes is that they use people and places in incredibly creative ways . masses of peer learning . how do you get learning to people when there are no teachers , when teachers wo n't come , when you ca n't afford them , and even if you do get teachers , what they teach is n't relevant to the communities that they serve ? well , you create your own teachers . you create peer-to-peer learning , or you create para-teachers , or you bring in specialist skills . but you find ways to get learning that 's relevant to people through technology , people and places that are different .
and it is important that we recognize that women still need help in school , that salaries are still significantly lower , even when controlled for job types , and that girls have continued to struggle in math and science for years . that 's all true . nothing about that prevents us from paying attention to the literacy needs of our boys between ages three and 13. in fact , what we ought to do is take a page from their playbook , because the initiatives and programs that have been set in place for women in science and engineering and mathematics are fantastic . they 've done a lot of good
at frog , the company i work for , we hold internal speed meet sessions that connect old and new employees , helping them get to know each other fast . by applying a strict process , we give them less control , less choice , but we enable more and richer social interactions . companies are the makers of their fortunes , and like all of us , they are utterly exposed to serendipity . that should make them more humble , more vulnerable and more human . at the end of the day , as hyperconnectivity and transparency expose companies ' behavior in broad daylight , staying true to their true selves is the only sustainable value proposition .
and basically , i was so , you know , it was so amusing , because i said ,  well , how much space do i have ?  and they said ,  well , you know , it 's the internet .  and i said ,  yes , but how much space do i have ?  and they said ,  it 's unlimited , it 's unlimited .  ok. so , the first one i was very timid , and i 'll begin .  how can i tell you everything that is in my heart ? impossible to begin . enough . no . begin with the hapless dodo .  and i talk about the dodo , and how the dodo became extinct , and then i talk about spinoza .  as the last dodo was dying , spinoza was looking for a rational explanation
and here i 'm expecting at any moment ,  ok , they 're going to turn the page , and i 'm going to see the cars , i 'm going to see the sketches , i 'm going to see maybe some idea of where it 's going .  dialog kept on going , with mental maps of words , and pretty soon it was becoming obvious that instead of being dazzled with brilliance , i was seriously being baffled with bullshit . and if you can imagine what this is like , to have these months of postcard indication of how great this team is working ,
the environment surrounding the painting . well , our vision is to rediscover the spirit of the renaissance , create a new discipline where engineering for cultural heritage is actually a symbol of blending art and science together . we definitely need a new breed of engineers that will go out and do this kind of work and rediscover for us these values , these cultural values that we badly need , especially today . and if you want to summarize in one just single word , well , this is what we 're trying to do . we 're trying to give a future to our past in order to have a future .
that somehow , the way animals and humans deal with play , is that it 's some sort of rehearsal for adult activity . your work seems to suggest that that is powerfully wrong . sb : yeah , i do n't think that 's accurate , and i think probably because animals have taught us that . if you stop a cat from playing -- which you can do , and we 've all seen how cats bat around stuff -- they 're just as good predators as they would be if they had n't played . and if you imagine a kid pretending to be king kong , or a race car driver , or a fireman ,
i would be willing to bet that i 'm the dumbest guy in the room because i could n't get through school . i struggled with school . but what i knew at a very early age was that i loved money and i loved business and i loved this entrepreneurial thing , and i was raised to be an entrepreneur , and what i 've been really passionate about ever since -- and i 've never spoken about this ever , until now -- so this is the first time anyone 's ever heard it , except my wife three days ago , because she said ,  what are you talking about ?  and i told her --
this chart is comprised of four completely independent studies . basically , there 's this precipitous drop of marital satisfaction , which is closely aligned , we all know , with broader happiness , that does n't rise again until your first child goes to college . so i 'm sitting here looking at the next two decades of my life , this chasm of happiness that we 're driving our proverbial convertible straight into . we were despondent . av : so you can imagine , i mean again , the first few months were difficult , but we 'd come out of it , and were really shocked to see this study . so we really wanted to take a deeper look at it
decided to emphasize them , using gold lacquer to repair it . this bowl is more beautiful now , having been broken , than it was when it was first made , and we can look at those cracks , because they tell the story that we all live , of the cycle of creation and destruction , of control and letting go , of picking up the pieces and making something new . thank you . we do not invest in victims , we invest in survivors . and in ways both big and small , the narrative of the victim shapes the way we see women . you ca n't count what you do n't see .
much of what people eat . and that 's really , really a problem . so when i started thinking about these issues and how i was going to change what kids ate , i really started focusing on what we would teach them . and the very first thing was about regional food -- trying to eat food from within our region . and clearly , with what 's going on with fossil fuel usage , or when -- as the fossil fuel is going away , as oil hits its peak oil , you know , we really have to start thinking about whether or not we should , or could , be moving food
stromatolites were the first to exhale oxygen . and they changed the atmosphere . a breath that 's fossilized now as iron . meteorites delivered chemistry , and perhaps membranes , too . life needs a membrane to contain itself so it can replicate and mutate . these are diatoms , single-celled phytoplankton with skeletons of silicon ... circuit boards of the future . shallow seas nurtured life early on , and that 's where it morphed into more complex forms . it grew as light and oxygen increased . life hardened and became defensive . it learned to move and began to see . the first eyes grew on trilobites . vision was refined in horseshoe crabs ,
so it 's the only college in india where , if you should have a ph.d. or a master 's , you are disqualified to come .
they 're empowered to make money and save money from their existing assets . but the real magic and the secret source behind collaborative consumption marketplaces like airbnb is n't the inventory or the money . it 's using the power of technology to build trust between strangers . this side of airbnb really hit home to sebastian last summer during the london riots . he woke up around 9 , and he checked his email and he saw a bunch of messages all asking him if he was okay . former guests from around the world had seen that the riots were happening just down the street , and wanted
so , the people here have participated in the creation of many miracles . usually , we do n't have a deadline , where you have to get the miracle by a certain date . usually , you just kind of stand by , and some come along , some do n't . this is a case where we actually have to drive at full speed and get a miracle in a pretty tight timeline . now , i thought ,  how could i really capture this ? is there some kind of natural illustration , some demonstration that would grab people 's imagination here ?  i thought back to a year ago when i brought mosquitos , and somehow people enjoyed that .
watching your rhythm -- that 's incredible , and it 's with us today . but that 's just the beginning . you check your email while you 're sitting here . in the future you 're going to be checking all your vital signs , all your vital signs : your heart rhythm , your blood pressure , your oxygen , your temperature , etc . this is already available today . this is airstrip technologies . it 's now wired -- or i should say , wireless -- by taking the aggregate of these signals in the hospital , in the intensive care unit , and putting it on a smartphone for physicians . if you 're an expectant parent , what about the ability to monitor , continuously ,
and you reach in with these long metal tongs , you grab the pot , and in japan , this red-hot pot would be immediately immersed in a solution of green tea , and you can imagine what that steam would smell like . but here in the united states , we ramp up the drama a little bit , and we drop our pots into sawdust , which catches on fire , and you take a garbage pail , and you put it on top , and smoke starts pouring out . i would come home with my clothes reeking of woodsmoke . i love raku because it allows me to play with the elements .
so the children said ,  how do we do that .  and i said ,  i do n't know , actually .  and i left . two months later -- and this is now documented in the information technology for international development journal -- that accents had changed and were remarkably close to the neutral british accent in which i had trained the speech-to-text synthesizer . in other words , they were all speaking like james tooley . so they could do that on their own . after that , i started to experiment with various other things that they might learn to do on their own . i got an interesting phone call once from columbo ,
and the nice thing about pregnancy is either you are pregnant or you 're not pregnant . you 're not partially pregnant or thinking about being pregnant or something of that sort . so , it works very well there , but it does n't work very well when you need more quantitative information . there are also dipsticks , but if you look at the dipsticks , they 're for another kind of urine analysis . there are an awful lot of colors and things like that . what do you actually do about that in a difficult circumstance ? so , the approach that we started with is to ask : is it really practical to make things of this sort ?
 a data-driven health revolution promises to make us all better , faster , and stronger . living by numbers .  and this one , which is really telling , this was from july , this cover article :  the personal metrics movement goes way beyond diet and exercise . it 's about tracking every facet of life , from sleep to mood to pain , 24/7/365 .  well , i tried this device . a lot of you have gotten that phillips direct life . i did n't have one of those , but i got the fitbit . that looks like this . it 's like a wireless accelerometer , pedometer . and i want to just give you the results of that testing ,
for example , these are two very well-known speeches .
he says ,  ok.  he goes to his box and he pulls out a bag of these little rubber bands . melanie picks up another lamb , puts it on the post , band goes on the tail , band goes on the scrotum . lamb goes on the ground , lamb takes two steps , falls down , gets up , shakes a little , takes another couple steps , falls down . i 'm like , this is not a good sign for this lamb , at all . gets up , walks to the corner , it 's quivering , and it lies down and it 's in obvious distress . and i 'm looking at the lamb and i say ,  albert , how long ?
they have these beautiful colored glass spherules . and these are actually microscopic ; you need a microscope to see these . now here 's a grain of sand that is from the moon , and you can see that the entire crystal structure is still there . this grain of sand is probably about three and a half or four billion years old , and it 's never eroded away like the way we have sand on earth erodes away because of water and tumbling , air , and so forth . all you can see is a little bit of erosion down here by the sun , has these solar storms ,
i could talk at length about the many little distinctions we made and the endless list of ways that i got it wrong . but , what it all comes down to is this . i formed a theory , and i 'm going to share it now in my remaining two minutes and 30 seconds . it goes like this -- we 've declared war on work , as a society , all of us . it 's a civil war . it 's a cold war , really . we did n't set out to do it and we did n't twist our mustache in some machiavellian way , but we 've done it . and we 've waged this war on at least four fronts ,
and i have a beautiful page of doodles from jonathan woodham 's talk . so , good things come out of , you know , incomprehension --
this one was actually around the playing cards i got yesterday , but it had a certain familiarity to it . and i said ,  well , what exactly is the process ?  and they said ,  the band is applied to the tail , tightly . and then another band is applied to the scrotum , tightly . blood flow is slowly retarded ; a week later the parts in question fall off .  great -- got it .  ok , i call the spca to confirm this -- they confirm it . i also call peta , just for fun , and they do n't like it -- but they confirm it . ok , that 's basically how you do it .
it 's particularly true of diabetics and elderly women . well , what is needed for the earliest possible warning of a heart attack ? a means to determine if there 's a complete blockage of a coronary artery . that , ladies and gentlemen , is a heart attack . the means consist of noting something a little technical , st segment elevation of the electrogram -- translated into english , that means that if there 's an electrical signal in the heart , and one part of the ecg -- which we call the st segment -- elevates , that is a sure sign of a heart attack . and if we had a computer put into the body of a person who 's at risk ,
where you just go in and see just a little bit of everything -- we put jonas into dharavi , which is part of mumbai , india , and let him stay there , and really get into the heart and soul of this really major part of the city . what jonas did was not just go and do a surface look at the awful conditions that exist in such places . he saw that this was a living and breathing and vital part of how the entire urban area functioned . by staying tightly focused in one place , jonas tapped into the soul and the enduring human spirit
the most mentally sharp older adults are the ones who show this positivity effect the most .
several hours pass and it gets worse , and even the man wo n't ignore it . finally , you go to the emergency room . you wait as burns and other critical patients are treated , because 75 percent of the patients who go to an emergency room with chest pains do n't have ami , so you 're not taken very seriously . they finally see you . it takes more time to get your electrocardiogram on your skin and diagnose it , and it 's hard to do because they do n't have the baseline data , which the computer we put in you gets . finally , if you 're lucky , you are treated in three or four hours after the incident ,
people gave money to homeless people . huge effect here of starbucks .
and to me that 's my quantification method for qualifying a team . this can not be .  so i told them this story . i said ,  guys , i 'm thinking about something here , this is n't right . i ca n't have a relationship with you guys based on a premise that is a quantifiable one . based on a dictate premise that says , ' i 'm a boss , you do what i say , without trust . '  i said  this ca n't be .  actually , we all broke down into tears , to be quite honest about it ,
and so some time around 200,000 years ago , our species confronted this crisis . and we really had only two options for dealing with the conflicts that visual theft would bring . one of those options was that we could have retreated into small family groups . because then the benefits of our ideas and knowledge would flow just to our relatives . had we chosen this option , sometime around 200,000 years ago , we would probably still be living like the neanderthals were when we first entered europe 40,000 years ago . and this is because in small groups there are fewer ideas , there are fewer innovations .
now , if you take the power-generating capability of an automobile and you compare that to the electric grid in the united states , it turns out that four percent of the automobiles , the power in four percent of the automobiles , equals that of the electric grid of the us . that 's a huge power-generating capability , a mobile power-generating capability . and hydrogen and fuel cells give us that opportunity to actually use our cars and trucks when they 're parked to generate electricity for the grid . and we talked about swarm networks earlier . and talking about the ultimate swarm , about having all of the processors
she 's at a place where she ca n't find money to go to school . she sells water , sells soft drinks and sells recharge cards for cellphones . and you would think she would take that money and put it back into her education . juanita is her name . she takes that money and finds single mothers in her community to send back to school . says ,  leymah , my wish is to be educated . and if i ca n't be educated , when i see some of my sisters being educated , my wish has been fulfilled . i wish for a better life .
here , they do n't actually crash the entire car , you know -- it 's not worth ruining a whole car to do it .
it ’ s the plant from which you can create mescaline , one of the psychedelic drugs . for those of you around in the '60s , you probably know it well . mckim published a paper in 1966 , describing an experiment that he and his colleagues conducted to test the effects of psychedelic drugs on creativity . so he picked 27 professionals -- they were engineers , physicists , mathematicians , architects , furniture designers even , artists -- and he asked them to come along one evening , and to bring a problem with them that they were working on . he gave each of them some mescaline , and had them listen to some nice , relaxing music for a while .
we borrowed it . video conferencing . the personal computer itself . i think it 's time that the educationists made their own specs , and i have such a set of specs . this is a brief look at that . and such a set of specs should produce the technology to address remoteness , values and violence . so i thought i 'd give it a name -- why do n't we call it  outdoctrination .  and could this be a goal for educational technology in the future ? so i want to leave that as a thought with you . thank you . aids was discovered 1981 ; the virus , 1983. these gapminder bubbles show you
that we think that , if people need something , we do n't have to make them want that . and i think that 's a mistake . and there 's some indications around the world that this is starting to change . one example is sanitation . we know that a million and a half children die a year from diarrhea and a lot of it is because of open defecation . but there 's a solution : you build a toilet . but what we 're finding around the world , over and over again , is , if you build a toilet and you leave it there , people reuse it for a slab for their home .
a curiosity box , a sunken ship , a burned-out interior , with videos and soundtracks that ranged from operatic arias to pigs fornicating . and in this extraordinary setting , the costumes were like actors and actresses , or living sculptures . it could have been a train wreck . it could have looked like shop windows on fifth avenue at christmas , but because of the way that andrew connected with the mcqueen team , he was channeling the rawness and the brilliance of mcqueen , and the show was quite transcendant , and it became a phenomenon in its own right . by the end of the show , we had people queuing
i know that i 'm going to live longer , and i 've even lost a little weight . so , please ask yourselves , for your health , for your pocketbook , for the environment , for the animals : what 's stopping you from giving weekday veg a shot ? after all , if all of us ate half as much meat , it would be like half of us were vegetarians .
♫ i got all the answers , ♫ ♫ all the answers , oh yeah . ♫ ♫ uh-huh ... ♫ ♫ but i tell you what i 'm going to do : ♫ ♫ i 'm going to find the capitol of peru ♫ ♫ or the latitude of kathmandu . ♫ ♫ i 'm gon na google it ♫ ♫ 'cause everybody 's doing it . ♫ ♫ and then i 'll rummage through the century . ♫ ♫ i got all , i got all , i got all ... ♫ ♫ i got all the answers . ♫ ♫ yeah , yeah ♫ ♫ i got all the answers . ♫ thank you . whew ! it 's a miracle i did n't make any mistakes on that song .
and see that there 's another liberian girl , ghanaian girl , nigerian girl , ethiopian girl standing on this ted stage . and maybe , just maybe , saying ,  because of that nobel laureate i 'm here today .  so i 'm troubled when i see them like there 's no hope . but i 'm also not pessimistic , because i know it does n't take a lot to get them charged up . ca : and in the last year , tell us one hopeful thing that you 've seen happening . lg : i can tell you many hopeful things that i 've seen happening . but in the last year , where president sirleaf comes from , her village , we went there to work with these girls .
we 've said , could it be that positive emotions are simply easier to process than negative emotions , and so you switch to the positive emotions ? maybe our neural centers in our brain are degraded such that we 're unable to process negative emotions anymore .
today , each of these elements is opening up due to dramatic changes in the global environment .
and hopefully different kinds of humor will evolve . and the books are really journals of my life . i never -- i do n't like plots . i do n't know what a plot means . i ca n't stand the idea of anything that starts in the beginning , you know , beginning , middle and end . it really scares me , because my life is too random and too confused , and i enjoy it that way .
av : and we kind of feel that the happiness gap , which we talked about , is really the result of walking into parenting -- and really any long-term partnership for that matter -- with the wrong expectations . and if you have the right expectations and expectation management , we feel like it 's going to be a pretty gratifying experience . rg : and so this is what -- and we think that a lot of parents , when you get in there -- in our case anyway --
to magnify any anger , hatred or feeling of marginalization . and in fact , with increasing globalization -- for which there are big winners and even bigger losers -- today the world is more diverse and unfair than perhaps it has ever been in history . one percent of us own 40 percent of all the goods and services . what will happen if the billion people today who live on less than one dollar a day rise to three billion in the next 30 years ? the one percent will own even more than 40 percent of all the world 's goods and services . not because they 've grown richer ,
here we go . this little baby has a lot of horsepower . it comes completely conscious . it 's got state-of-the-art lobes . we 've got the occipital lobe so we can actually see the world . we got the temporal lobe so we can actually hear the world . here we 've got a little bit of long-term memory , so , you know that night you want to forget , when you got really drunk ? bye-bye ! gone . so actually , it 's filled with 100 billion neurons just zizzing away , electrically transmitting information , zizzing , zizzing . i 'm going to give you a little side view here . i do n't know if you can get that here .
as people went to this trouble to try and rework their tactics , we went back to the vaccine -- it 's a 50-year-old vaccine -- and we thought , surely we can make a better vaccine , so that when they finally get to these kids , we can have a better bang for our buck . and this started an incredible collaboration with industry , and within six months , we were testing a new polio vaccine that targeted , just two years ago , the last two types of polio in the world . we got the first results from the first trial with this vaccine , and it turned out to be a game-changer .
and you can think of this as our satellite view for our map . the next thing we do is we collect what 's called a diffusion tensor imaging . this maps the large cabling in the brain . and again , you can think of this as almost mapping our interstate highways , if you will . the brain is removed from the skull , and then it 's sliced into one-centimeter slices . and those are frozen solid , and they 're shipped to seattle . and in seattle , we take these -- this is a whole human hemisphere -- and we put them into what 's basically a glorified meat slicer . there 's a blade here that 's going to cut across
environmentally , meat , amazingly , causes more emissions than all of transportation combined : cars , trains , planes , buses , boats , all of it .
for anything that is creative . so if you add rules to play , you have a game . that 's actually what an experiment is . so armed with these two ideas , that science is a way of being and experiments are play , we asked , can anyone become a scientist ? and who better to ask than 25 eight- to 10-year-old children ? because they 're experts in play . so i took my bee arena down to a small school in devon , and the aim of this was to not just get the kids to see science differently , but , through the process of science , to see themselves differently . right ?
before , i used to dress in a way that it looked good . now i dress in a way that it sounds good . so today i 'm dressed in c major , so it 's quite a happy chord . if i had to go to a funeral , though , i would dress in b minor , which would be turquoise , purple and orange . also , food , the way i look at food has changed ,
but by comparison , we can learn . we can learn by watching other people and copying or imitating what they can do . we can then choose , from among a range of options , the best one . we can benefit from others ' ideas . we can build on their wisdom . and as a result , our ideas do accumulate , and our technology progresses . and this cumulative cultural adaptation , as anthropologists call this accumulation of ideas , is responsible for everything around you in your bustling and teeming everyday lives . i mean the world has changed out of all proportion to what we would recognize even 1,000 or 2,000 years ago .
maybe one of the most heartening findings from the psychology of pleasure is there 's more to looking good than your physical appearance . if you like somebody , they look better to you . this is why spouses in happy marriages tend to think that their husband or wife looks much better than anyone else thinks that they do . a particularly dramatic example of this comes from a neurological disorder known as capgras syndrome . so capgras syndrome is a disorder where you get a specific delusion . sufferers of capgras syndrome believe that the people they love most in the world have been replaced by perfect duplicates .
giving vitamin a drops , giving measles shots , giving bed nets against malaria even during some of these campaigns . but the most exciting thing that the polio eradication program has been doing has been to force us , the international community , to reach every single child , every single community , the most vulnerable people in the world , with the most basic of health services , irrespective of geography , poverty , culture and even conflict . so things were looking very exciting , and then about five years ago , this virus , this ancient virus , started to fight back . the first problem we ran into was that , in these last four countries , the strongholds of this virus ,
so he built me the first barefoot training center in sierra leone . and 150 grandmothers have been trained in sierra leone . gambia : we went to select a grandmother in gambia . went to this village . i knew which woman i would like to take . the community got together and said ,  take these two women . 
and small groups are more prone to accidents and bad luck . so if we 'd chosen that path , our evolutionary path would have led into the forest -- and been a short one indeed . the other option we could choose was to develop the systems of communication that would allow us to share ideas and to cooperate amongst others . choosing this option would mean that a vastly greater fund of accumulated knowledge and wisdom would become available to any one individual than would ever arise from within an individual family or an individual person on their own . well , we chose the second option ,
you can stay with me for 20 years , go tomorrow .
and take the child right through school , sent to college , and get them prepared for better living , a high value job .  so , we started parikrma . the first parikrma school started in a slum where there were 70,000 people living below the poverty line . our first school was on a rooftop of a building inside the slums , a second story building , the only second story building inside the slums . and that rooftop did not have any ceiling , only half a tin sheet . that was our first school . one hundred sixty-five children . indian academic year begins in june . so , june it rains , so many a times
but i still wanted to tell a narrative story and i still wanted to tell my stories . so i decided that i would start to draw . how hard could that be ? and so what happened was that i started just becoming an editorial illustrator through , you know , sheer whatever , sheer ignorance . and we started a studio . well , tibor really started the studio , called m & amp ; co. and the premise of m & amp ; co was , we do n't know anything , but that 's all right , we 're going to do it anyway . and as a matter of fact , it 's better not to know anything , because if you know too much , you 're stymied .
what did we find when we called them back at the end of the day ? people who spent money on other people got happier .
they are substantially happier when they 're focused only on their commute than when their mind is going off to something else . it 's amazing . so how could this be happening ? i think part of the reason , a big part of the reason , is that when our minds wander , we often think about unpleasant things , and they are enormously less happy when they do that , our worries , our anxieties , our regrets , and yet even when people are thinking about something neutral , they 're still considerably less happy even when they 're thinking about something they would describe as pleasant , they 're actually just slightly less happy
so what you do one day is you take a pile of arrowheads , and you walk up to the one that ca n't speak very well , and you put the arrowheads down in front of him , hoping that he 'll get the idea that you want to trade your arrowheads for finished arrows . but he looks at the pile of arrowheads , thinks they 're a gift , picks them up , smiles and walks off . now you pursue this guy , gesticulating . a scuffle ensues and you get stabbed with one of your own arrowheads . okay , now replay this scene now , and you 're approaching the one who has language .
it 's really a remarkable , awesome thing that happens there . i 've always -- just as a listener , as just a fan -- i listen to that , and i 'm just astounded . i think -- how can this possibly be ? how can the brain generate that much information , that much music , spontaneously ? and so i set out with this concept , scientifically , that artistic creativity , it 's magical , but it 's not magic , meaning that it 's a product of the brain . there 's not too many brain-dead people creating art . and so with this notion that artistic creativity is in fact a neurologic product , i took this thesis that we could study it
from the arab spring to the anna hazare movement in india , using mobile phones and social media not just for political accountability but also for development accountability .
and i wanted to give something back in my own way . 
it does n't turn out to be the case when you look at seatbelts versus car seats .
i started to have favorite colors , and i started to dream in colors . so , when i started to dream in color is when i felt that the software and my brain had united ,
telegraph ? no .
we were sort of very gung ho with our success in australia and new zealand at that stage .
so mass education started with social entrepreneurship in the 19th century .
that you can think of like hormones , and these are the red triangles , and when the bacteria is alone the molecules just float away and so no light . but when the bacteria grow and double and they 're all participating in making these molecules , the molecule -- the extracellular amount of that molecule increases in proportion to cell number . and when the molecule hits a certain amount that tells the bacteria how many neighbors there are , they recognize that molecule and all of the bacteria turn on light in synchrony . that 's how bioluminescence works -- they 're talking with these chemical words . the reason that vibrio fischeri is doing that comes from the biology .
we invest in more emotionally important parts of life , and life gets better , so we 're happier day-to-day .
on ebay or star ratings on amazon . the difference today is that , with every trade we make , comment we leave , person we flag , badge we earn , we leave a reputation trail of how well we can and ca n't be trusted . and it 's not just the breadth but the volume of reputation data out there that is staggering . just consider this : five million nights have been booked on airbnb in the past six months alone . 30 million rides have been shared on carpooling.com . this year , two billion dollars worth of loans will go through peer-to-peer lending platforms . this adds up to millions of pieces of reputation data
it 's hardly time to rest on our laurels .
certain things that voters want , certain things that voters have been promised , may be things that we can not deliver or perhaps that we feel we should not deliver . and the second thing we should do is understand the genius of our societies . our societies have never been so educated , have never been so energized , have never been so healthy , have never known so much , cared so much , or wanted to do so much , and it is a genius of the local . one of the reasons why we 're moving away from banqueting halls such as the one in which we stand , banqueting halls with extraordinary images on the ceiling
through various inventions and new ways of doing lighting , through different types of cars , different ways of building buildings -- there are a lot of services where you can bring the energy for that service down quite substantially . some individual services even bring it down by 90 percent . there are other services like how we make fertilizer , or how we do air transport , where the rooms for improvement are far , far less . and so , overall here , if we 're optimistic , we may get a reduction of a factor of three to even , perhaps , a factor of six . but for these first three factors now ,
to check if he needed anything . sebastian actually said to me , he said ,  thirteen former guests contacted me before my own mother rang .  now , this little anecdote gets to the heart of why i 'm really passionate about collaborative consumption , and why , after i finished my book , i decided i 'm going to try and spread this into a global movement . because at its core , it 's about empowerment . it 's about empowering people to make meaningful connections , connections that are enabling us to rediscover a humanness that we 've lost somewhere along the way , by engaging in marketplaces like airbnb , like kickstarter ,
first , there 's this amazing thing about actually getting out of the box that leads to out-of-the-box thinking .
once the baby 's born , it recognizes her voice and it prefers listening to her voice over anyone else 's . how can we know this ? newborn babies ca n't do much , but one thing they 're really good at is sucking . researchers take advantage of this fact by rigging up two rubber nipples , so that if a baby sucks on one , it hears a recording of its mother 's voice on a pair of headphones , and if it sucks on the other nipple , it hears a recording of a female stranger 's voice . babies quickly show their preference by choosing the first one . scientists also take advantage of the fact
that would save hundreds of millions of dollars in legal costs in the united states and would decrease the cost of medicine for everyone . these are just some starting points . and , so there , that 's the end of all my wishes . i wish i had more wishes but three is what i 've got and there they are .
it 's the era of change . there 's more change going on than ever has occurred in the history of human life on earth . and you all sort of know it , but it 's hard to get it so that you really understand it . and i 've tried to put together something that 's a good start for this . i 've tried to show in this -- though the color does n't come out -- that what i 'm concerned with is the little 50-year time bubble that you are in . you tend to be interested in a generation past , a generation future -- your parents , your kids , things you can change
to be able to help us think about how to do this better , to use as a community our collective wisdom to be able to make a difference , and in particular , for the individuals in families with autism , i invite you to join the interactive autism network , to be part of the solution to this , because it 's going to take really a lot of us to think about what 's important , what 's going to be a meaningful difference . as we think about something that 's potentially a solution , how well does it work ? is it something that 's really going to make a difference
that means every one of us , and our children , consumes what would equal a five-pound bag -- those bags you have at home . if i had one here and ripped it open , and that pile i would have on the floor is what we consume and feed our children every year because of what goes into our food supply , because of the way we consume produce in america . the usda allows these antibiotics , these hormones and these pesticides in our food supply , and the usda paid for this ad in time magazine . okay , we could talk about rachel carson and ddt ,
i said ,  but you know , i bought an airline ticket , and i 'm stuck here for a week .  and i said ,  i 'm staying in a hotel downtown . would you like to come and have lunch tomorrow ? and you can practice your english .  because he told me -- i was trying to ask him questions about himself . and so i went to the hotel , and i found two older amerasians . a girl whose mother had been a prostitute , and she was a prostitute , and a boy who 'd been in and out of jail . and i said to them ,  look , there 's a little girl
the most exciting is the harlem children 's zone , which over 10 years , led by geoffrey canada , has , through a mixture of schooling and family and community projects , attempted to transform not just education in schools , but the entire culture and aspiration of about 10,000 families in harlem .
in the field of service and education . and i 'm not a trained academic . neither am i a veteran social worker . i was 26 years in the corporate world , trying to make organizations profitable . and then in 2003 i started parikrma humanity foundation from my kitchen table . the first thing that we did was walk through the slums . you know , by the way , there are two million people in bangalore , who live in 800 slums . we could n't go to all the slums , but we tried to cover as much as we could . we walked through these slums , identified houses where children would never go to school .
a day is too short ;  after i retire  is too long . there 's got to be a middle way . a fourth observation : we need to approach balance in a balanced way . a friend came to see me last year -- and she does n't mind me telling this story -- a friend came to see me last year and said ,  nigel , i 've read your book . and i realize that my life is completely out of balance . it 's totally dominated by work . i work 10 hours a day ; i commute two hours a day . all of my relationships have failed . there 's nothing in my life
there would n't have been a gossamer condor , there would n't have been an albatross , a solar challenger , there would n't be an impact car , there would n't be a mandate on zero-emission vehicles in california . a lot of these things -- or similar -- would have happened some time , probably a decade later . i did n't realize at the time i was doing inquiry-based , hands-on things with teams , like they 're trying to get in education systems . so i think that , as a symbol , it 's important . and i believe that also is important . you can think of it as a sort of a symbol for learning and ted
and under conditions where it really matters , older people do process the negative information just as well as the positive information .
-- which i will do a painting of , and then it will end up in my work . so , i 'm open to the possibilities of not knowing and finding out something new . so , in writing for children , it seems simple , and it is . you have to condense a story into 32 pages , usually . and what you have to do is , you really have to edit down to what you want to say . and hopefully , you 're not talking down to kids and you 're not talking in such a way that you , you know , could n't stand reading it after one time . so , i hopefully am writing , you know ,
from the broken places . the best way to learn about anything is through stories , and so i want to tell you a story about work and play and about four aspects of life that we need to embrace in order for our own creativity to flourish . the first embrace is something that we think ,  oh , this is very easy ,  but it 's actually getting harder , and that 's paying attention to the world around us . so many artists speak about needing to be open , to embrace experience , and that 's hard to do when you have a lighted rectangle in your pocket that takes all of your focus .
there were tens of thousands of people in the vicinity of the world trade center in new york -- commuters spilling off trains , waitresses setting tables for the morning rush , brokers already working the phones on wall street . 1,700 of these people were pregnant women . when the planes struck and the towers collapsed , many of these women experienced the same horrors inflicted on other survivors of the disaster -- the overwhelming chaos and confusion , the rolling clouds of potentially toxic dust and debris , the heart-pounding fear for their lives . about a year after 9/11 , researchers examined a group of women who were pregnant
in this map from moldova , the green color shows those districts that have low spending on schools but good educational outcomes ,
when they got to a certain stage , pratham got big enough to attract some pro bono support from mckinsey .
had graduated from college , let alone considered business school . but they had hustled to feed their kids and pay their rent . and i saw from a young age that having a decent job and earning a good living made the biggest difference for families who were struggling . so if you 're going to talk about jobs , then you have to talk about entrepreneurs . and if you 're talking about entrepreneurs in conflict and post-conflict settings , then you must talk about women , because they are the population you have left . rwanda in the immediate aftermath of the genocide was 77 percent female .
 run like the wind , veruca ! run !  and all the girlies , girlies running , running , running , everybody except for my daughter , who was just standing at the starting line , just waving , because she did n't know she was supposed to run . so i took to my bed for about a month , and when i woke up i found i was institutionalized , and when i saw the other inmates , i realized that i had found my people , my tribe . because they became my only friends , they became my friends , because very few people that i knew -- well , i was n't sent a lot of cards or flowers . i mean , if i had had a broken leg
here , there is n't really an option .
and they said ,  yeah , you 're right , we should make a law . we should outlaw this cheap and simple treatment and not let anybody use this on their children . 
was actually done in india . and i set myself and impossible target : can tamil speaking 12-year-old children in a south indian village teach themselves biotechnology in english on their own ? and i thought , i 'll test them , they 'll get a zero -- i 'll give the materials , i 'll come back and test them -- they get another zero , i 'll go back and say ,  yes , we need teachers for certain things .  i called in 26 children . they all came in there , and i told them that there 's some really difficult stuff on this computer . i would n't be surprised if you did n't understand anything . it 's all in english , and i 'm going .
but at 10 , my dad said ,  that 's going to be your next business .  so not only would he get me one , but i had to get two , and then he wanted me to hire someone to deliver half the papers , which i did , and then i realized that collecting tips was where you made all the money . so i would collect the tips and get payment . so i would go and collect for all the papers . he could just deliver them . because then i realized i could make the money . by this point , i was definitely not going to be an employee .
they all talk about how having a high reputation unlocks a sense of their own power . on stack overflow , it creates a level playing field , enabling the people with the real talent to rise to the top . on airbnb , the people often become more important than the spaces . on taskrabbit , it gives people control of their economic activity . now at the end of my tea with sebastian , he told me how , on a bad , rainy day , when he has n't had a customer in his bookstore , he thinks of all the people around the world who 've said something wonderful about him , and what that says about him as a person .
you ’ ll find something taped underneath it . that ’ s great . if you could pass it up . thanks , david , i appreciate it . so this is a finger blaster , and you will find that every one of you has got one taped under your chair . and i ’ m going to run a little experiment . another little experiment . but before we start , i need just to put these on . thank you . all right . now , what i ’ m going to do is , i ’ m going to see how -- i can ’ t see out of these , ok. i ’ m going to see how many of you at the back of the room
and the things that they build amaze even themselves . video : three , two , one , go ! gever tulley : a rollercoaster built by seven-year-olds . video : yay ! gt : thank you . it 's been a great pleasure . thank you very much . thank you . it 's a distinct privilege to be here . a few weeks ago , i saw a video on youtube of congresswoman gabrielle giffords at the early stages of her recovery from one of those awful bullets . this one entered her left hemisphere , and knocked out her broca 's area , the speech center of her brain . and in this session , gabby 's working with a speech therapist ,
so the question remains , what does cause autism ? in fact , there 's probably not one single answer .
which is that in 1,997 out of 2,000 communities , women , young women , were making more money than young men . so here you have a generation of young women who grow up thinking of themselves as being more powerful earners than the young men around them . now , i 've just laid out the picture for you , but i still have n't explained to you why this is happening . and in a moment , i 'm going to show you a graph , and what you 'll see on this graph -- it begins in 1973 , just before women start flooding the workforce , and it brings us up to our current day .
as opposed to whether the children have enough to eat , and whether they are packed tightly into classrooms and that sort of thing . it appears that way . when you take education and technology , then i find in the literature that , you know , things like websites , collaborative environments -- you 've been listening to all that in the morning -- it 's always piloted first in the best schools , the best urban schools , and , according to me , biases the result . the literature -- one part of it , the scientific literature -- consistently blames et as being over-hyped and under-performing . the teachers always say , well , it 's fine , but it 's too expensive for what it does .
in so many of these remote places , i 'm really struck by the things that we have in common . they want what we want for our children and that is for their children to grow up successful , to be healthy , and to have a successful life . but i also see lots of poverty , and it 's quite jarring , both in the scale and the scope of it . my first trip in india , i was in a person 's home where they had dirt floors , no running water , no electricity , and that 's really what i see all over the world . so in short , i 'm startled by all the things
they do n't all become race car drivers or firemen , you know . so there 's a disconnect between preparation for the future -- which is what most people are comfortable in thinking about play as -- and thinking of it as a separate biological entity . and this is where my chasing animals for four , five years really changed my perspective from a clinician to what i am now , which is that play has a biological place , just like sleep and dreams do . and if you look at sleep and dreams biologically , animals sleep and dream , and they rehearse and they do some other things that help memory
i think that -- that 's a few years back -- i think that wave is past , and the play wave is cresting , because there is some good science . nothing lights up the brain like play . three-dimensional play fires up the cerebellum , puts a lot of impulses into the frontal lobe -- the executive portion -- helps contextual memory be developed , and -- and , and , and . so it 's -- for me , its been an extremely nourishing scholarly adventure to look at the neuroscience that 's associated with play , and to bring together people who in their individual disciplines had n't really thought of it that way .
it 's what i study . it 's what i treat . and i know that kids get concussed every year . in fact , more than four million people sustain a concussion every year , and these data are just among kids under 14 who were seen in emergency rooms . and so when kids sustain a concussion , we talk about them getting dinged or getting their bell rung , but what is it that we 're really talking about ? let 's take a look . all right .  starsky and hutch ,  arguably , yes . so a car accident . forty miles an hour into a fixed barrier -- 35 gs . a heavy weight boxer
and yet we 're discovering they 're predictable .
and we know this because when we study different language groups and associate them with their cultures , we see that different languages slow the flow of ideas between groups . they slow the flow of technologies . and they even slow the flow of genes . now i ca n't speak for you , but it seems to be the case that we do n't have sex with people we ca n't talk to . now we have to counter that , though , against the evidence we 've heard that we might have had some rather distasteful genetic dalliances with the neanderthals and the denisovans . okay , this tendency we have ,
a wish for a better life somewhere in new york , a wish for a better life somewhere in new jersey . will you journey with me to help that girl , be it an african girl or an american girl or a japanese girl , fulfill her wish , fulfill her dream , achieve that dream ? because all of these great innovators and inventors that we 've talked to and seen over the last few days are also sitting in tiny corners in different parts of the world , and all they 're asking us to do is create that space to unlock the intelligence , unlock the passion , unlock all of the great things
if you teach a man to fish , you feed him for a lifetime .  if we can teach our kids to become entrepreneurial -- the ones that show those traits to be -- like we teach the ones who have science gifts to go on in science , what if we saw the ones who had entrepreneurial traits and taught them to be entrepreneurs ? we could actually have all these kids spreading businesses instead of waiting for government handouts . what we do is we sit and teach our kids all the things they should n't do : do n't hit ; do n't bite ; do n't swear .
and what i 'd like to talk to you about today is some of the evidence why i believe this to be true : that for children two years old and up , there really is no real benefit -- proven benefit -- of car seats , in spite of the incredible energy that has been devoted toward expanding the laws and making it socially unacceptable to put your children into seatbelts . and then talk about why -- what is it that makes that true ? and then , finally talk a little bit about a third way , about another technology , which is probably better than anything we have ,
then we did what i consider to be the heart of the work : interviewed 1,100 children , boys and girls , ages seven to 12 , all over the united states -- except for silicon valley , boston and austin because we knew that their little families would have millions of computers in them and they would n't be a representative sample . and at the end of those remarkable conversations with kids and their best friends across the united states , after two years , we pulled together some survey data from another 10,000 children , drew up a set up of what we thought were the key findings of our research ,
one bowl of raw broccoli and one bowl of delicious goldfish crackers . now all of the babies , even in berkley , like the crackers and do n't like the raw broccoli . but then what betty did was to take a little taste of food from each bowl . and she would act as if she liked it or she did n't . so half the time , she acted as if she liked the crackers and did n't like the broccoli -- just like a baby and any other sane person . but half the time , what she would do is take a little bit of the broccoli
we let them embrace it and interpret it in their own way .
of people-powered marketplaces . i actually came across this fascinating study by the pew center this week that revealed that an active facebook user is three times as likely as a non-internet user to believe that most people are trustworthy . virtual trust will transform the way we trust one another face to face . now , with all of my optimism , and i am an optimist , comes a healthy dose of caution , or rather , an urgent need to address some pressing , complex questions . how to ensure our digital identities reflect our real world identities ? do we want them to be the same ? how do we mimic the way trust is built face-to-face online ?
about how neurotic you are .  so in the spirit of full disclosure , i brought some pictures to share . awwww . i 'll just say , july . zzzzzzip for safety . water wings -- an inch of water . and then , finally , all suited up for the 90-minute drive to copper mountain . so you can get kind of a feel for this . so my baby , vander , is eight years old now . and , despite being cursed with my athletic inability , he plays soccer . he 's interested in playing football . he wants to learn how to ride a unicycle . so why would i worry ? because this is what i do . this is what i teach .
the knowledge that you display on quora or [ unclear ] , they 'll all live together in one place , and this will live in some kind of reputation dashboard that will paint a picture of your reputation capital . now this is a concept that i 'm currently researching and writing my next book on , and currently define as the worth of your reputation , your intentions , capabilities and values across communities and marketplaces . this is n't some far-off frontier . there are actually a wave of startups like connect.me and legit and trustcloud that are figuring out how you can aggregate , monitor and use your online reputation . now , i realize that this concept may sound a little
of course , there 's the implication . but we think this virus is pretty ubiquitous . it 's also pretty clear that the bees sometimes catch other viruses or other flus , and so the question we 're still struggling with , and the question that keeps us up at night , is why have the bees suddenly become so susceptible to this flu , and why are they so susceptible to these other diseases ? and we do n't have the answer to that yet , and we spend a lot of time trying to figure that out . we think perhaps it 's a combination of factors . we know from the work of a very large and dynamic working team
but actually i did better than average in 50 to 60 year olds .  ok ? and the key thing was , what i did n't know , was that i was a really good dreamer . ok. now let 's move from sleep to diseases . eighty percent of americans have chronic disease , or 80 percent of age greater than 65 have two or more chronic disease , 140 million americans have one or more chronic disease , and 80 percent of our 1.5 , whatever , trillion expenditures are related to chronic disease . now , diabetes is one of the big ones . almost 24 million people have diabetes . and here is the latest map . it was published
there 's no malevolence , they 're just pressing a button . the first shock is recorded as very painful . the second shock feels less painful , because you get a bit used to it . the third drops , the fourth , the fifth . the pain gets less . in the other condition , they 're told that the person in the next room is shocking them on purpose -- knows they 're shocking them . the first shock hurts like hell . the second shock hurts just as much , and the third and the fourth and the fifth . it hurts more if you believe somebody is doing it to you on purpose . the most extreme example of this
proteins are targets for drugs . so drugs bind to proteins and either turn them off , etc . so if you want to understand the action of drugs , you want to understand how they 're acting in the ways you want them to , and also in the ways you do n't want them to . in the side effect profile , etc. , you want to see where those genes are turned on . and for the first time , we can actually do that . we can do that in multiple individuals that we 've assayed too . so now we can look throughout the brain . we can see this unique fingerprint .
we hoped we 'd be funny , but we did n't know it would be a cover , and we did n't know that that image , at the moment that it happened , would be something that would be so wonderful for a lot of people . and it really became the -- i do n't know , you know , it was one of those moments people started laughing at what was going on . and from , you know , fattushis , to taxistan to , you know , for the fashtoonks , botoxia , pashmina , khlintunisia , you know , we were able to take the city and make fun of this completely foreign , who are -- what 's going on over here ?
so , it 's not about slapping skins , anymore , on a technology . it 's really about designing from the inside out . and then , on the other side of the room , the designers are making small adjustments , sketching , drawing by hand , putting it in the computer . and it 's what i call being design driven . you know , there is some push and pull , but design is really helping define the whole experience from the inside out . and then , of course , design is never done . and this is -- the other new way that is unique in how we work is , because it 's never done , you have to do all this other stuff .
they 're spending in a classroom , and most of those classrooms are not places where men exist . and so they say , i guess this really is n't a place for boys . this is a place for girls . and i 'm not very good at this , so i guess i 'd better go play video games or get into sports , or something like that , because i obviously do n't belong here . men do n't belong here , that 's pretty obvious . so that may be a very direct way that we see it happen . but less directly , the lack of male presence in the culture -- you 've got a teachers ' lounge ,
and so that 's incredible . and there 's no money to do that . but i 'm glad to say that i think we know the cause of all these conditions , and that cause is ndd : nature deficit disorder . and that is that i think that what we have in our society is , we forgot our connection with nature . and i think if we reconnect to nature , we 'll be able to have the resources and that interest to solve these problems . and i think that there is an easy cure for ndd . and that is , make meadows and not lawns . and i think we have lost our connection ,
and listen to people . they have the solutions in front of you .
and i 've now got a fully dysfunctional family just like everybody else . but i 'm reporting back to you to say quite simply that you can define how strong a democracy is by how its government treats its child . i do n't mean children . i mean the child of the state . thanks very much . it 's been an honor . it 's really quite an honor to be here tonight , and i 'm really glad that i stayed here and listened because i 've really been inspired . and i 'm going to play some songs for you tonight that are , literally , world premieres . i 've been working on my new record
you pack your bags for a trip to europe , and you 're really excited to go . get out of the airplane , it turns out you 're trekking in nepal . and trekking in nepal is an extraordinary experience , particularly if you pack your bags properly and you know what you 're getting in for and you 're psyched . so the point of all this for us today is not just hopefully honesty for the sake of honesty , but a hope that by being more honest and candid about these experiences , that we can all collectively bend that happiness baseline up a little bit . rg + av : thank you .
most people think men . why is that ? because we aim low and we think small when it comes to women . microfinance is an incredibly powerful tool that leads to self-sufficiency and self-respect , but we must move beyond micro-hopes and micro-ambitions for women , because they have so much greater hopes for themselves . they want to move from micro to medium and beyond . and in many places , they 're there . in the u.s. , women-owned businesses will create five and a half million new jobs by 2018. in south korea and indonesia ,
there 's a christian , there 's a sabian , there are female representatives , there 's every political party in this council , what 's wrong with the people that we chose ?  the answer came ,  the problem is n't the people that you chose . the problem is that you chose them .  i have not met , in afghanistan , in even the most remote community , anybody who does not want a say in who governs them . most remote community , i have never met a villager who does not want a vote . so we need to acknowledge that despite the dubious statistics , despite the fact that 84 percent of people in britain feel politics is broken ,
birds witnessed the emergence of flowering plants . water lilies were among the first . plants began to diversify and grew , turning into trees . in australia , a lily turned into a grass tree , and in hawaii , a daisy became a silver sword . in africa , gondwana molded proteas . but when that ancient continent broke up , life got lusher . tropical rainforests arose , sparking new layers of interdependence . fungi multiplied . orchids emerged , genitalia shaped to lure insects ... a trick shared by the largest flower on earth . co-evolution entwined insects and birds and plants forever . when birds ca n't fly , they become vulnerable . kiwis are , and so are these hawks trapped near antarctica .
sydney . i had been waiting my whole life to get to sydney . i got to the airport , to the hotel , checked in , and , sitting there in the lobby , was a brochure for the sydney festival . i thumbed through it , and i came across a show called  minto : live .  the description read :  the suburban streets of minto become the stage for performances created by international artists in collaboration with the people of minto .  what was this place called minto ? sydney , as i would learn , is a city of suburbs , and minto lies southwest , about an hour away . i have to say , it was n't exactly what i had in mind
it 's good to get gifts for people that you know .
right ? the brain takes meaningless information and makes meaning out of it , which means we never see what 's there , we never see information , we only ever see what was useful to see in the past . all right ? which means , when it comes to perception , we 're all like this frog . right ? it 's getting information . it 's generating behavior man : ow ! ow ! bl : and sometimes , when things do n't go our way , we get a little bit annoyed , right ? but we 're talking about perception here , right ? and perception underpins everything we think , we know , we believe , our hopes , our dreams , the clothes we wear ,
and this needs to be like this . ag : okay , hypothesis two . boy : that 's why . oh . ag : now this is his next idea . he told the experimenter to do this , to try putting it out onto the other location . not working either . boy : oh , because the light goes only to here , not here . oh , the bottom of this box has electricity in here , but this does n't have electricity . ag : okay , that 's a fourth hypothesis . boy : it 's lighting up . so when you put four . so you put four on this one to make it light up and two on this one to make it light up .
to buy new gear -- which brings us to suit up . wear a helmet . the only way to prevent a bad outcome is to prevent that first injury from happening . recently , one of my graduate students , tom said ,  kim , i 've decided to wear a bike helmet on my way to class .  and tom knows that that little bit of foam in a bike helmet can reduce the g-force of impact by half . now i thought that it was because i have this totally compelling helmet crusade , right , this epiphany of tom 's . as it turns out , it occurred to tom that a $ 20 helmet
themselves attached to certain specific target zones , bacteria that we do n't like . and i feel now like george bush . it 's like  mission accomplished .  so i might be doing something dumb , just like he was doing at the time . but basically what i was talking about there we 've now gotten to work . and it 's killing bacteria . it 's eating them . this thing can be stuck , like that little green triangle up there , sort of symbolizing this right now . you can stick this to something called a dna aptamer . and that dna aptamer will attach specifically to a target that you have selected for it .
why do n't you sit down with kids and give them four items , a red shirt , a blue tie , a kangaroo and a laptop , and have them tell a story about those four things ? my kids do that all the time . it teaches them to sell ; it teaches them creativity ; it teaches them to think on their feet . just do that kind of stuff and have fun with it .
♫ right here in my hand . ♫ ♫ and i got all the answers ♫ ♫ and i do n't have to understand ♫ ♫ 'cause i got all the answers . ♫ ♫ think i 'll rummage through the century ♫ ♫ while i listen to the sea . ♫ ♫ oh , it 's good to be so free , ♫ ♫ so free . ♫ ♫ who was mayor of chicago ♫ ♫ back in 1964 ? ♫ ♫ and why did shakespeare create iago ♫ ♫ to tear apart a love so pure ? ♫ ♫ how can my dreams be so vivid ♫ ♫ in a psychosonic way ? ♫
they were shocked .  a clay building is not able to stand a rainy season , and francis wants us to use it and build a school . is this the reason why he spent so much time in europe studying instead of working in the field with us ?  my people build all the time with clay , but they do n't see any innovation with mud . so i had to convince everybody . i started to speak with the community , and i could convince everybody , and we could start to work . and the women , the men , everybody from the village , was part of this building process .
it does n't look like this ; it really looks more like this . it 's a continuous journey . and if we want to avoid  success-to-failure-syndrome ,  we just keep following these eight principles , because that is not only how we achieve success , it 's how we sustain it . so here is to your continued success . thank you very much . my subject today is learning . and in that spirit , i want to spring on you all a pop quiz . ready ? when does learning begin ? now as you ponder that question , maybe you 're thinking about the first day of preschool or kindergarten , the first time that kids are in a classroom with a teacher .
and then we had them improvise to the same exact chord changes . and if you can hit that lower-right sound icon , that 's an example of what was recorded in the scanner . so in the end , it 's not the most natural environment , but they 're able to play real music . and i 've listened to that solo 200 times , and i still like it . and the musicians , they were comfortable in the end . and so we first measured the number of notes . were they in fact just playing a lot more notes when they were improvising ? that was not what was going on .
your mom would be so proud .  and from that moment i realized that movember is so much more than a mustache , having a joke .
and once you see blood vessels , we think we can see the malaria . we can see it because of this molecule called hemozoin . it 's produced by the malaria parasite and it 's a very interesting crystalline substance . interesting , anyway , if you 're a solid-state physicist . there 's a lot of cool stuff we can do with it . this is our femtosecond laser lab . so this creates pulses of light that last a femtosecond . that 's really , really , really short . this is a pulse of light that 's only about one wavelength of light long , so it 's a whole bunch of photons all coming and hitting simultaneously .
2,000 times closer than the real gfc synchronous satellite . we could n't bring one here to fly it and show you . but now let 's look at the other end . in the video you saw that nine-pound or eight-pound pointer airplane surveillance drone that keenan has developed and just done a remarkable job . where some have servos that have gotten down to , oh , 18 or 25 grams , his weigh one-third of a gram . and what he 's going to bring out here is a surveillance drone that weighs about 2 ounces -- that includes the video camera , the batteries that run it , the telemetry , the receiver and so on . and we 'll fly it , we hope ,
all of those conversations need to be happening . there are some great examples out there of schools -- the new york times just talked about a school recently . a game designer from the new school put together a wonderful video gaming school . but it only treats a few kids , and so this is n't very scalable . we have to change the culture and the feelings that politicians and school board members and parents have about the way we accept and what we accept in our schools today . we need to find more money for game design . because good games , really good games , cost money ,
how can that not make you optimistic ? a disease which killed hundreds of thousands in india , and blinded half of all of those who were made blind in india , ended . and most importantly for us here in this room , a bond was created . doctors , health workers , from 30 different countries , of every race , every religion , every color , worked together , fought alongside each other , fought against a common enemy , did n't fight against each other . how can that not make you feel optimistic for the future ? thank you very much . beau lotto : so , this game is very simple . all you have to do is read what you see . right ?
of kings enthroned , the entire drama played out here on this space , where the king of england had his head lopped off , why we 've moved from spaces like this , thrones like that , towards the town hall , is we 're moving more and more towards the energies of our people , and we need to tap that . that can mean different things in different countries . in britain , it could mean looking to the french , learning from the french , getting directly elected mayors in place in a french commune system . in afghanistan , it could have meant instead of concentrating on the big presidential and parliamentary elections ,
whether it was  happy birthday to you  or their favorite song by the eagles or the rolling stones . and after 70 hours of intensive singing lessons , he found that the music was able to literally rewire the brains of his patients and create a homologous speech center in their right hemisphere to compensate for the left hemisphere 's damage . when i was 17 , i visited dr. schlaug 's lab , and in one afternoon he walked me through some of the leading research on music and the brain -- how musicians had fundamentally different brain structure than non-musicians , how music , and listening to music ,
but what i 'm really pleased to say is , in 2010 , movember became a truly global movement .
they say yes just a little bit out of delhi , and they say no when you hit the rich suburbs of delhi -- because , you know , those are relatively better off areas -- and then from 200 kilometers out of delhi , the answer is consistently yes . i would imagine that a teacher who comes or walks into class every day thinking that , i wish i was in some other school , probably has a deep impact on what happens to the results . so it looked as though teacher motivation and teacher migration was a powerfully correlated thing with what was happening in primary schools ,
you 'll be surprised at how fresh air drives fresh thinking , and in the way that you do , you 'll bring into your life an entirely new set of ideas .
voice : my favorite season is winter.mt : well yeah , mine too . winter is like magic . it 's a time of change , when warmth turns to cold , water turns to snow , and then it all disappears . there are 13 cards in each suit . voice : each card represents a phase of the 13 lunar cycles . mt : so over here is low tide , and over here is high tide , and in the middle is the moon . voice : the moon is one of the most potent symbols of magic . mt : there are two colors in a deck of cards . there is the color red and the color black ,
said mahatma gandhi . and thank you for listening . we are now going through an amazing and unprecedented moment where the power dynamics between men and women are shifting very rapidly , and in many of the places where it counts the most , women are , in fact , taking control of everything . in my mother 's day , she did n't go to college . not a lot of women did . and now , for every two men who get a college degree , three women will do the same . women , for the first time this year , became the majority of the american workforce . and they 're starting to dominate lots of professions --
in fact , more important than to anyone else on the planet . the climate getting worse means that many years , their crops wo n't grow : there will be too much rain , not enough rain , things will change in ways that their fragile environment simply ca n't support . and that leads to starvation , it leads to uncertainty , it leads to unrest . so , the climate changes will be terrible for them . also , the price of energy is very important to them . in fact , if you could pick just one thing to lower the price of , to reduce poverty , by far you would pick energy . now , the price of energy has come down over time .
we know can increase that risk of autism .
so let 's switch gears and look at a really complex problem courtesy of the u.s. government . this is a diagram of the u.s. counterinsurgency strategy in afghanistan . it was front page of the new york times a couple months ago . instantly ridiculed by the media for being so crazy complicated .
what was really exciting about this project was we , and beau , had no idea whether it would work . it was completely new , and no one had done it before , including adults . bl : including the teachers , and that was really hard for the teachers . it 's easy for a scientist to go in and not have a clue what he 's doing , because that 's what we do in the lab , but for a teacher not to know what 's going to happen at the end of the day -- so much of the credit goes to dave strudwick , who was the collaborator on this project . okay ?
and one of the young women in the project , she was a fantastic lady , she actually built her room in the bathroom . the bathroom was so big , she built the bed over the bathtub -- it 's quite fascinating . on the other hand , i did n't know anything about this . ok ? nothing . this is all going on , and all i 'm getting is postcards of these guys in las vegas , or whatever , saying ,  do n't worry chris , this is really going to be good .  ok ?
having a conversation , for example , in iraq , with a community that asked me whether the riot we were seeing in front of us , this was a huge mob ransacking a provincial council building , was a sign of the new democracy . the same , i felt , was true in almost every single one of the middle and developing countries that i went to , and to some extent the same is true of us . well , what is the answer to this ? is the answer to just give up on the idea of democracy ? well , obviously not . it would be absurd if we were to engage again in the kind of operations
we could stop vaccinating everybody , worldwide , in all of our countries for polio . and it would only be the second disease ever wiped off the face of the planet . and we are so close . and this victory is so possible . so if coke 's marketers came to me and asked me to define happiness , i 'd say my vision of happiness is a mother holding healthy baby in her arms . to me , that is deep happiness . and so if we can learn lessons from the innovators in every sector , then in the future we make together , that happiness can be just as ubiquitous
and gives her testimony of how she and her siblings live together , their father and mother died during the war . she 's 19 ; her dream is to go to college to be able to support them . she 's highly athletic . one of the things that happens is that she applies for a scholarship . full scholarship . she gets it . her dream of going to school , her wish of being educated , is finally here . she goes to school on the first day . the director of sports who 's responsible for getting her into the program asks her to come out of class . and for the next three years ,
there is medical literature that is very difficult to resolve with this other data , which suggests that car seats are dramatically better . and they use a completely different methodology that involves -- after the crash occurs , they get from the insurance companies the names of the people who were in the crash , and they call them on the phone , and they asked them what happened . and i really ca n't resolve , yet , and i 'd like to work with these medical researchers to try to understand how there can be these differences , which are completely at odds with one another . but it 's obviously a critical question .
years ago , my colleagues and i embarked on a study where we followed the same group of people over a 10-year period .
an ultraconservative organization .  i 've heard this before . i know how it goes .
messed around on the swings , played some silly games . i then walked him up the hill to the local cafe , and we shared a pizza for two , then walked down the hill to our home , and i gave him his bath and put him in his batman pajamas . i then read him a chapter of roald dahl 's  james and the giant peach .  i then put him to bed , tucked him in , gave him a kiss on his forehead and said ,  goodnight , mate ,  and walked out of his bedroom . as i was walking out of his bedroom , he said ,  dad ?  i went ,  yes , mate ? 
for you or for birds , and we 're learning a lot from its fascinating subjects . in concluding , i want to get back to the big picture and i have just two final slides to try and put it in perspective . the first i 'll just read . at last , i put in three sentences and had it say what i wanted . over billions of years on a unique sphere , chance has painted a thin covering of life -- complex , improbable , wonderful and fragile . suddenly , we humans -- a recently arrived species , no longer subject to the checks and balances inherent in nature -- have grown in population , technology and intelligence
i was disabled from reading . i just had to do it really slowly , and as i did , lingering on those sentences as i had to linger , i fell heir to language 's other qualities , which i think has helped me write sentences . jb : it 's so powerful . richard ford , who 's won the pulitzer prize , says that dyslexia helped him write sentences . he had to embrace this challenge , and i use that word intentionally . he did n't have to overcome dyslexia . he had to learn from it . he had to learn to hear the music in language . artists also speak about how pushing up against
for the 30 days of november , and then we agreed that we would come together at the end of the month , have a mustache-themed party , and award a prize for the best , and of course , the worst mustache . now trust me , when you 're growing a mustache back in 2003 , and there were 30 of us back then , and this was before the ironic hipster mustache movement — — it created a lot of controversy . so my boss would n't let me go and see clients .
so the hardest thing for me was the kinesthetic thing , of looking at my hands through two mirrors , laying on my back and not able to move at all except for my hand . that was challenging . but again , there were moments , for sure , there were moments of real , honest-to-god musical interplay , for sure . cl : at this point , i 'll take a few moments . and so what you 're seeing here -- and i 'm doing a cardinal sin in science , which is to show you preliminary data . this is one subject 's data . this is , in fact , mike pope 's data . so what am i showing you here ?
who were hurt by their condition , all of them who spawned thousands of other books and other films , all of them were fostered , adopted or orphaned . it seems that writers know that the child outside of family reflects on what family truly is more than what it promotes itself to be . that is , they also use extraordinary skills to deal with extraordinary situations on a daily basis . how have we not made the connection ? and why have we not made the connection , between — how has that happened ? — between these incredible characters of popular culture and religions , and the fostered , adopted or orphaned child
went to afghanistan . one lesson we learned in india was men are untrainable .
i could go on and on . kids -- you can see these signs in kids . and what we 're doing is we 're giving them ritalin and saying ,  do n't be an entrepreneurial type . fit into this other system and try to become a student .  sorry , entrepreneurs are n't students . we fast-track . we figure out the game . i stole essays . i cheated on exams . i hired kids to do my accounting assignments in university for 13 consecutive assignments . but as an entrepreneur you do n't do accounting , you hire accountants . so i just figured that out earlier . at least i can admit i cheated in university ; most of you wo n't .
now to put this in perspective , let me just zoom out for a minute . more years were added to average life expectancy in the 20th century than all years added across all prior millennia of human evolution combined .
and reflected in it are her parents , the king and queen of spain , who would be standing where you might stand to look at the picture . as he often did , velázquez put himself in this painting too . he 's standing on the left with his paintbrush in one hand and his palette in the other . richard serra : i was standing there looking at it , and i realized that velázquez was looking at me , and i thought ,  oh . i 'm the subject of the painting .  and i thought ,  i 'm not going to be able to do that painting .  i was to the point where i was using a stopwatch
i got to tell you , it 's such a great device though . when you start to look for peripetia , you find it everywhere . i mean , bruce willis in  the sixth sense ,  right ? spends the whole movie trying to help the little kid who sees dead people , and then , boom --  oh , i 'm dead  -- peripetia . you know ? it 's crushing when the audience sees it the right way . neo in  the matrix ,  you know ?  oh , i 'm living in a computer program  -- that 's weird . these discoveries that lead to sudden realizations ; and i 've been having them , over 200 dirty jobs , i have them all the time ,
who are my friends ?  ; to exercise the love of social complexity and the narrative intelligence that drives most of their play behavior ; and which embeds in it values about noticing that we have lots of choices in our lives and the ways that we conduct ourselves . the other title that we launched is called  secret paths in the forest ,  which addresses the more fantasy-oriented , inner lives of girls . these two titles both showed up in the top 50 entertainment titles in pc data -- entertainment titles in pc data in december , right up there with  john madden football ,  which thrills me to death .
when i graduated ucla , i moved to northern california , and i lived in a little town called elk on the mendocino coast , and i did n't have a phone or tv , but i had u.s. mail , and life was good back then , if you could remember it . i 'd go to the general store for a cup of coffee and a brownie , and i 'd ship my film to san francisco , and lo and behold , two days later , it would end up on my front door , which was way better than having to fight the traffic of hollywood . i did n't have much money ,
so we thought , why not ? let 's do it .
as long as the city 's putting out notices like this to try to get people engaged , then of course people are n't going to be engaged . but that 's not apathy ; that 's intentional exclusion . public space . the manner in which we mistreat our public spaces is a huge obstacle towards any type of progressive political change because we 've essentially put a price tag on freedom of expression . whoever has the most money gets the loudest voice , dominating the visual and mental environment .
so this is a school in a bus on a building site in pune , the fastest growing city in asia . pune has 5,000 building sites . it has 30,000 children on those building sites . that 's one city . imagine that urban explosion that 's going to take place across the developing world and how many thousands of children will spend their school years on building sites . well , this is a very simple scheme to get the learning to them through a bus . and they all treat learning , not as some sort of academic , analytical activity , but as that 's something that 's productive , something you make ,
it 's absolutely huge . one congressman here in the united states thinks that the entire investment that the u.s. put into smallpox eradication pays itself off every 26 days -- in foregone treatment costs and vaccination costs . and if we can finish polio eradication , the poorest countries in the world are going to save over 50 billion dollars in the next 25 years alone . so those are the kind of stakes that we 're after . but smallpox eradication was hard ; it was very , very hard . and polio eradication , in many ways , is even tougher , and there 's a few reasons for that . the first is that ,
rockett : really ? what other party ? girl : max 's party is going to be so cool , whitney .
rg : that is not fair . this is a trick question . he 's not up there , is he ? av : our eight-week-old son is somewhere in here , and i want to see if rufus can actually quickly identify him . rg : the far left . av : no ! rg : cruel . av : nothing more to be said . i 'll move on to taboo number two . you ca n't talk about how lonely having a baby can be . i enjoyed being pregnant . i loved it . i felt incredibly connected to the community around me . i felt like everyone was participating in my pregnancy , all around me , tracking it down till the actual due-date .
and can be certain that that 's really what we need to do in autism . but that 's not going to be the only answer .
my dad owned an automotive and industrial repair shop . he had all these old automotive parts lying around . they had this old brass and copper . i asked him what he did with it , and he said he just throws it out . i said ,  but would n't somebody pay you for that ?  and he goes ,  maybe .  remember at 10 years old -- so 34 years ago i saw opportunity in this stuff . i saw there was money in garbage . and i was actually collecting it from all the automotive shops in the area on my bicycle . and then my dad would drive me on saturdays
and academic curriculum to tie it all together . now you 've probably garnered that i do n't love the usda , and i do n't have any idea what to do with their pyramid , this upside-down pyramid with a rainbow over the top , i do n't know . you know , run up into the end of the rainbow , i do n't know what you do with it . so , i came up with my own . this is available on my website in english and spanish , and it 's a visual way to talk to kids about food . the really tiny hamburger , the really big vegetables . we have to start changing this .
but which -- there has n't been any enthusiasm for adoption precisely because people are so enamored with the current car seat solution . ok .
when it was reported on this website that 800 students were at risk because school repairs had stalled due to corruption , the department of education in the philippines took swift action .
this is the new ecosystem of open-knowledge flows , not just traveling north to south , but south to south , and even south to north , with mexico 's oportunidades today inspiring new york city .
if you want to take it to the next level , remember , the major culprits in terms of environmental damage and health are red and processed meats . so you want to swap those out with some good , sustainably harvested fish . it 's structured , so it ends up being simple to remember , and it 's okay to break it here and there . after all , cutting five days a week is cutting 70 percent of your meat intake . the program has been great , weekday veg . my footprint 's smaller , i 'm lessening pollution , i feel better about the animals , i 'm even saving money . best of all , i 'm healthier ,
and i soon learned that we were having a boy , and then when i was five months , we learned that we had lost our child . this is actually the last little image we have of him . and it was obviously a very difficult time -- really painful . as i was working through that mourning process , i was amazed that i did n't want to see anybody . i really wanted to crawl into a hole , and i did n't really know how i was going to work my way back into my surrounding community . and i realize , i think , the way i was feeling that way ,
it 's not realistic with lifelong treatment for everyone in the poorest countries . but it 's very good that what is done is being done . but focus now is back on prevention . it is only by stopping the transmission that the world will be able to deal with it . drugs is too costly -- had we had the vaccine , or when we will get the vaccine , that 's something more effective -- but the drugs are very costly for the poor . not the drug in itself , but the treatment and the care which is needed around it . so , when we look at the pattern ,
and so many of the comments were exactly of this type , where people got money and , in fact , it made them antisocial . so i told you that it ruins people 's lives and that their friends bug them . it also , money often makes us feel very selfish and we do things only for ourselves . well maybe the reason that money does n't make us happy is that we 're always spending it on the wrong things , and in particular , that we 're always spending it on ourselves .
well , on the left is the imd , which is implantable medical device , and tonight in the tent you can see it -- they 've exhibited it . it 's about this big , the size of a pacemaker . it 's implanted with very conventional techniques . and the exd is an external device that you can have on your night table . it 'll wake you up and tell you to get your tail to the emergency room when the thing goes off because , if you do n't , you 're in deep doo-doo . and then , finally , a programmer that will set the level of the stimulation , which is the level which says you are having a heart attack .
this profound gift of generosity challenged and changed the very purpose of my life .
there are now studies clearly showing that the wars are terrible , that rapes are terrible , but this is not the driving force for the high levels in africa . so , is it poverty ? well if you look at the macro level , it seems more money , more hiv . but that 's very simplistic , so let 's go down and look at tanzania . i will split tanzania in five income groups , from the highest income to the lowest income , and here we go . the ones with the highest income , the better off -- i would n't say rich -- they have higher hiv . the difference goes from 11 percent down to four percent ,
so far . it seems to indicate that indeed we have found some pigments , and since we know for sure that no other artist has painted on that wall before vasari came in about 60 years later , well , those pigments are therefore firmly related to mural painting and most likely to leonardo . well , we are searching for the highest and highly praised work of art ever achieved by mankind . as a matter of fact , this is by far the most important commission that leonardo has ever had , and for doing this great masterpiece , he was named the number one artist influence at the time .
and i went to visit louise bourgeoise , who 's also still working , and i looked at her sink , which is really amazing , and left . and then i photograph and do a painting of a sofa on the street . and a woman who lives on our street , lolita . and then i go and have some tea . and then my aunt frances dies , and before she died , she tried to pay with sweet ' n low packets for her bagel . and i wonder what the point is and then i know , and i see that hy meyerowitz , rick meyerowitz 's father , a dry-cleaning supply salesman from the bronx ,
i said ,  i like the body language . i like the way she speaks . 
now you see this slight downturn at very advanced ages . and there is a slight downturn . but at no point does it return to the levels we see in early adulthood .
and before i tell you the ways that you can spend it that will make you happier , let 's think about the ways we usually spend it that do n't , in fact , make us happier .
and there are like 100 of these lambs in the pen , and suddenly this whole thing 's starting to feel like a german porno , and i 'm like ... melanie picks up the lamb , puts it on the post , opens it up . albert hands me the knife . i go in , tail comes off . i go in , i grab the scrotum , tip comes off . albert instructs ,  push it way up there .  i do .  push it further .  i do . the testicles emerge -- they look like thumbs , coming right at you -- and he says ,  bite 'em . just bite 'em off .  and i heard him , i heard all the words .
that 's not very much money . but right now we do n't have enough of that . we have a big gap in that money . we 're cutting corners , and every time we cut corners , more places get infected that should n't have , and it just slows us down . and that great buy costs us a little bit more . bg : well , hopefully we 'll get the word out , and the governments will keep their generosity up . so good luck . we 're all in this with you . about a year ago , i asked myself a question :  knowing what i know , why am i not a vegetarian ?  after all , i 'm one of the green guys :
so i went to the gas stations and i sold lots of them to the gas stations and had the gas stations sell them to their customers . that was cool because then i had retail outlets . and i think i was 14. then i paid my entire way through first year university at carlton by selling wine skins door to door . you know that you can hold a 40-ounce bottle of rum and two bottles of coke in a wineskin ? so what , right ? yeah , but you know what ? you stuff that down your shorts ,
superman was a foster child ; cinderella was a foster child ; lisbeth salander , the girl with the dragon tattoo , was fostered and institutionalized ; batman was orphaned ; lyra belacqua from philip pullman 's  northern lights  was fostered ; jane eyre , adopted ; roald dahl 's james from  james and the giant peach ;  matilda ; moses -- moses ! moses ! -- the boys in michael morpurgo 's  friend or foe ;  alem in benjamin zephaniah 's  refugee boy ;  luke skywalker -- luke skywalker ! -- oliver twist ; cassia in  the concubine of shanghai  by hong ying ; celie in alice walker 's  the color purple .  all of these great fictional characters , all of them
and , you know , terrapower , if things go well -- which is wishing for a lot -- could easily meet that . and there are , fortunately now , dozens of companies -- we need it to be hundreds -- who , likewise , if their science goes well , if the funding for their pilot plants goes well , that they can compete for this . and it 's best if multiple succeed , because then you could use a mix of these things . we certainly need one to succeed . ca : in terms of big-scale possible game changes , is this the biggest that you 're aware of out there ? bg : an energy breakthrough is the most important thing .
that somehow gets you thinking of technology and nature , and puts it all together in things that are -- that make this conference , i think , more important than any that 's taken place in this country in this decade . thank you . this is the exact moment that i started creating something called tinkering school . tinkering school is a place where kids can pick up sticks and hammers and other dangerous objects , and be trusted . trusted not to hurt themselves , and trusted not to hurt others . tinkering school does n't follow a set curriculum , and there are no tests .
are they positively correlated ? giving money makes you happy .
that really describes philippe starck for me , you know , this is like you know , this is like puppy love , you know , this is cool right ? toothbrush , cool . it really only gets serious when you look at something like this . ok ? this is one substitution that i believe all of us , in design management , are guilty of . and this idea that there is more to love ,
to make circuits work , and understand how those circuits work to now control behavior , and understand that both in individuals with autism as well as individuals who have normal cognition . but early diagnosis is a key for us . being able to make that diagnosis of someone who 's susceptible at a time in a window where we have the ability to transform , to be able to impact that growing , developing brain is critical . and so folks like ami klin have developed methods to be able to take infants , small babies , and be able to use biomarkers , in this case eye contact and eye tracking ,
the car seat 's moving all over the place .
when it comes to jobs , productivity , employment , child nutrition , maternal mortality , literacy and much , much more . because , as the world economic forum noted , smaller gender gaps are directly correlated with increased economic competitiveness . and not one country in all the world has eliminated its economic participation gap -- not one . so the great news is this is an incredible opportunity . we have so much room to grow . so you see , this is not about doing good , this is about global growth and global employment . it is about how we invest and it 's about how we see women . and women can no longer be
but , you know , in many parts of the world , governments are not interested in opening up or in serving the poor , and it is a real challenge for those who want to change the system .
you put it on a little device , the device filters out the blood cells , lets the serum go through , and you get a series of colors down in the bottom there . and the colors indicate  disease  or  normal .  but even that 's complicated , because to you , to me , colors might indicate  normal ,  but , after all , we 're all suffering from probably an excess of education . what you do about something which requires quantitative analysis ? and so the solution that we and many other people are thinking about there , and at this point there is a dramatic flourish , and out comes the universal solution to everything these days ,
thank you . bill gates : well bruce , where do you think the toughest places are going to be ? where would you say we need to be the smartest ? ba : the four places where you saw , that we 've never stopped -- northern nigeria , northern india , the southern corner of afghanistan and bordering areas of pakistan -- they 're going to be the toughest . but the interesting thing is , of those three , india 's looking real good , as you just saw in the data . and afghanistan , afghanistan , we think has probably stopped polio repeatedly . it keeps getting reinfected . so the tough ones : going to get the top of nigeria finished
aging brings some rather remarkable improvements -- increased knowledge , expertise -- and emotional aspects of life improve .
so they just have these bench seats , and they strap the car seat and the seatbelt onto it .
to expert scientists . now here , i want to share the stage with someone quite special . right ? she was one of the young people who was involved in this study , and she 's now one of the youngest published scientists in the world . right ? she will now , once she comes onto stage , will be the youngest person to ever speak at ted . right ? now , science and asking questions is about courage . now she is the personification of courage , because she 's going to stand up here and talk to you all . so amy , would you please come up ? so amy 's going to help me tell the story of what we call
helps us do our jobs better , and helps us feel better when we do them . now , an adult encountering a new situation -- when we encounter a new situation we have a tendency to want to categorize it just as quickly as we can , you know . and there ’ s a reason for that : we want to settle on an answer . life ’ s complicated ; we want to figure out what ’ s going on around us very quickly . i suspect , actually , that the evolutionary biologists probably have lots of reasons [ for ] why we want to categorize new things very , very quickly . one of them might be , you know ,
and there will be no mistakes . 
this birth woman , should have her eyes scratched out for not signing the adoption papers . she was an evil woman too selfish to sign , so i spent those 11 years kneeling and praying . i tried praying . i swear i tried praying .  god , can i have a bike for christmas ?  but i would always answer myself ,  yes , of course you can .  and then i was supposed to determine whether that was the voice of god or it was the voice of the devil . and it turns out i 've got the devil inside of me . who knew ? so anyway , two years sort of passed ,
and in fact , we ’ re going to do that exercise right now . you all have a piece of cardboard and a piece of paper . it ’ s actually got a bunch of circles on it . i need you to turn that piece of paper over ; you should find that it ’ s blank on the other side . and there should be a pencil . and i want you to pick somebody that ’ s seated next to you , and when i say , go , you ’ ve got 30 seconds to draw your neighbor , ok ? so , everybody ready ? ok. off you go . you ’ ve got 30 seconds , you ’ d better be fast . come on : those masterpieces ...
and i think that 's because they 've been optimized to pass , as we always expect people to do , to optimize relative to bright-line rules about how affected the car will be .
they have similar sound of eyes .
it was either you 're a meat eater or you 're a vegetarian , and i guess i just was n't quite ready . imagine your last hamburger . so my common sense , my good intentions , were in conflict with my taste buds . and i 'd commit to doing it later , and not surprisingly , later never came . sound familiar ? so i wondered , might there be a third solution ? and i thought about it , and i came up with one . i 've been doing it for the last year , and it 's great . it 's called weekday veg . the name says it all : nothing with a face monday through friday . on the weekend , your choice .
we 're going to the dry season now . it nearly goes away in the dry season , because there 's no place for the mosquitoes to breed . and then , of course , the next year it comes roaring back . by doing these kinds of simulations , we want to eradicate or control malaria thousands of times in software before we actually have to do it in real life ; to be able to simulate both the economic trade-offs -- how many bed nets versus how much spraying ? -- or the social trade-offs -- what happens if unrest breaks out ? we also try to study our foe . this is a high-speed camera view
now it 's really too simplistic to say that older people are  happy . 
one is to deliver extrinsic motivation , that education has a payoff . our education systems all work on the principle that there is a payoff , but you have to wait quite a long time . that 's too long if you 're poor .
so ecstasy is essentially a stepping into an alternative reality . and it 's interesting , if you think about it , how , when we think about the civilizations that we look up to as having been pinnacles of human achievement -- whether it 's china , greece , the hindu civilization , or the mayas , or egyptians -- what we know about them is really about their ecstasies , not about their everyday life .
when that happened , he started calling all the neighborhood children , like , children would come and see what 's happening over here . and by the evening of that day , 70 children were all browsing . so eight minutes and an embedded computer seemed to be all that we needed there . so we thought that this is what was happening : that children in groups can self-instruct themselves to use a computer and the internet . but under what circumstances ? at this time there was a -- the main question was about english . people said , you know , you really ought to have this in indian languages . so i said , have what , shall i translate the internet
in the winning life edited scheme in a render here , we combine a moving wall with transformer furniture to get a lot out of the space .
we need to educate . we need to educate the kids . we need to educate the staff . i had 90 employees . two were supposed to be cooks -- none could . and , you know , i 'm not that better off now . but we really have to educate . we have to get academic institutions to start thinking about ways to teach people how to cook again , because , of course , they do n't -- because we 've had this processed food in schools and institutions for so long . we need 40-minute lunches -- most schools have 20-minute lunches -- and lunches that are time-appropriate .
this is another african girl 's wish . i failed to fulfill the wish of those two girls . i failed to do this . these were the things that were going through the head of this other young woman -- i failed , i failed , i failed . so i will do this . women came out , protested a brutal dictator , fearlessly spoke . not only did the wish of a piece of doughnut come true , the wish of peace came true . this young woman wished also to go to school . she went to school . this young woman wished for other things to happen , it happened for her .
show the kids what bad customers or bad employees look like . show them the grumpy employees . when you see grumpy customer service , point that out to them . say ,  by the way , that guy 's a crappy employee .  and say ,  these ones are good ones .  if you go into a restaurant and you have bad customer service , show them what bad customer service looks like . we have all these lessons in front of us , but we do n't take those opportunities ; we teach kids to go get a tutor . imagine if you actually took all the kids ' junk that 's in the house right now ,
our brains and our nerve cells are actually doing this right now . they 're not just static . they 're moving around making new connections , and that 's what happens when we learn . as you go farther down this scale here , that 's a micron , or a micrometer , and we go all the way down to here to a nanometer and an angstrom . now , an angstrom is the size of the diameter of a hydrogen atom . that 's how small that is . and microscopes that we have today can actually see individual atoms . so these are some pictures of individual atoms . each bump here is an individual atom .
in order to have the car seat approved , you need to pass certain federal standards , all of which involve slamming your car into a direct frontal crash . but when you look at other types of crashes , like rear-impact crashes , indeed , the car seats do n't perform as well .
rests critically on who you think you 're looking at . you probably think the picture on the left is male , the one on the right is female . if that belief turns out to be mistaken , it will make a difference . it will make a difference if they turn out to be much younger or much older than you think they are . it will make a difference if you were to discover that the person you 're looking at with lust is actually a disguised version of your son or daughter , your mother or father . knowing somebody 's your kin typically kills the libido .
they 're good at tapping into that local entrepreneurial talent . coke 's been in africa since 1928 , but most of the time they could n't reach the distant markets , because they had a system that was a lot like in the developed world , which was a large truck rolling down the street . and in africa , the remote places , it 's hard to find a good road . but coke noticed something -- they noticed that local people were taking the product , buying it in bulk and then reselling it in these hard-to-reach places . and so they took a bit of time to learn about that . and they decided in 1990
of this sort of spent uranium , and then the process starts at the top and kind of works down ? bg : that 's right . today , you 're always refueling the reactor , so you have lots of people and lots of controls that can go wrong : that thing where you 're opening it up and moving things in and out , that 's not good . so , if you have very cheap fuel that you can put 60 years in -- just think of it as a log -- put it down and not have those same complexities . and it just sits there and burns for the 60 years , and then it 's done .
there 's this focus that , once it becomes intense , leads to a sense of ecstasy , a sense of clarity : you know exactly what you want to do from one moment to the other ; you get immediate feedback .
as coca-cola . thank you . well , i was born with a rare visual condition called achromatopsia , which is total color blindness , so i 've never seen color , and i do n't know what color looks like ,
there 's sustaining innovation , which will sustain an existing institution or an organization , and disruptive innovation that will break it apart , create some different way of doing it .
educational technology should be introduced into remote areas first , and other areas later . values are acquired ; doctrine and dogma are imposed -- the two opposing mechanisms . and learning is most likely a self-organizing system . if you put all the four together , then it gives -- according to me -- it gives us a goal , a vision , for educational technology . an educational technology and pedagogy that is digital , automatic , fault-tolerant , minimally invasive , connected and self-organized . as educationists , we have never asked for technology ; we keep borrowing it . powerpoint is supposed to be considered a great educational technology , but it was not meant for education , it was meant for making boardroom presentations .
by david doubilet . and this is a comet , captured by dr. euan mason . and finally , the bow of the titanic , without movie stars , photographed by emory kristof . photography carries a power that holds up under the relentless swirl of today 's saturated , media world , because photographs emulate the way that our mind freezes a significant moment . here 's an example . four years ago , i was at the beach with my son , and he was learning how to swim in this relatively soft surf of the delaware beaches . but i turned away for a moment , and he got caught into a riptide and started to be pulled out towards the jetty .
very often at school , i 'd be taking pictures , and she would whisper into her girlfriends ' ears , and then look at me and say ,  stop .  and i would stand at attention , and all the girls would crack up , and it was sort of a little joke . the end of the week came and my translator came back , because i 'd asked her to come back , so i could formally thank the grandmother and hyun-sook . and in the course of the grandmother talking to the translator , the grandmother started crying . and i said to my translator ,  what 's going on , why is she crying ? 
bacteria are the oldest living organisms on the earth . they 've been here for billions of years , and what they are are single-celled microscopic organisms . so they are one cell and they have this special property that they only have one piece of dna . they have very few genes , and genetic information to encode all of the traits that they carry out . and the way bacteria make a living is that they consume nutrients from the environment , they grow to twice their size , they cut themselves down in the middle , and one cell becomes two , and so on and so on .
they can split that colony in two . and then the one half that does n't have a queen , they can buy a queen . it comes in the mail ; it can come from australia or hawaii or florida , and you can introduce that queen . and in fact , america was the first country that ever did mail-delivery queens and in fact , it 's part of the postal code that you have to deliver queens by mail in order to make sure that we have enough bees in this country . if you do n't just want a queen , you can buy , actually , a three-pound package of bees , which comes in the mail , and of course ,
they were exploring following what was interesting to them . they went from designing splints for wounded soldiers coming out of world war ii and the korean war , i think , and from this experiment they moved on to chairs . through constant experimentation with materials , they developed a wide range of iconic solutions that we know today , eventually resulting in , of course , the legendary lounge chair . now , if the eameses had stopped with that first great solution , then we wouldn ’ t be the beneficiaries of so many wonderful designs today . and of course , they used experimentation in all aspects of their work , from films to buildings , from games to graphics .
a very silly , trivial thing to do , but think of the difference on a team that did n't do that at all , that got 15 euro , put it in their pocket , maybe bought themselves a coffee , or teams that had this prosocial experience where they all bonded together to buy something and do a group activity . what we see is that , in fact , the teams that are prosocial sell more stuff than the teams that only got money for themselves . and one way to think about it is for every 15 euro you give people for themselves , they put it in their pocket , they do n't do anything different than they did before .
and all wild nature is three percent . we have won . the next generation does n't even have to worry about this game -- it is over . and the biggest problem came in the last 25 years : it went from 25 percent up to that 97 percent . and this really is a sobering picture upon realizing that we , humans , are in charge of life on earth ; we 're like the capricious gods of old greek myths , kind of playing with life -- and not a great deal of wisdom injected into it . now , the third curve is information technology . this is moore 's law plotted here , which relates to density
now nobody believed him . and he said ,  i 'll prove it . bring me a canvas and some paint , and i will paint a vermeer much better than i sold that disgusting nazi . i also need alcohol and morphine , because it 's the only way i can work .  so they brought him in . he painted a beautiful vermeer . and then the charges of treason were dropped . he had a lesser charge of forgery , got a year sentence and died a hero to the dutch people . there 's a lot more to be said about van meegeren , but i want to turn now to goering ,
around these four are usually a group of about 16 children , who are also advising , usually wrongly , about everything that 's going on on the computer . and all of them also will clear a test given on that subject . so they are learning as much by watching as they learn by doing . it seems counter-intuitive to adult learning , but remember , eight-year-olds live in a society where most of the time they are told , do n't do this , you know , do n't touch the whiskey bottle . so what does the eight-year-old do ? he observes very carefully how a whiskey bottle should be touched . and if you tested him ,
at brooks air base , with anthrax . and they had also been treated with a drug that we made that would attack anthrax in particular , and direct your immune system to it . you 'll notice they all lived , the ones on the top line -- that 's a 100 percent survival rate . and they actually lived another 14 days , or 28 when we finally killed them , and took them apart and figured out what went wrong . why did they not die ? and they did n't die because they did n't have anthrax anymore . so we did it . okay ? mission accomplished ! alisa volkman : so this is where our story begins --
in the research phase of the project at interval , we partnered with a company called cheskin research , and these people -- davis masten and christopher ireland -- changed my mind entirely about what market research was and what it could be . they taught me how to look and see , and they did not do the incredibly stupid thing of saying to a child ,  of all these things we already make you , which do you like best ?  -- which gives you zero answers that are usable .
distributes itself . and what you see , at the lower right-hand side there , is a sample in which a single sample of blood has been put on the top , and it has gone through and distributed itself into these 16 holes on the bottom , in a piece of paper -- basically it looks like a chip , two pieces of paper thick . and in this particular case we were just interested in the replicability of that . but that is , in principle , the way you solve the  fever of unexplained origin  problem , because each one of those spots then becomes a test for a particular set of markers
and about the technologies that exist today , what would we do ? we wanted something that was really affordable . the fuel cell looked great : one-tenth as many moving parts and a fuel-cell propulsion system as an internal combustion engine -- and it emits just water . and we wanted to take advantage of moore 's law with electronic controls and software , and we absolutely wanted our car to be connected . so we embarked upon the reinvention around an electrochemical engine , the fuel cell , hydrogen as the energy carrier . first was autonomy . autonomy really set the vision for where we wanted to head . we embodied all of the key components of a fuel cell propulsion system .
what was interesting about the article was people started commenting on the article , readers of the thing .
he was livid , and i still remember how we cried when that cart with our half-eaten sweets was pulled away from us .
[ kid ...  and you thought you could do anything ?  ] [ you still can . ] [ because a lot of what we consider impossible ... ] [ ... is easy to overcome ] [ because in case you have n't noticed , we live in a place where ] [ one individual can make a difference ] [ want proof ? ] [ just look at the people who built our country ; ] [ our parents , grandparents , our aunts , uncles ... ] [ they were immigrants , newcomers ready to make their mark ] [ maybe they came with very little ] [ or perhaps they did n't own anything except for ... ] [ ... a single brilliant idea ] [ these people were thinkers , doers ... ]
some of the entrepreneurial traits that you 've got to nurture in kids : attainment , tenacity , leadership , introspection , interdependence , values .
he knew that friendship is a short cut to play . and he knew that it gives us a sense of trust , and it allows us then to take the kind of creative risks that we need to take as designers . and so , that decision to work with his friends -- now he has 550 of them -- was what got ideo started . and our studios , like , i think , many creative workplaces today , are designed to help people feel relaxed : familiar with their surroundings , comfortable with the people that they ’ re working with . it takes more than decor , but i think we ’ ve all seen that
and television is still in black and white .
to understanding the rules for social interactions , and are actually quite quick to point out when they ’ re broken . so when , as adults , we role-play , then we have a huge set of these scripts already internalized . we ’ ve gone through lots of experiences in life , and they provide a strong intuition as to whether an interaction is going to work . so we ’ re very good , when acting out a solution , at spotting whether something lacks authenticity . so role-play is actually , i think , quite valuable when it comes to thinking about experiences . another way for us , as designers , to explore role-play is to put ourselves through an experience which we ’ re designing for ,
it felt like yoda -- it is your destiny to go to work for who and to help eradicate smallpox , at a time when there was no smallpox program . it should make you optimistic that smallpox no longer exists because it was the worst disease in history . in the last century -- that 's the one that was seven years ago -- half a billion people died from smallpox : more than all the wars in history , more than any other infectious disease in the history of the world . in the summer of love , in 1967 , two million people , children , died of smallpox .
it 's the finest form of delayed adolescence ever invented .  sorry , i have to go on an assignment , i 'll be back  -- and then you never come back . so , i asked the translator why she thought she was dying . can i get her to a hospital ? could i pay to get her a doctor ? and she refused any help at all . and so , when i got outside , i actually gave the translator some money and said ,  please go back and see if you can do something .  and i gave the grandmother my business card . and i said ,  if you 're serious , i will try to find a family for her . 
we created a space called the young girls transformative project . we go into rural communities and all we do , like has been done in this room , is create the space .
i mean , here we 're blowing wings off but the wing motor keeps all the way down . so , that 's what i have . thanks very much . so , a funny thing happened on my way to becoming a brilliant , world-class neuropsychologist : i had a baby . and that 's not to say i ever went on to become a brilliant , world-class neuropsychologist . sorry , ted . but i did go on to be a reasonably astute , arguably world-class worrier . one of my girlfriends in graduate school , marie , said ,  kim , i figured it out . it 's not that you 're more neurotic than everyone else ; it 's just that you 're more honest
but he knew about the cheap and simple one . and he thought about it , and the expensive one did n't seem that great to him . so he thought ,  i do n't know anything about science , but i do know something about data , so maybe i should go and look at the data and see whether this expensive and complicated treatment actually works any better than the cheap and simple one .  and lo and behold , when he went through the data , he found that it did n't look like the expensive , complicated solution was any better than the cheap one , at least for the children who were two and older --
for the homeless and mentally ill at shelters and clinics on skid row , performing for combat veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder , and for the incarcerated and those labeled as criminally insane . after one of our events at the patton state hospital in san bernardino , a woman walked up to us and she had tears streaming down her face , and she had a palsy , she was shaking , and she had this gorgeous smile , and she said that she had never heard classical music before , she did n't think she was going to like it , she had never heard a violin before , but that hearing this music was like hearing the sunshine ,
you wo n't be alone . thank you .
i 'm my father 's daughter . i read , i write , i think about global health a lot .
who 's only done eight years of primary schooling -- never been to school , never been to college . he knows more about solar than anyone i know anywhere in the world guaranteed . food , if you come to the barefoot college , is solar cooked . but the people who fabricated that solar cooker are women , illiterate women , who actually fabricate the most sophisticated solar cooker . it 's a parabolic scheffler solar cooker . unfortunately , they 're almost half german , they 're so precise . you 'll never find indian women so precise . absolutely to the last inch , they can make that cooker . and we have 60 meals twice a day
about how we can create a different relationship between our work and the world , whether it 's for business , or , as i 'm going to show , on some civic-type projects . because i think everybody agrees that as designers we bring value to business , value to the users also , but i think it 's the values that we put into these projects that ultimately create the greater value . and the values we bring can be about environmental issues , about sustainability , about lower power consumption . you know , they can be about function and beauty ; they can be about business strategy .
when you go to places like this what you see is that education in these settings works by pull , not push . most of our education system is push .
so this thing right here is freaking me out . it 's probably why i 'm a little bit panicked right now -- other than all the caffeine that i 've had and the sugar -- but this is really creepy for an entrepreneur . attention deficit disorder , bipolar disorder . do you know that bipolar disorder is nicknamed the ceo disease ? ted turner 's got it . steve jobs has it . all three of the founders of netscape had it .
cars are an avatar . cars are an expansion of yourself : they take your thoughts , your ideas , your emotions , and they multiply it -- your anger , whatever . it 's an avatar . it 's a super-waldo that you happen to be inside of , and if you feel sexy , the car is sexy . and if you 're full of road rage , you 've got a  chevy : like a rock ,  right ? cars are a sculpture -- did you know this ? that every car you see out there is sculpted by hand . many people think ,  well , it 's computers ,
for example , perceiving infrared is good because you can actually detect if there 's movement detectors in a room . i can hear if someone points at me with a remote control . and the good thing about perceiving ultraviolet is that you can hear if it 's a good day or a bad day to sunbathe , because ultraviolet is a dangerous color , a color that can actually kill us , so i think we should all have this wish to perceive things that we can not perceive . that 's why , two years ago , i created the cyborg foundation , which is a foundation that tries to help people
 no , we do n't want two 11-year-olds five floors away .  so , his son said ,  dad , i have a sleeping bag , i 'll sleep on the floor .  and i said ,  yeah , i have one too .  so , tim and i slept on the floor , natasha got one bed , gene got the other -- kids pass out , it 's been very exciting for three days . we 're lying in bed , and gene and i are talking about how cool we are . we said ,  that was so great , we saved this little girl 's life .  we were just like , you know , ah , just full of ourselves . and we fall asleep -- and i 've been in this room , you know ,
and what you find is that the car seats and the lap-and-shoulder belts , when it comes to saving lives , fatalities look exactly identical .
i was with my brother and a mate having a few beers , and i was watching the world go by , had a few more beers , and the conversation turned to '70s fashion — — and how everything manages to come back into style .
and i 'll give you some examples of what i mean .
depending on which of these metrics you like . i know you think of yourself as human beings , but i think of you as 90 or 99 percent bacterial . these bacteria are not passive riders , these are incredibly important , they keep us alive . they cover us in an invisible body armor that keeps environmental insults out so that we stay healthy . they digest our food , they make our vitamins , they actually educate your immune system to keep bad microbes out . so they do all these amazing things that help us and are vital for keeping us alive ,
thank you . companies are losing control . what happens on wall street no longer stays on wall street . what happens in vegas ends up on youtube . reputations are volatile . loyalties are fickle . management teams seem increasingly disconnected from their staff . a recent survey said that 27 percent of bosses believe their employees are inspired by their firm . however , in the same survey , only four percent of employees agreed . companies are losing control of their customers and their employees . but are they really ? i 'm a marketer , and as a marketer , i know that i 've never really been in control . your brand is what other people say about you
so , the premise in the studio was , there are no boundaries , there is no fear . and i -- and my full-time job , i landed the best job on earth , was to daydream , and to actually come up with absurd ideas that -- fortunately , there were enough people there , and it was a team , it was a collective , it was not just me coming up with crazy ideas . but the point was that i was there as myself , as a dreamer . and so some of the things -- i mean , it was a long history of m & amp ; co , and clearly we also needed to make some money ,
they make chemical words , they recognize those words , and they turn on group behaviors that are only successful when all of the cells participate in unison . we have a fancy name for this : we call it quorum sensing . they vote with these chemical votes , the vote gets counted , and then everybody responds to the vote . what 's important for today 's talk is that we know that there are hundreds of behaviors that bacteria carry out in these collective fashions . but the one that 's probably the most important to you is virulence . it 's not like a couple bacteria get in you and they start secreting some toxins --
and instead of talking about how it had made them realize that money does n't lead to happiness , everyone instantly started saying ,  you know what i would do if i won the lottery ... ?  and fantasizing about what they 'd do .
he got dementia anyway . if the monster wants you , the monster 's gon na get you . especially if you 're me , 'cause alzheimer 's tends to run in families . so i 'm preparing to get alzheimer 's disease . based on what i 've learned from taking care of my father , and researching what it 's like to live with dementia , i 'm focusing on three things in my preparation : i 'm changing what i do for fun , i 'm working to build my physical strength , and -- this is the hard one -- i 'm trying to become a better person .
great personal assistants and weed out the dodgy rabbits . now , there 's over 4,000 rabbits across the united states and 5,000 more on the waiting list . now the tasks being posted are things that you might expect , like help with household chores or doing some supermarket runs . i actually learned the other day that 12 and a half thousand loads of laundry have been cleaned and folded through taskrabbit . but i love that the number one task posted , over a hundred times a day , is something that many of us have felt the pain of doing : yes , assembling ikea furniture .
just nine months after 7/7 , a londoner wrote ,  for the first time since the london bombings , my daughter called up with that sparkle back in her voice . she had gathered with others to watch 'the sultan 's elephant , ' and , you know , it just made all the difference .  lyn gardner in the guardian has written that a great festival can show us a map of the world , a map of the city and a map of ourselves , but there is no one fixed festival model . i think what 's so brilliant about the festivals , the new festivals , is that they are really fully capturing
so in 2007 , we brought the campaign across here , and it was , it set the stage for the campaign .
and cars are thought so much as a product that it 's a little bit difficult to get into the aesthetic side under the same sort of terminology that one would discuss art . and so cars , as art , brings it into an emotional plane -- if you accept that -- that you have to deal with on the same level you would with art with a capital a. now at this point you 're going to see a picture of michelangelo . this is completely different than automobiles . automobiles are self-moving things , right ? elevators are automobiles . and they 're not very emotional ; they solve a purpose ;
with a set of core values that fundamentally love and respect people . the basic idea of humanism is the improvable quality of life ; that we can do good things , that there are things worth doing because they 're good things to do , and that clear-eyed empiricism can help us figure out how to do them . so , contrary to popular belief , there is not a conflict of interest between empiricism and values .
and so , some of the things that they figured out , some of these individuals figured out ; in one case , a new commercial building and designs for houses that were accepted by clients ; a design of a solar space probe experiment ; a redesign of the linear electron accelerator ; an engineering improvement to a magnetic tape recorder -- you can tell this is a while ago ; the completion of a line of furniture ; and even a new conceptual model of the photon . so it was a pretty successful evening . in fact , maybe this experiment was the reason that silicon valley got off to its great start with innovation .
now to the funds we raise , and research , and how we 're redefining research .
and as i went village to village , i remember one day , when i was famished and exhausted , and i was almost collapsing in a scorching heat under a tree , and just at that time , one of the poorest men in that village invited me into his hut and graciously fed me .
his body disappears , his identity disappears from his consciousness , because he does n't have enough attention , like none of us do , to really do well something that requires a lot of concentration , and at the same time to feel that he exists .
takes on a new dimension , a new meaning . we have a shared center ; we have a shared focus -- that car stays at the middle of all our relationships . and it 's my job , in the competitive process , to narrow this down . i heard today about joseph 's death genes that have to go in and kill cell reproduction . you know , that 's what i have to do sometimes . we start out with 10 cars ; we narrow it down to five cars , down to three cars , down to two cars , down to one car ,
the arabic texts containing this mathematical wisdom finally made their way to europe -- which is to say spain -- in the 11th and 12th centuries .
and we thought , i wonder what would happen if we made people spend more of their money on other people .
we fund prostate cancer foundations now in 13 countries .
i was allowed to use even traditional techniques . so clay floor for example , the young men come and stand like that , beating , hours for hours , and then their mothers came , and they are beating in this position , for hours , giving water and beating . and then the polishers come . they start polishing it with a stone for hours . and then you have this result , very fine , like a baby bottom . it 's not photoshopped . this is the school , built with the community . the walls are totally made out of compressed clay blocks from gando . the roof structure is made with cheap steel bars
or the wrong one ?  he said ,  consider the face of the poorest , most vulnerable human being that you ever chanced upon , and ask yourself if the act that you contemplate will be of benefit to that person . and if it will be , it 's the right thing to do , and if not , rethink it .  for those of us in this room , it 's not just the poorest and the most vulnerable individual , it 's the community , it 's the culture , it 's the world itself . and the trends for those who are at the periphery of our society , who are the poorest and the most vulnerable ,
to put it this way , nature knows no other circumstance in which functionally equivalent traits coexist . one of them always drives the other extinct . and we see this in the inexorable march towards standardization . there are lots and lots of ways of measuring things -- weighing them and measuring their length -- but the metric system is winning . there are lots and lots of ways of measuring time , but a really bizarre base 60 system known as hours and minutes and seconds is nearly universal around the world . there are many , many ways of imprinting cds or dvds , but those are all being standardized as well .
we should have done what was in the afghan constitution from the very beginning , which is to get direct local elections going at a district level and elect people 's provincial governors . but for any of these things to work , the honesty in language , the local democracy , it 's not just a question of what politicians do . it 's a question of what the citizens do . for politicians to be honest , the public needs to allow them to be honest , and the media , which mediates between the politicians and the public , needs to allow those politicians to be honest . if local democracy is to flourish , it is about the active
for a couple of months now . and they always overheat the hotels in korea terribly , so during the day i always left the window open . and then , at night , about midnight , they turn the heat off in the hotel . so at about 1 a.m. , the whole room would be like 20 below zero , and i 'd get up . i 'd been doing this every night i 'd been there . so , sure enough , it 's one o'clock , room 's freezing , i go to close the window , and i hear people shouting outside , and i thought ,  oh , the bars must have just gotten out .  and i do n't speak korean , but i 'm hearing these voices ,
and i think the reality is that love is a process , and i think the problem with thinking of love as something that 's binary is that it causes us to be unduly concerned that love is fraudulent , or inadequate , or what have you . and i think i 'm speaking obviously here to the father 's experience . but i think a lot of men do go through this sense in the early months , maybe their first year , that their emotional response is inadequate in some fashion . av : well , i 'm glad rufus is bringing this up , because you can notice where he dips in the first years
we 're not trying to find vanity and beauty . we 're trying to find the beauty in the truth . however , engineers tend to look at things a little bit more newtonian , instead of this quantum approach . we 're dealing with irrationalisms , and we 're dealing with paradoxes that we admit exist , and the engineers tend to look things a little bit more like two and two is four , and if you get 4.0 it 's better , and 4.000 is even better . and that sometimes leads to bit of a divergence in why we 're doing what we 're doing .
i bought her used clothes and bought her her first doll . the night before i left , she came to the room and said ,  leymah , do n't leave me here .
because it means that we have to , as a society , think about what we value . and if it 's just papers and phys . rev . letters , we 've got a problem . here is another example of something which is -- this is a little spectrophotometer . it measures the absorption of light in a sample the neat thing about this is , you have light source that flickers on and off at about 1,000 hertz , another light source that detects that light at 1,000 hertz , and so you can run this system in broad daylight . it performs about equivalently to a system that 's in the order of
this is the uncle signing the adoption papers . now , we went out to dinner that night to celebrate . the uncle went back to his family , and natasha and tim and gene and i went out to dinner . and gene was showing natasha how to use a knife and fork , and then natasha was returning the utensil lessons . we went back to our hotel room , and gene was showing natasha also where atlanta was . this is the third night we were in korea . the first night we 'd gotten a room for the kids right next to us . now , i 'd been staying in this room for about three months --
and all around the world now you see more and more schools reinventing themselves . they 're recognizably schools , but they look different .
and he says at the end that he did n't  achieve  her up till now .
to make sure that our materials work properly , then you 'll only be up in the hundreds of millions . the tough thing is building the pilot reactor ; finding the several billion , finding the regulator , the location that will actually build the first one of these . once you get the first one built , if it works as advertised , then it 's just clear as day , because the economics , the energy density , are so different than nuclear as we know it . ca : and so , to understand it right , this involves building deep into the ground almost like a vertical kind of column of nuclear fuel ,
and the so-called sala grande , which was built in 1494 , and to find out the original doors , windows , and in order to do that , we first created a 3d model , and then , with thermography , we went on to discover hidden windows . these are the original windows of the hall of the sala grande . we also found out about the height of the ceiling , and we managed to reconstruct , therefore , all the layout of this original hall the way it was before there came vasari , and restructured the whole thing , including a staircase that was very important in order to precisely place  the battle of anghiari 
now , true science education i think should be about giving people a voice and enabling to express that voice , so i 've asked amy to be the last voice in this short story . so , amy ? ao : this project was really exciting for me , because it brought the process of discovery to life , and it showed me that anyone , and i mean anyone , has the potential to discover something new , and that a small question can lead into a big discovery . changing the way a person thinks about something can be easy or hard . it all depends on the way the person feels about change .
this guy 's 60 years old . so it turned into a dual celebration , because natasha was the first person from this village ever to go to the united states . so , these are the greenhouse tents . this is the elders teaching gene their dances . we drank a lot of rice wine . we were both so drunk , i could n't believe it . this is the last picture before gene and tim headed back . the adoption people told us it was going to take a year for the adoption to go through . like , what could you do for a year ? so i found out the name of every official on both the korean and american side ,
because he has to half-crawl , because it 's faster to move that way to keep up with his friends , keep up with his brothers and sisters , than to get up on his crutches and walk . but umar is a fantastic student . he 's an incredible kid . as you probably ca n't see the detail here , but this is his report card , and you 'll see , he 's got perfect scores . he got 100 percent in all the important things , like nursery rhymes , for example there . but you know i 'd love to be able to tell you that umar is a typical kid with polio these days ,
and we 'll watch as global warming makes them melt . more water comes down , the deforested areas , here in the tarai , will be unable to absorb the effluent , because trees are like straws that suck up the extra seasonal water . now we 're looking down south , through the kali gandaki . many of you , i think , have probably trekked here . and we 're going to cruise down and take a look at bangladesh and see what the impact will be of twin increases in water coming from the north , and in the seas rising from the south . looking at the five major rivers that feed bangladesh .
we 're all in this together . this is not something that happens far away to people that we do n't know . global warming is something that happens to all of us , all at once . as are these newly emerging communicable diseases , names that you had n't heard 20 years ago : ebola , lhasa fever , monkey pox . with the erosion of the green belt separating animals from humans , we live in each other 's viral environment . do you remember , 20 years ago , no one had ever heard of west nile fever ? and then we watched , as one case arrived on the east coast of the united states
and they 're out there spending all this money , and they 're learning , and they 're doing all this stuff . i went fucking ballistic , right ? i went nuts . you can probably remember tiburon , it used to look like this . after four hours of this , i stood up , and i took this team apart . i screamed at them , i yelled at them ,  what the hell are you doing ? you 're letting me down , you 're my designers ,
walk the talk .
about ten times smaller than that , is a cell . so you could fit 10 human cells across the diameter of a human hair . so when we would look at cells , this is how i really got involved in biology and science is by looking at living cells in the microscope . when i first saw living cells in a microscope , i was absolutely enthralled and amazed at what they looked like . so if you look at the cell like that from the immune system , they 're actually moving all over the place . this cell is looking for foreign objects , bacteria , things that it can find .
i know it 's about prostate cancer , but this is for breast cancer .  and i said ,  okay , that 's interesting .  and he goes ,  last year , my mom passed away from breast cancer in sri lanka , because we could n't afford proper treatment for her ,  and he said ,  this mustache is my tribute to my mom .  and we sort of all choked up in the back of the taxi , and i did n't tell him who i was , because i did n't think it was appropriate , and i just shook his hand and i said ,  thank you so much .
is because every new advancement of technology increases the efficiency and the social glue of trust to make sharing easier and easier . now , i 've looked at thousands of these marketplaces , and trust and efficiency are always the critical ingredients . let me give you an example . meet 46-year-old chris mok , who has , i bet , the best job title here of superrabbit . now , four years ago , chris lost his job , unfortunately , as an art buyer at macy 's , and like so many people , he struggled to find a new one during the recession . and then he happened to stumble across a post about taskrabbit .
worked with , was friends with , family members that i had known a long time , had never shared with me their own stories . and i just remember feeling all these stories came out of the woodwork , and i felt like i happened upon this secret society of women that i now was a part of , which was reassuring and also really concerning . and i think , miscarriage is an invisible loss . there 's not really a lot of community support around it . there 's really no ceremony , rituals , or rites . and i think , with a death , you have a funeral , you celebrate the life , and there 's a lot of community support ,
it 's recognizably 19th century in its roots . and of course it 's a huge achievement . and of course it will bring great things . it will bring skills and learning and reading . but it will also lay waste to imagination . it will lay waste to appetite . it will lay waste to social confidence .
from bad feelings -- is the only way i can put it . so this is called  tembererana .  it 's based on an argentinian rhythm called  carnivalito .  ♫ a dream within a dream , ♫ ♫ a world within a world , ♫ ♫ the sound of a primal scream ♫ ♫ travels out across the land . ♫ ♫ images flickering , ♫ ♫ the sound of the war machine , ♫ ♫ a procession of limousines ♫ ♫ travels slowly across the land . ♫ ♫ another child could use a hand . ♫ ♫ tembererana , hey , tembererana ... ♫ ♫ annihilation moves . ♫ ♫ the earth is an open tomb . ♫
above , it 's just kind of , i bought a gift for my mother .
and i tried to correlate it with things like infrastructure , or with the availability of electricity , and things like that . to my surprise , it did not correlate . it did not correlate with the size of classrooms . it did not correlate with the quality of the infrastructure . it did not correlate with the poverty levels . it did not correlate . but what happened was that when i administered a questionnaire to each of these schools , with one single question for the teachers -- which was ,  would you like to move to an urban , metropolitan area ?  -- 69 percent of them said yes . and as you can see from that ,
and the new experience i was looking for is giving the choice for the user to go from a warm , sort of glowing kind of mood light , all the way to a bright work light . so , the light bulb actually does that . it allows the person to switch , and to mix these two colorations . and it 's done in a very simple way : one just touches the base of the light , and on one side , you can mix the brightness , and on the other , the coloration of the light . so , all of these projects have a humanistic sense to them , and i think as designers we need to really think
in the initial iteration of our organization , we were a disaster response organization that was using veteran service . we had a lot of success , and we really felt like we were changing the disaster response paradigm . but after clay , we shifted that focus , and suddenly , now moving forward , we see ourselves as a veteran service organization that 's using disaster response . because we think that we can give that purpose and that community and that self-worth back to the veteran . and tornadoes in tuscaloosa and joplin , and then later hurricane irene , gave us an opportunity to look at that . now i want you to imagine for a second an 18-year-old boy
and so what happens is every morning when the sun comes up the squid goes back to sleep , it buries itself in the sand , and it 's got a pump that 's attached to its circadian rhythm , and when the sun comes up it pumps out like 95 percent of the bacteria . now the bacteria are dilute , that little hormone molecule is gone , so they 're not making light -- but of course the squid does n't care . it 's asleep in the sand . and as the day goes by the bacteria double , they release the molecule , and then light comes on at night , exactly when the squid wants it .
our ribbon is a hairy ribbon . our ambassadors are the mo bros and the mo sistas , and i think that 's been fundamental to our success . we hand across our brand and our campaign to those people .
and the other thing we saw is the amount of money does n't matter that much . so people thought that 20 dollars would be way better than five dollars . in fact , it does n't matter how much money you spent . what really matters is that you spent it on somebody else rather than on yourself .
because people used to sew and they needed a pin cushion . but what i realized was that you had to have options . so i actually spray painted a whole bunch of them brown . and then when i went to the door , it was n't ,  do you want to buy one ?  it was ,  which color would you like ?  like i 'm 10 years old ; you 're not going to say no to me , especially if you have two options -- you have the brown one or the clear one . so i learned that lesson at a young age . i learned that manual labor really sucks .
these became the two bookends of his life , and the journey he traveled in between mirrored the changing development landscape .
create these completely immersive experiences that put the audience at the center of the action , but the german performance company rimini protokoll takes this all to a whole new level . in a series of shows that includes  100 percent vancouver ,   100 percent berlin ,  rimini protokoll makes shows that actually reflect society . rimini protokoll chooses 100 people that represent that city at that moment in terms of race and gender and class , through a careful process that begins three months before , and then those 100 people share stories about themselves and their lives , and the whole thing becomes a snapshot of that city at that moment .
tell a woman .
first , even if carbon dioxide emissions stopped today , global warming would continue . and even with global warming -- if you can see these blue lines , the dotted line shows that even if emissions of greenhouse gasses stopped today , the next decades will see rising sea levels . a minimum of 20 to 30 inches of increase in sea levels is the best case that we can hope for , and it could be 10 times that . what will that do to bangladesh ? let 's take a look . so here 's bangladesh . 70 percent of bangladesh is at less than five feet above sea level . let 's go up and take a look at the himalayas .
went back into italian google . fifteen minutes later -- next question : where is calcutta ? this one , they took only 10 minutes . i tried a really hard one then . who was pythagoras , and what did he do ? there was silence for a while , then they said ,  you 've spelled it wrong . it 's pitagora .  and then , in 20 minutes , the right-angled triangles began to appear on the screens . this sent shivers up my spine . these are 10 year-olds . text : in another 30 minutes they would reach the theory of relativity . and then ? sm : so you know what 's happened ? i think we 've just stumbled across
that underlies this community . and he did it in a beautiful way . sometimes , though , the only way to tell a story is with a sweeping picture . we teamed up underwater photographer brian skerry and photojournalist randy olson to document the depletion of the world 's fisheries . we were n't the only ones to tackle this subject , but the photographs that brian and randy created are among the best to capture both the human and natural devastation of overfishing . here , in a photo by brian , a seemingly crucified shark is caught up in a gill net off of baja . i 've seen sort of ok pictures of bycatch ,
to the transfer of goods and ideas and technologies and wisdom . and they impose a barrier to cooperation . and nowhere do we see that more clearly than in the european union , whose 27 member countries speak 23 official languages . the european union is now spending over one billion euros annually translating among their 23 official languages . that 's something on the order of 1.45 billion u.s. dollars on translation costs alone . now think of the absurdity of this situation . if 27 individuals from those 27 member states sat around table , speaking their 23 languages , some very simple mathematics will tell you that you need an army of 253 translators
girl 2 : divorced -- parents divorced , maybe .
in dar es salaam , tanzania , even an impoverished community was able to use these tools to voice its aspirations .
to extract termites . all right , if this view of language and its value in solving the crisis of visual theft is true , any species that acquires it should show an explosion of creativity and prosperity . and this is exactly what the archeological record shows . if you look at our ancestors , the neanderthals and the homo erectus , our immediate ancestors , they 're confined to small regions of the world . but when our species arose about 200,000 years ago , sometime after that we quickly walked out of africa and spread around the entire world , occupying nearly every habitat on earth . now whereas other species are confined
and bees are very faithful . when they 're out pollinating or gathering pollen from one flower , they stay to that crop exclusively , in order to help generate . and of course , they 're made to carry this pollen . they build up a static electric charge and the pollen jumps on them and helps spread that pollen from bloom to bloom . however , honeybees are a minority . honeybees are not native to america ; they were introduced with the colonialists . and there are actually more species of bees than there are mammals and birds combined . in pennsylvania alone , we have been surveying bees for 150 years , and very intensely in the last three years .
more quickly , than any previous technology .  and that 's before we got going on the m-health world . aging : the problem is enormous , 300,000 broken hips per year ; but the solutions are extraordinary , and they include so many different things . one of the ones i just wanted to mention : the ishoe is another example of a sensor that improves proprioception among the elderly to prevent falling . one of many different techniques using wireless sensors . so , we can change medicine across the continuum of care , across the ages from premies or unborn children to seniors ; the pharmaceutical arena changes ; the full spectrum of disease -- i hope i 've given you a sense of that --
 you did n't get a government job ?  i said ,  no .   what are you doing here ? why are you here ? the education system in india makes you look at paris and new delhi and zurich ; what are you doing in this village ? is there something wrong with you you 're not telling us ?  i said ,  no , i want to actually start a college only for the poor .
and i spent a year at home with my wife and four young children . but all i learned about work-life balance from that year was that i found it quite easy to balance work and life when i did n't have any work . not a very useful skill , especially when the money runs out . so i went back to work , and i 've spent these seven years since struggling with , studying and writing about work-life balance . and i have four observations i 'd like to share with you today . the first is : if society 's to make any progress on this issue ,
but my sense is that in the public mind , today , that gm is not viewed as serious about some of these environmental ideas as some of your japanese competitors , maybe even as ford . are you serious about it , and not just , you know , when the consumers want it , when the regulators force us to do it we will go there ? are you guys going to really try and show leadership on this ? larry burns : yeah , we 're absolutely serious . we 're into this over a billion dollars already , so i would hope people would think we 're serious when we 're spending that kind of money .
then they will show off with each other about what they can do . this is what these children are doing . they are trying to multiply , i think . and all over india , at the end of about two years , children were beginning to google their homework . as a result , the teachers reported tremendous improvements in their english -- rapid improvement and all sorts of things . they said ,  they have become really deep thinkers and so on and so forth . and indeed they had . i mean , if there 's stuff on google , why would you need to stuff it into your head ?
or i was with child i would have been inundated , but all i got was a couple phone calls telling me to perk up . perk up . because i did n't think of that . because , you know , the one thing , one thing that you get with this disease , this one comes with a package , is you get a real sense of shame , because your friends go ,  oh come on , show me the lump , show me the x-rays ,  and of course you 've got nothing to show , so you 're , like , really disgusted with yourself because you 're thinking ,  i 'm not being carpet-bombed . i do n't live in a township . 
pretty much in every case , that 's how a charity starts .
on a massive scale all over the world , something we 'd never been able to do before . called trackyourhappiness.org , it uses the iphone to monitor people 's happiness in real time . how does this work ? basically , i send people signals at random points throughout the day , and then i ask them a bunch of questions about their moment-to-moment experience at the instant just before the signal . the idea is that , if we can watch how people 's happiness goes up and down over the course of the day , minute to minute in some cases ,
that they do n't have . but i am surprised by one thing that they do have : coca-cola . coke is everywhere . in fact , when i travel to the developing world , coke feels ubiquitous . and so when i come back from these trips , and i 'm thinking about development , and i 'm flying home and i 'm thinking ,  we 're trying to deliver condoms to people or vaccinations ,  you know , coke 's success kind of stops and makes you wonder : how is it that they can get coke to these far-flung places ? if they can do that , why ca n't governments and ngos do the same thing ? and i 'm not the first person to ask this question .
when food is scarce , they divert nutrients towards the really critical organ , the brain , and away from other organs like the heart and liver . this keeps the fetus alive in the short-term , but the bill comes due later on in life when those other organs , deprived early on , become more susceptible to disease . but that may not be all that 's going on . it seems that fetuses are taking cues from the intrauterine environment and tailoring their physiology accordingly . they 're preparing themselves for the kind of world they will encounter on the other side of the womb . the fetus adjusts its metabolism
only the other drawing that for five centuries we were not able to see , so thanks only to technology . well , the tablet . well , we thought , well , if we all have this pleasure , this privilege to see all this , to find all these discoveries , what about for everybody else ? so we thought of an augmented reality application using a tablet . let me show you just simulating what we could be doing , any of us could be doing , in a museum environment . so let 's say that we go to a museum with a tablet , okay ? and we just aim the camera of the tablet
well it may be , but i will say that , from a scientific perspective -- we talked a lot about innovation today -- the science of innovation , how much we understand about how the brain is able to innovate is in its infancy , and truly , we know very little about how we are able to be creative . and so i think that we 're going to see over the next 10 , 20 , 30 years a real science of creativity that 's burgeoning and is going to flourish . because we now have new methods that can enable us to take this process of something like this ,
well , this project , deep blue , put me in contact with my team in a way that i never expected , and i want to pass it on to you , because i want you to reflect on this , perhaps in your own relationships . we wanted to a do a car which was a complete leap of faith for bmw . we wanted to do a team which was so removed from the way we 'd done it , that i only had a phone number that connected me to them .
now , how simple can you make the production ? why do we choose paper ? there 's an example of the same thing on a finger , showing you basically what it looks like . one reason for using paper is that it 's everywhere . we have made these kinds of devices using napkins and toilet paper and wraps , and all kinds of stuff . so , the production capability is there . the second is , you can put lots and lots of tests in a very small place . i 'll show you in a moment that the stack of paper there would probably hold something like 100,000 tests , something of that kind .
big brother to some of you , and yes , there are some enormous transparency and privacy issues to solve , but ultimately , if we can collect our personal reputation , we can actually control it more , and extract the immense value that will flow from it . also , more so than our credit history , we can actually shape our reputation . just think of sebastian and how he bought the cat to influence his . now privacy issues aside , the other really interesting issue i 'm looking at is how do we empower digital ghosts , people [ who ] for whatever reason , are not active online , but are some of the most trustworthy people in the world ?
and you know what it feels like : all of that uncertainty while you ’ re left out in the hallway while the docs are dealing with some more urgent case in one of the emergency rooms , wondering what the heck ’ s going on . and so this notion of using role-play -- or in this case , living through the experience as a way of creating empathy -- particularly when you use video , is really powerful . or another one of our designers , altay sendil : he ’ s here having his chest waxed , not because he ’ s very vain , although actually he is -- no , i ’ m kidding -- but in order to empathize with the pain that chronic care patients
or you know ,  my , what big teeth you have .  then paul thinks that she simply took pity on him . to her , here was this big , goofy creature in the water that for some reason did n't seem to be interested in chasing penguins . so what she did was she started to bring penguins to him , alive , and put them in front of him . she dropped them off , and then they would swim away . she 'd kind of look at him , like  what are you doing ?  go back and get them , and then bring them back and drop them in front of him .
and school districts spend 500 dollars a year feeding a child . it 's no wonder , you know , we have criminals . and what 's happening is , we 're getting sick . we 're getting sick and our kids are getting sick . it is about what we feed them . what goes in is what we are . we really are what we eat . and if we continue down this path , if we continue to feed kids bad food , if we continue not to teach them what good food is , what 's going to happen ? you know , what is going to happen ? what 's going to happen to our whole medical system ?
you come for the money , you do n't come to barefoot college . you come for the work and the challenge , you 'll come to the barefoot college .
and basically that if he does n't show me that it works here , i do n't believe anything he said .
he 's my age , by the way , he calls me son , i love that -- he says ,  son , i 'm a captain of a crab boat . my responsibility is not to get you home alive . my responsibility is to get you home rich .  you want to get home alive , that 's on you . and for the rest of that day , safety first . i was like -- so , the idea that we create this false -- this sense of complacency when all we do is talk about somebody else 's responsibility as though it 's our own , and vice versa . anyhow , a whole lot of things .
and so i had some friends over to dinner , and i was asking -- we had a cookout -- i was asking them what advice they might have for me about proving my point . they said ,  why do n't you run some crash tests ? 
you 'll all agree is true , is that time goes forward , not backward . right ? the cause has to come before the effect . we 're lucky in this data we have many responses from each person , and so we can look and see , does mind-wandering tend to precede unhappiness , or does unhappiness tend to precede mind-wandering , to get some insight into the causal direction . as it turns out , there is a strong relationship between mind-wandering now and being unhappy a short time later , consistent with the idea that mind-wandering is causing people to be unhappy . in contrast , there 's no relationship between being unhappy now and mind-wandering a short time later .
god is that personal journey we all want to be on , to be inspired , to feel like we 're connected to a universe that celebrates life . did you know that 80 percent of the information we receive comes through our eyes ? and if you compare light energy to musical scales , it would only be one octave that the naked eye could see , which is right in the middle ? and are n't we grateful for our brains that can , you know , take this electrical impulse that comes from light energy to create images in order for us to explore our world ? and are n't we grateful that we have hearts
because i 'd never had a migraine headache , but then i spoke to some people who have three or four every week of their life , and their lives are being totally ruined by it . we have a mission statement for our company doing migraine , which is ,  prevent or ameliorate migraine headaches by the application of a safe , controlled magnetic pulse applied , as needed , by the patient .  now , you 're probably very few physicists here . if you 're a physicist you 'd know there 's a certain faraday 's law , which says if i apply a magnetic pulse on salt water -- that 's your brains by the way --
and that shows all the customers my products . the whole business is run on sustainable energy . this is powered by wind . all of the lights are daylight bulbs . paint is all low-volume chemical , which is very important when you 're working in the room all the time . i was experimenting with these -- i do n't know if you can see it -- but there 's a work surface there . and that 's a plastic polymer . and i was thinking , well i 'm trying to think nature , nature , nature . but i thought , no , no , experiment with resins , experiment with polymers . will they outlive me ? they probably might .
the moon was closer ; things were different . heat from within made geysers erupt -- that is how the oceans were born . water froze around the poles and shaped the edges of the earth . water is the key to life , but in frozen form , it is a latent force . and when it vanishes , earth becomes mars . but this planet is different -- it 's roiling inside . and where that energy touches water , something new emerges : life . it arises around cracks in the earth . mud and minerals become substrate ; there are bacteria . learn to multiply , thickening in places ... growing living structures under an alien sky ...
and we get confirmation . we get confirmation that , indeed , the gene is turned on -- for something like prozac , in serotonergic structures , things that are already known be affected -- but we also get to see the whole thing . we also get to see areas that no one has ever looked at before , and we see these genes turned on there . it 's as interesting a side effect as it could be . one other thing you can do with such a thing is you can , because it 's a pattern matching exercise , because there 's unique fingerprint , we can actually scan through the entire genome
i had luck . i was lucky , because this is a fact of life when you grow up in a place like that . but i was lucky . i had a scholarship . i could go to germany to study . so now , i suppose , i do n't need to explain to you how great a privilege it is for me to be standing before you today . from gando , my home village in burkina faso , to berlin in germany to become an architect is a big , big step . but what to do with this privilege ? since i was a student , i wanted to open up better opportunities to other kids in gando .
charitable status : groups who have charitable status in canada are n't allowed to do advocacy . this is a huge problem and a huge obstacle to change because it means that some of the most passionate and informed voices are completely silenced , especially during election time . which leads us to the last one , which is our elections . as you may have noticed , our elections in canada are a complete joke . we use out-of-date systems that are unfair and create random results . canada 's currently led by a party that most canadians did n't actually want . how can we honestly and genuinely encourage more people to vote
where we take some of our best inventors , and we say ,  are there problems where we have a good idea for solving a problem the world has ?  -- and to solve it in the way we try to solve problems , which is with dramatic , crazy , out-of-the-box solutions . bill gates is one of those smartest guys of ours that work on these problems and he also funds this work , so thank you . so i 'm going to briefly discuss a couple of problems that we have and a couple of problems where we 've got some solutions underway . vaccination is one of the key techniques in public health ,
and we persisted , and we got 450 guys growing mustaches , and together we raised 54,000 dollars , and we donated every cent of that to the prostate cancer foundation of australia , and that represented at the time the single biggest donation they 'd ever received .
had been completely eradicated worldwide -- proof of concept . and then today , there 's been a 99 percent reduction -- greater than 99 percent reduction -- in the number of children who are being paralyzed by this awful disease . when we started , over 20 years ago , 1,000 children were being paralyzed every single day by this virus . last year , it was 1,000. and at the same time , the polio eradication program has been working to help with a lot of other areas . it 's been working to help control pandemic flu , sars for example . it 's also tried to save children by doing other things --
it would have been , even without the environmental constraint , but the environmental constraint just makes it so much greater . in the nuclear space , there are other innovators . you know , we do n't know their work as well as we know this one , but the modular people , that 's a different approach . there 's a liquid-type reactor , which seems a little hard , but maybe they say that about us . and so , there are different ones , but the beauty of this is a molecule of uranium has a million times as much energy as a molecule of , say , coal , and so -- if you can deal with the negatives ,
and not all girls exist within those rigid boundaries of what we think of as girls . but , in fact , most boys tend to be a certain way , and most girls tend to be a certain way . and the point is that , for boys , the way that they exist and the culture that they embrace is n't working well in schools now . how do we know that ? the hundred girls project tells us some really nice statistics . for example , for every 100 girls that are suspended from school , there are 250 boys that are suspended from school . for every 100 girls who are expelled from school ,
the power and beauty of music transcends the  e  in the middle of our beloved acronym . music transcends the aesthetic beauty alone . the synchrony of emotions that we experience when we hear an opera by wagner , or a symphony by brahms , or chamber music by beethoven , compels us to remember our shared , common humanity , the deeply communal connected consciousness , the empathic consciousness that neuropsychiatrist iain mcgilchrist says is hard-wired into our brain 's right hemisphere . and for those living in the most dehumanizing conditions of mental illness within homelessness and incarceration , the music and the beauty of music offers a chance for them to transcend the world around them ,
is that , to be creative , you have to have this weird dissociation in your frontal lobe . one area turns on , and a big area shuts off , so that you 're not inhibited , so that you 're willing to make mistakes , so that you 're not constantly shutting down all of these new generative impulses . now a lot of people know that music is not always a solo activity -- sometimes it 's done communicatively . and so the next question was : what happens when musicians are trading back and forth , something called  trading fours ,  which is something they do normally in a jazz experiment ? so this is a twelve-bar blues .
of solar cooking . we have a dentist -- she 's a grandmother , illiterate , who 's a dentist . she actually looks after the teeth of 7,000 children . barefoot technology : this was 1986 -- no engineer , no architect thought of it -- but we are collecting rainwater from the roofs . very little water is wasted . all the roofs are connected underground to a 400,000 liter tank , and no water is wasted . if we have four years of drought , we still have water on the campus , because we collect rainwater . 60 percent of children do n't go to school , because they have to look after animals --
and when you get more imagination , it makes you want to go deeper in so you can get more and see beautifuller things , like the path , if it 's a path , it could lead you to a beach , or something , and it could be beautiful . elderly man : you think this is just another day in your life ? it 's not just another day . it 's the one day that is given to you today . it 's given to you . it 's a gift . it 's the only gift that you have right now , and the only appropriate response is gratefulness . if you do nothing else but to cultivate that response
stacy sager : but for christina sidebottom , almost anything was worth trying if it could stop a migraine . it may look silly or even frightening as you walk around with it in your purse , but researchers here in ohio organizing clinical trials for this migraine zapper , say it is scientifically sound -- that , in fact , when the average person gets a migraine , it 's caused by something similar to an electrical impulse . the zapper creates a magnetic field to counteract that . yousef mohammed : in other words , we 're treating electricity with electricity , rather than treating electricity with the chemicals that we 're using nowadays . ss : but is it safe to use everyday ?
to see if the coast is clear . and then everybody kind of runs out and goes out . but then paul got in the water . and he said he was never really afraid of this . well , this one female came up to him . she 's probably -- it 's a shame you ca n't see it in the photograph , but she 's 12 feet long . so , she is pretty significant in size . and paul said he was never really afraid , because she was more curious about him than threatened . this mouthing behavior , on the right , was really her way of saying to him ,  hey , look how big i am ! 
and so , he went forth to the people and he said ,  i 've made this wonderful finding : it looks as if we could just use the cheap and simple solution , and by doing so we could save ourselves 300 million dollars a year , and we could spend that on our children in other ways .  and the parents were very unhappy , and they said ,  this is a terrible thing , because how can the cheap and easy thing be as good as the hard thing ?  and the government was very upset .
into those little open mouths . all right , why would we see this correlation ? well an idea is that that strategy , that learning strategy , is an extremely powerful , great strategy for getting on in the world , but it has one big disadvantage . and that one big disadvantage is that , until you actually do all that learning , you 're going to be helpless . so you do n't want to have the mastodon charging at you and be saying to yourself ,  a slingshot or maybe a spear might work . which would actually be better ?  you want to know all that before the mastodons actually show up .
here 's a guy from canada . very similar thing .
thank you .  what i will  i will not dance to your war drum . i will not lend my soul nor my bones to your war drum . i will not dance to that beating . i know that beat . it is lifeless . i know intimately that skin you are hitting . it was alive once , hunted , stolen , stretched . i will not dance to your drummed-up war . i will not pop , spin , break for you . i will not hate for you or even hate you . i will not kill for you . especially i will not die for you . i will not mourn the dead with murder nor suicide .
and they 're always talking about this stuff .  and they say these things as if it 's okay . but if it were your culture , think of how that might feel . it 's very uncomfortable to be on the receiving end of that kind of language . they 're nervous about anything that has anything to do with violence because of the zero tolerance policies . they are sure that parents and administrators will never accept anything . so we really need to think about looking at teacher attitudes and finding ways to change the attitudes so that teachers are much more open and accepting of boy cultures in their classrooms .
to think they taste better ? it 's simple , you tell them they 're from mcdonald 's . they believe mcdonald 's food is tastier , and it leads them to experience it as tastier . how do you get adults to really enjoy wine ? it 's very simple : pour it from an expensive bottle . there are now dozens , perhaps hundreds of studies showing that if you believe you 're drinking the expensive stuff , it tastes better to you . this was recently done with a neuroscientific twist . they get people into a fmri scanner , and while they 're lying there , through a tube , they get to sip wine .
bring this campaign to these countries .
and this is a wonderful way of reconnecting to our environment . i 've had the privilege of living by a meadow for the last little while , and it is terribly engaging . and if we look at the history of lawns , it 's actually rather tragic . it used to be , two , three hundred years ago , that a lawn was a symbol of prestige , and so it was only the very rich that could keep these green actually , deserts : they 're totally sterile . americans spent , in 2001 -- 11 percent of all pesticide use was done on lawns . five percent of our greenhouse gases are produced by mowing our lawns .
miko : hey rockett ! c'mere ! rockett : hi miko ! what 's going on ? miko : did you hear about nakilia 's big halloween party this weekend ? she asked me to make sure you knew about it .
why is that ? why ca n't we combine growing a mustache and doing something for men 's health ? and i started to research that topic , and discovered prostate cancer is the male equivalent of breast cancer in terms of the number of men that die from it and are diagnosed with it . but there was nothing for this cause , so we married growing a mustache with prostate cancer , and then we created our tagline , which is ,  changing the face of men 's health .  and that eloquently describes the challenge , changing your appearance for the 30 days , and also the outcome that we 're trying to achieve :
but after we disbursed the loans , i remember a trip in uganda where i found newly built schools without textbooks or teachers , new health clinics without drugs , and the poor once again without any voice or recourse .
can we roll the video ? no i 'm kidding -- we do n't -- i thought it best to talk in pictures . so , i do something now i 've never ever done on a  dirty jobs  shoot , ever . i say ,  time out . stop .  you guys know the show , we use take one , we do n't do take two . there 's no writing , there 's no scripting , there 's no nonsense . we do n't fool around , we do n't rehearse -- we shoot what we get ! i said ,  stop . this is nuts .  i mean , you know .  this is crazy . we ca n't do this .  and albert 's like ,  what ?  and i 'm like ,  i do n't know what just happened ,
and you unlock people 's potential . the third component of coke 's success is marketing . ultimately , coke 's success depends on one crucial fact and that is that people want a coca-cola . now the reason these micro-entrepreneurs can sell or make a profit is they have to sell every single bottle in their pushcart or their wheelbarrow . so , they rely on coca-cola in terms of its marketing , and what 's the secret to their marketing ? well , it 's aspirational . it is associated that product with a kind of life that people want to live . so even though it 's a global company , they take a very local approach .
to even things like google glass .
what the teacher asks you to do all the time .  the teacher 's salary depends on  no child left behind  and  race to the top 
that they can not bring this together at all . and so we had our first meeting , after three months , in tiburon , which is just up the road from here -- you know tiburon ? and the idea was after the first three months of this independent research they would present it all to dr. goschel -- who is now my boss , and at that time he was co-mentor on the project -- and they would present their results .
the problem with this model is that there are some amazing messages that need to be said that are n't profitable to say . so you 're never going to see them on a billboard . the media plays an important role in developing our relationship with political change , mainly by ignoring politics and focusing on celebrities and scandals , but even when they do talk about important political issues , they do it in a way that i feel discourages engagement . and i 'll give you an example : the now magazine from last week -- progressive , downtown weekly in toronto . this is the cover story . it 's an article about a theater performance ,
when they were exposed to the world trade center attack . in the babies of those women who developed post-traumatic stress syndrome , or ptsd , following their ordeal , researchers discovered a biological marker of susceptibility to ptsd -- an effect that was most pronounced in infants whose mothers experienced the catastrophe in their third trimester . in other words , the mothers with post-traumatic stress syndrome had passed on a vulnerability to the condition to their children while they were still in utero . now consider this : post-traumatic stress syndrome appears to be a reaction to stress gone very wrong , causing its victims tremendous unnecessary suffering .
the chinese restaurant model spreads .
they had their two cures . until a particular mother , whose child had just turned two , died of this disease .
show us the grades .  and we did . the data was conclusive . when children are empowered , not only do they do good , they do well , in fact very well , as you can see in this national benchmarking assessment taken by over 2,000 schools in india , riverside children were outperforming the top 10 schools in india in math , english and science . so , it worked . it was now time to take it outside riverside . so , on august 15th , independence day , 2007 , the children of riverside set out to infect ahmedabad . now it was not about riverside school . it was about all children . so , we were shameless .
kbs : first time , a rally and a street play in a rural school -- unheard of -- to tell their parents why literacy is important . look at what their parents says . man : this program is wonderful . we feel so nice that our children can teach us how to read and write . woman : i am so happy that my students did this campaign . in the future , i will never doubt my students ' abilities . see ? they have done it . kbs : an inner city school in hyderabad . girl : 581. this house is 581 ...
and it was this : that i was at a crossroads in my life , trying to choose between music and medicine . i had just completed my undergraduate , and i was working as a research assistant at the lab of dennis selkoe , studying parkinson 's disease at harvard , and i had fallen in love with neuroscience . i wanted to become a surgeon . i wanted to become a doctor like paul farmer or rick hodes , these kind of fearless men who go into places like haiti or ethiopia and work with aids patients with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis , or with children with disfiguring cancers . i wanted to become that kind of red cross doctor ,
play is one of the only human endeavors where uncertainty is actually celebrated . uncertainty is what makes play fun . right ? it 's adaptable to change . right ? it opens possibility , and it 's cooperative . it 's actually how we do our social bonding , and it 's intrinsically motivated . what that means is that we play to play . play is its own reward . now if you look at these five ways of being , these are the exact same ways of being you need in order to be a good scientist . science is not defined by the method section of a paper . it 's actually a way of being , which is here , and this is true
even one like , say , tickle me elmo -- which , despite its ingenuity , really only does one thing , whereas boxes offer an infinite number of choices . so again , this is another one of those playful activities that , as we get older , we tend to forget and we have to relearn . so another one of bob mckim ’ s favorite exercises is called the  30 circles test .  so we ’ re back to work . you guys are going to get back to work again . turn that piece of paper that you did the sketch on back over , and you ’ ll find those 30 circles printed on the piece of paper .
so we built the first barefoot college in 1986. it was built by 12 barefoot architects who ca n't read and write , built on $ 1.50 a sq . ft. 150 people lived there , worked there . they got the aga khan award for architecture in 2002. but then they suspected , they thought there was an architect behind it . i said ,  yes , they made the blueprints , but the barefoot architects actually constructed the college .  we are the only ones who actually returned the award for $ 50,000 , because they did n't believe us , and we thought that they were actually casting aspersions on the barefoot architects of tilonia .
we see this again and again when we give people money to spend on other people instead of on themselves . of course , these are undergraduates in canada -- not the world 's most representative population .
gene ended up using his coat , and his fist in the coat , to break open a liquor cabinet . people were lying on the floor . it was one of just the most horrifying nights . and then 12 hours later , we rented a car , as we had planned to , and drove back to natasha 's village . and we kept saying ,  do you realize we were dying in a hotel fire , like eight hours ago ?  it 's so weird how life just goes on . natasha wanted to introduce her brother and father to all the villagers , and the day we showed up turned out to be a 60-year-old man 's birthday .
no water , rocky soil . 
it 's confusing to watch television , and often very frightening . and reading is just about impossible . when you care for someone with dementia , and you get training , they train you to engage them in activities that are familiar , hands-on , open-ended . with my dad , that turned out to be letting him fill out forms . he was a college professor at a state school ; he knows what paperwork looks like . he 'll sign his name on every line , he 'll check all the boxes , he 'll put numbers in where he thinks there should be numbers . but it got me thinking , what would my caregivers do with me ?
it could be that there is other things which makes transmission occur in a higher frequency . after all , if you are completely healthy and you have heterosexual sex , the risk of infection in one intercourse is one in 1,000. do n't jump to conclusions now on how to behave tonight and so on . but -- and if you are in an unfavorable situation , more sexually transmitted diseases , it can be one in 100. but what we think is that it could be concurrency . and what is concurrency ? in sweden , we have no concurrency . we have serial monogamy . vodka , new year 's eve -- new partner for the spring .
of what it was like in a courtyard then . i think we may have lost something in our culture . so i 'm gon na take you through what i think is a remarkable sequence . north of churchill , manitoba , in october and november , there 's no ice on hudson bay . and this polar bear that you see , this 1200-pound male , he 's wild and fairly hungry . and norbert rosing , a german photographer , is there on scene , making a series of photos of these huskies , who are tethered . and from out of stage left comes this wild , male polar bear , with a predatory gaze . any of you who 've been to africa or had a junkyard dog come after you ,
but your body knows it extremely well . and i was thinking that your body hated it , at the time , because we are very immune to this . this is called alpha-gal epitope . and the fact that pig heart valves have lots of these on them is the reason that you ca n't transplant a pig heart valve into a person easily . actually our body does n't hate these . our body loves these . it eats them . i mean , the cells in our immune system are always hungry . and if an antibody is stuck to one of these things on the cell , it means  that 's food . 
and all he wanted to do was to create a healthy drink , or an organic drink for his kids , to replace the high-sugar-content sodas that he 's trying to get them away from . so , we worked on this bottle , and it 's completely symmetrical in every dimension . and this allows the bottle to turn into a game . the bottles connect together , and you can create different shapes , different forms . thank you . and then while we were doing this , the shape of the bottle upside down reminded us of a y , and then we thought , well these words ,  why  and  why not , 
like etsy , that are built on personal relationships versus empty transactions . now the irony is that these ideas are actually taking us back to old market principles and collaborative behaviors that are hard-wired in all of us . they 're just being reinvented in ways that are relevant for the facebook age . we 're literally beginning to realize that we have wired our world to share , swap , rent , barter or trade just about anything . we 're sharing our cars on whipcar , our gardens on landshare . we 're lending and borrowing money from strangers on zopa and lending club .
whether you sit down and eat a meal with your kids , whether you take your kids , or grandchildren , or nieces and nephews shopping to a farmers ' market . just do tastings with them . sit down and care . and on the macro level , we 're in what seems to be a 19-month presidential campaign , and of all the things we 're asking all of these potential leaders , what about asking for the health of our children ? thank you . what i thought i would do is i would start with a simple request . i 'd like all of you to pause for a moment , you wretched weaklings ,
now when i think about improvisation and the language , well what 's next ? rap , of course , rap -- free-style . and so i 've always been fascinated by free-style . and let 's go ahead and play this video here . ♫ rockin ' it when i be , in your vicinity ♫ ♫ whole-style synergy , recognize symmetry ♫ cl : and so there 's a lot of analogy between what takes place in free-style rap and jazz . there are , in fact , a lot of correlations between the two forms of music i think in different time periods . in a lot a ways , rap serves the same social function that jazz used to serve .
hold her now with you . you do n't need to say her name out loud , you can just hold her . are you holding her ? this is  break clustered .  all holy history banned . unwritten books predicted the future , projected the past . but my head unwraps around what appears limitless , man 's creative violence . whose son shall it be ? which male child will perish a new day ? our boys ' deaths galvanize . we cherish corpses . we mourn women , complicated . bitches get beat daily . profits made , prophets ignored . war and tooth , enameled salted lemon childhoods . all colors run , none of us solid . do n't look for shadow behind me . i carry it within .
is an utterly impractical flight vehicle , which is a little ornithopter wing-flapping device that -- rubber-band powered -- that we 'll show you . mk : 32 gram . sorry , one gram . pm : last night we gave it a few too many turns and it tried to bash the roof out also . it 's about a gram . the tube there 's hollow , about paper-thin . and if this lands on you , i assure you it will not hurt you . but if you reach out to grab it or hold it , you will destroy it . so , be gentle , just act like a wooden indian or something . and when it comes down -- and we 'll see how it goes .
going down there was like entering a time capsule , and i came out with a different sense of myself in time . the oxygen exhaled by those stromatolites is what we all breathe today . stromatolites are the heroes in my story . i hope it 's a story that has some resonance for our time . it 's a story about you and me , nature and science . and with that said , i 'd like to invite you for a short , brief journey of life through time . our journey starts in space , where matter condenses into spheres over time ... solidifying into surface , molded by fire . the fire gave way , earth emerged -- but this was an alien planet .
so how do you study rap scientifically ? and my colleagues kind of think i 'm crazy , but i think it 's very viable . and so this is what you do : you have a free-style artist come in and memorize a rap that you write for them , that they 've never heard before , and then you have them free-style . so i told my lab members that i would rap for ted , and they said ,  no , you wo n't .  and then i thought -- but here 's the thing . with this big screen , you can all rap with me . okay ? so what we had them do was memorize this lower-left sound icon , please .
right now we teach our kids to go after really good jobs , you know , and the school system teaches them to go after things like being a doctor and being a lawyer and being an accountant and a dentist and a teacher and a pilot . and the media says that it 's really cool if we could go out and be a model or a singer or a sports hero like luongo , crosby . our mba programs do not teach kids to be entrepreneurs . the reason that i avoided an mba program -- other than the fact that i could n't get into any
it 's been bombarded by micrometeorites , and when micrometeorites come in at about 20 to 60,000 miles an hour , they vaporize on contact . and you can see here that that is -- that 's sort of vaporized , and that material is holding this little clump of little sand grains together . this is a very small grain of sand , this whole thing . and that 's called a ring agglutinate . and many of the grains of sand on the moon look like that , and you 'd never find that on earth . most of the sand on the moon , especially -- and you know when you look at the moon ,
why is it that x is the unknown ? x is the unknown because you ca n't say  sh  in spanish .
so for example , one guy from uganda says this . he said ,  i called a girl i wished to love . 
the other way around . so i really enjoy creating , like , sound portraits of people . instead of drawing someone 's face , like drawing the shape , i point at them with the eye and i write down the different notes i hear , and then i create sound portraits . here 's some faces . yeah , nicole kidman sounds good .
well , it is more common with multiple partners , there is less condom use , and there is age-disparate sex -- that is , older men tend to have sex with younger women . we see higher rates in younger women than younger men in many of these highly affected countries . but where are they situated ? i will swap the bubbles to a map . look , the highly infected are four percent of all population and they hold 50 percent of the hiv-infected . hiv exists all over the world . look , you have bubbles all over the world here . brazil has many hiv-infected . arab countries not so much , but iran is quite high .
of our future . then we did the solar car for general motors -- the sunracer -- that won the race in australia . we got a lot of people thinking about electric cars , what you could do with them . a few years later , when we suggested to gm that now is the time and we could do a thing called the impact , they sponsored it , and here 's the impact that we developed with them on their programs . this is the demonstrator . and they put huge effort into turning it into a commercial product . with that preamble , let 's show the first two-minute videotape ,
then we stimulated , and you see how that heavy black line and then you see the electroencephalogram signal going to normal , which means they did not get the epileptic seizure . that concludes my discussion of epilepsy , which is the third invention that i want to discuss here this afternoon . i have three wishes . well , i ca n't do much about africa . i 'm a tech ; i 'm into medical gadgetry , which is mostly high-tech stuff like mr. bono talked about . the first wish is to use the epilepsy responsive neurostimulator , called rns , for responsive neurostimulator -- that 's a brilliant acronym -- for the treatment of other brain disorders .
and they had a child of their own , and then another two years passed , and they had another child of their own , and then another time passed and they had another child that they called an accident , which i thought was an unusual name . and i was on the cusp of , sort of , adolescence , so i was starting to take biscuits from the tin without asking . i was starting to stay out a little bit late , etc. , etc . now , in their religiosity , in their naivete , my mom and dad , which i believed them to be forever , as they said they were , my mom and dad
i 'm going to quickly go through this . a quote by bertrand russell ,  all the labor of all the ages , all the devotion , all the inspiration , all the noonday brightness of human genius are destined to extinction .
we had a little natural experiment . so cnn , a little while ago , wrote this interesting article on what happens to people when they win the lottery .
my father was responsible for building roads in bihar , and he had developed a firm stance against corruption , even though he was harassed and threatened .
we walked into the offices of the municipal corporation , the police , the press , businesses , and basically said ,  when are you going to wake up and recognize the potential that resides in every child ? when will you include the child in the city ? basically , open your hearts and your minds to the child .  so , how did the city respond ? since 2007 every other month the city closes down the busiest streets for traffic and converts it into a playground for children and childhood . here was a city telling its child ,  you can .  a glimpse of infection in ahmedabad . video : [ unclear ] so , the busiest streets closed down .
you could imagine , for instance , gabriel , with his social awkwardness , might be able to wear google glass with an earpiece in his ear , and have a coach be able to help him , be able to help think about conversations , conversation-starters , being able to even perhaps one day invite a girl out on a date . all of these new technologies just offer tremendous opportunities for us to be able to impact the individuals with autism , but yet we have a long way to go . as much as we know , there is so much more that we do n't know , and so i invite all of you
because the point is that this is happening to all of us . i myself have a husband and a father and two sons whom i dearly love . and this is why i like to talk about this , because if we do n't acknowledge it , then the transition will be pretty painful . but if we do take account of it , then i think it will go much more smoothly . i first started thinking about this about a year and a half ago . i was reading headlines about the recession just like anyone else , and i started to notice a distinct pattern -- that the recession was affecting men
i asked a forester -- high-powered , paper-qualified expert -- i said ,  what can you build in this place ?  he had one look at the soil and said ,  forget it . no way . not even worth it .
can i do it on you ? oh yeah , yeah , yeah , come on . yeah yeah . okay . now , science is about taking risks , so this is an incredible risk , right ? for me , not for him . right ? because we 've only done this once before . and you like technology , right ? shimon schocken : right , but i like myself . bl : this is the epitome of technology . right . okay . now ... okay . now , we 're going to do a little demonstration , right ? you have to close your eyes , and you have to point where you hear me clapping . all right ? okay , how about if everyone over there shouts . one , two , three ?
and the pictures before were taken in september . well , there was an american marine priest that i had met in the course of doing the story , who had 75 children living in his house . he had three women helping him take care of these kids . and so i suggested to the uncle that we go down and meet father keene , to find out how the adoption process worked . because i wanted him to feel like this was all being done very much above board . so , this is on the way down to the orphanage . this is father keene . he 's just a wonderful guy .
a lot of them have said that babies and young children were barely conscious if they were conscious at all . and i think just the opposite is true . i think babies and children are actually more conscious than we are as adults . now here 's what we know about how adult consciousness works . and adults ' attention and consciousness look kind of like a spotlight . so what happens for adults is we decide that something 's relevant or important , we should pay attention to it . our consciousness of that thing that we 're attending to becomes extremely bright and vivid , and everything else sort of goes dark .
globally , 1.3 billion people live on less than $ 1.25 a day , and the work i did in uganda represents the traditional approach to these problems that has been practiced since 1944 , when winners of world war ii , 500 founding fathers , and one lonely founding mother , gathered in new hampshire , usa , to establish the bretton woods institutions , including the world bank .
and you know what 's exciting is that this innovation is now spreading south to south , from the philippines to indonesia , kenya , moldova and beyond .
we 're all choking , and there 's smoke pouring through the vents , under the doors . there 's people screaming . i just remember this unbelievable , just utter chaos . i remember sitting near the bed , and i was just so -- i had two overwhelming feelings . one was absolute terror -- it 's like ,  oh , please god , i just want to wake up . this has got to be a nightmare , this ca n't be happening . please , i just want to wake up , it 's got to be a nightmare .  and the other is unbelievable guilt . here i 've been , playing god with my friends ' lives , my friends ' son , with natasha 's life ,
with my wife and kids . meditate for half an hour . have sex . walk the dog . have sex again . go to bed . how often do you think i have that day ? we need to be realistic . you ca n't do it all in one day . we need to elongate the time frame upon which we judge the balance in our life , but we need to elongate it without falling into the trap of the  i 'll have a life when i retire , when my kids have left home , when my wife has divorced me , my health is failing , i 've got no mates or interests left . 
and sold for several hundreds of dollars . and in fact , there 's a thriving market in the partially eaten food of beloved people . the shoes are perhaps the most valuable of all . according to an unconfirmed report , a saudi millionaire offered 10 million dollars for this pair of shoes . they were the ones thrown at george bush at an iraqi press conference several years ago . now this attraction to objects does n't just work for celebrity objects . each one of us , most people , have something in our life that 's literally irreplaceable , in that it has value because of its history --
is my community . when i was a kid , i was going to school , i was coming back every holiday to gando . by the end of every holidays , i had to say goodbye to the community , going from one compound to another one . all women in gando will open their clothes like that and give me the last penny . in my culture , this is a symbol of deep affection . as a seven-year-old guy , i was impressed .
so , i 'm going to count to you , so we do n't all do it together . okay , one , two , three.audience : can you read this ? bl : amazing . what about this one ? one , two , three.audience : you are not reading this . bl : all right . one , two , three . if you were portuguese , right ? how about this one ? one , two , three . audience : what are you reading ? bl : what are you reading ? there are no words there . i said , read what you 're seeing . right ? it literally says ,  wat ar ou rea in ?  right ? that 's what you should have said . right ? why is this ? it 's because perception is grounded in our experience .
and it 's looking around , and when it finds something , and recognizes it being foreign , it will actually engulf it and eat it . so if you look right there , it finds that little bacterium , and it engulfs it and eats it . if you take some heart cells from an animal , and put it in a dish , they 'll just sit there and beat . that 's their job . every cell has a mission in life , and these cells , the mission is to move blood around our body . these next cells are nerve cells , and right now , as we see and understand what we 're looking at ,
or even the money that we need to reach children , the most vulnerable children in the world , with something as simple as an oral polio vaccine , then pretty soon , more than 200,000 children are again going to be paralyzed by this disease every single year . there 's absolutely no question . these are children like umar . umar is seven years old , and he 's from northern nigeria . he lives in a family home there with his eight brothers and sisters . umar also has polio . umar was paralyzed for life . his right leg was paralyzed in 2004. this leg , his right leg , now takes an awful beating
if you put a child in a car seat , 18.2 percent of the children die .
so , all in all , in an age when the visual image of any kind was rare , tapestries were an incredibly potent form of propaganda . well , i became a tapestry historian . in due course , i ended up as a curator at the metropolitan museum , because i saw the met as one of the few places where i could organize really big exhibitions about the subject i cared so passionately about . and in about 1997 , the then-director philippe de montebello gave me the go-ahead to organize an exhibition for 2002. we normally have these very long lead-in times . it was n't straightforward . it 's no longer a question
like paper , paper and cardboard . so , i 'm going to finish with one last project , and this is a little bit more of adult play . some of you might have heard about the new york city condom . it 's actually just launched , actually launched on valentine 's day , february 14 , about 10 days ago . so , the department of health in new york came to us , and they needed a way to distribute 36 million condoms for free to the citizens of new york . so a pretty big endeavor , and we worked on the dispensers . these are the dispensers . there 's this friendly shape .
for an on-time delivery . that is having real impact in a country like ethiopia , and it 's why you see their child mortality numbers coming down 25 percent from 2000 to 2008. in ethiopia , there are hundreds of thousands of children living because of this health extension worker program . so what 's the next step for ethiopia ? well , they 're already starting talk about this . they 're starting to talk about ,  how do you have the health community workers generate their own ideas ? how do you incent them based on the impact that they 're getting out in those remote villages ?  that 's how you tap into local entrepreneurial talent
and although parents tried as hard as they could to use it properly , almost all of them ended up using it wrong in the end .
so humans are turning more towards animal consumption . in africa last year , africans ate 600 million wild animals , and consumed two billion kilograms of bush meat . and every kilogram of bush meat contained hundreds of thousands of novel viruses that have never been charted , the genomic sequences of which we do n't know . their fitness for creating pandemics we are unaware of , but we are ripe for zoonotic-borne , emerging communicable diseases . increasingly , i would say explosive growth of technology . most of us are the beneficiaries of that growth . but it has a dark side -- in bioweapons , and in technology that puts us on a collision course
of the need to get to work , is so powerful in joel 's story . when i saw joel meyerowitz recently , i told him how much i admired his passionate obstinacy , his determination to push through all the bureaucratic red tape to get to work , and he laughed , and he said ,  i 'm stubborn , but i think what 's more important is my passionate optimism .  the first time i told these stories , a man in the audience raised his hand and said ,  all these artists talk about their work , not their art , which has got me thinking about my work and where the creativity is there ,
ways that we can think about overcoming that problem . first , i want to start by saying , this is a boy , and this is a girl , and this is probably stereotypically what you think of as a boy and a girl . if i essentialize gender for you today , then you can dismiss what i have to say . so i 'm not going to do that . i 'm not interested in doing that . this is a different kind of boy and a different kind of girl . so the point here is that not all boys exist within these rigid boundaries of what we think of as boys and girls ,
what i am always thinking about is what this session is about , which is called simplicity . and almost , i would almost call it being simple-minded , but in the best sense of the word . i 'm trying to figure out two very simple things : how to live and how to die , period . that 's all i 'm trying to do , all day long . and i 'm also trying to have some meals , and have some snacks , and , you know , and yell at my children , and do all the normal things that keep you grounded . so , i was fortunate enough to be born a very dreamy child .
so they could communicate . now , every home electrical system becomes an intelligent network . the appliance 's safe operating parameters are embedded into its plug . if too much current is flowing , the intelligent receptacle turns itself off , and prevents another fire from starting . we call this technology efci , electrical fault circuit interrupter . okay , two more points . every year in the usa , roughly 2,500 children are admitted to emergency rooms for shock and burn injuries related to electrical receptacles . and this is crazy . an intelligent receptacle prevents injuries because the power is always off ,
of one child at a time . this is five-year-old parusharam . he was begging by a bus stop a few years ago , got picked up and is now in an orphanage , has been coming to school for the last four and a half months . he 's in kindergarten . he has learned how to speak english . we have a model by which kids can speak english and understand english in three month 's time . he can tell you stories in english of the thirsty crow , of the crocodile and of the giraffe . and if you ask him what he likes to do he will say ,  i like sleeping .
these are our three sons . and of course , they 're not always crying and screaming , but with three boys , there 's a decent probability that at least one of them will not be comporting himself exactly as he should . av : yes , you can see where the disconnect was happening for us . we really felt like what we went in expecting had nothing to do with what we were actually experiencing , and so we decided we really wanted to give it to parents straight . we really wanted to let them understand what the realities of parenting were in an honest way . rg : so today , what we would love to do
and what she did was show children that yellow ones made it go and red ones did n't , and then she showed them an anomaly . and what you 'll see is that this little boy will go through five hypotheses in the space of two minutes . boy : how about this ? same as the other side . alison gopnik : okay , so his first hypothesis has just been falsified . boy : this one lighted up , and this one nothing . ag : okay , he 's got his experimental notebook out . boy : what 's making this light up . ag : every scientist will recognize that expression of despair . boy : oh , it 's because this needs to be like this ,
is play . and you can trust it . the basis of human trust is established through play signals . and we begin to lose those signals , culturally and otherwise , as adults . that 's a shame . i think we 've got a lot of learning to do . now , jane goodall has here a play face along with one of her favorite chimps . so part of the signaling system of play has to do with vocal , facial , body , gestural . you know , you can tell -- and i think when we 're getting into collective play , its really important for groups to gain a sense of safety through their own sharing of play signals .
and i would ask questions . i mean , in retrospect , probably stupid questions , but things like ,  what 's this caps lock key for ?  or  what 's this num lock key for ?  you know , that thing ?  you know , do people really use it ? do they need it ? do they want it in their homes ?  what i realized then is , they did n't really want to change the legacy stuff ; they did n't want to change the insides . they were really looking for us , the designers , to create the skins , to put some pretty stuff outside of the box . and i did n't want to be a colorist .
we all have lived separate lives . but the fact is our genomes are greater than 99 percent similar . we 're similar at the genetic level . and what we 're finding is actually , even at the brain biochemical level , we are quite similar . and so this shows it 's not 99 percent , but it 's roughly 90 percent correspondence at a reasonable cutoff , so everything in the cloud is roughly correlated . and then we find some outliers , some things that lie beyond the cloud . and those genes are interesting , but they 're very subtle . so i think it 's an important message to take home today that even though we celebrate all of our differences ,
leafing through a book and butterflies , imagine such displacement , such loss ?  and then i want to tell you that this is a map . so ,  my beautiful mother 's family fled russia as well . too many pogroms . leaving the shack , the wild blueberry woods , the geese , the river sluch , they went to palestine and then america .  and my mother drew this map for me of the united states of america , and that is my dna over here , because that person who i grew up with had no use for facts whatsoever . facts were actually banished from our home . and so , if you see that texas -- you know , texas and california
how could it be that children are doing statistics ? so to test this we used a machine that we have called the blicket detector . this is a box that lights up and plays music when you put some things on it and not others . and using this very simple machine , my lab and others have done dozens of studies showing just how good babies are at learning about the world . let me mention just one that we did with tumar kushner , my student . if i showed you this detector , you would be likely to think to begin with that the way to make the detector go
the dog is a surrogate for you , you know ,  today ,   this month ,   since the rainy season  -- there are lots of opportunities for misunderstanding , and so an issue here is to , in some cases , to figure out how to deal with matters that seem uninteresting , like compliance . now , take a look at what a typical test looks like . prick a finger , you get some blood , about 50 microliters . that 's about all you 're going to get , because you ca n't use the usual sort of systems . you ca n't manipulate it very well , although i 'll show something about that in a moment . so , you take the drop of blood , no further manipulations ,
they have n't looked at children and they 're certainly not demonstrating any love for them .
to write a word or a phrase or a sentence in arabic is like crafting an equation , because every part is extremely precise and carries a lot of information .
which i spoke to you about earlier . they were men who had been contractors , or they had been building houses and they had lost their jobs after the housing boom , and they were in this group because they were failing to pay their child support . and the instructor was up there in the class explaining to them all the ways in which they had lost their identity in this new age . he was telling them they no longer had any moral authority , that nobody needed them for emotional support anymore , and they were not really the providers . so who were they ?
i can just sit back and relax .  reaching success , i always tried to improve and do good work . but then i stopped because i figured ,  hey , i 'm good enough . i do n't need to improve any more .  reaching success , i was pretty good at coming up with good ideas . because i did all these simple things that led to ideas . but then i stopped , because i figured i was this hot-shot guy and i should n't have to work at ideas , they should just come like magic . and the only thing that came was creative block . i could n't come up with any ideas .
that babies will slow down their sucking when something interests them and resume their fast sucking when they get bored . this is how researchers discovered that , after women repeatedly read aloud a section of dr. seuss '  the cat in the hat  while they were pregnant , their newborn babies recognized that passage when they hear it outside the womb . my favorite experiment of this kind is the one that showed that the babies of women who watched a certain soap opera every day during pregnancy recognized the theme song of that show once they were born .
so the united states keeps a data set of every fatal accident that 's happened since 1975 .
that our very close genetic relatives , the neanderthals , had social learning . sure enough , their tools were more complicated than those of homo erectus , but they too showed very little change over the 300,000 years or so that those species , the neanderthals , lived in eurasia . okay , so what this tells us is that , contrary to the old adage ,  monkey see , monkey do ,  the surprise really is that all of the other animals really can not do that -- at least not very much . and even this picture has the suspicious taint of being rigged about it -- something from a barnum & amp ; bailey circus .
and a recent gallup poll asked participants how much stress and worry and anger they had experienced the previous day .
it was ridiculous . i could n't get a mobile phone plan because my credit history did n't travel with me . i was essentially a ghost in the system . now i 'm not suggesting that the next stage of the reputation economy is about adding up multiple ratings into some kind of empty score . people 's lives are too complex , and who wants to do that ? i also want to be clear that this is n't about adding up tweets and likes and friends in a clout-like fashion . those guys are measuring influence , not behaviors that indicate our trustworthiness . but the most important thing that we have to keep in mind
i 'd shake my head , and i 'd ask myself the eternal question :  why did n't i go into banking ?  and i 'd look around , and then i 'd see another paratrooper , a young guy or girl , and they 'd have pulled out their m4 carbine and they 'd be picking up their equipment . they 'd be doing everything that we had taught them . and i realized that , if they had to go into combat , they would do what we had taught them and they would follow leaders . and i realized that , if they came out of combat , it would be because we led them well . and i was hooked again on the importance of what i did .
and they had n't done anything because -- kind of , like in car business , engineers are there to solve problems , and we were asking them to create a problem . and the engineers were waiting for the designers to say ,  this is the problem that we 've created , now help us solve it .  and they could n't talk about it . so what happened was , the engineers showed up with nothing .
and beef production uses 100 times the water that most vegetables do .
that was the pink ovals on my last slide , this is it . it 's a very small , five-carbon molecule . what the important thing is that we learned is that every bacterium has exactly the same enzyme and makes exactly the same molecule . so they 're all using this molecule for interspecies communication . this is the bacterial esperanto . once we got that far , we started to learn that bacteria can talk to each other with this chemical language . but what we started to think is that maybe there is something practical that we can do here as well . i 've told you that bacteria do have all these social behaviors ,
al-jebr finally came into english as algebra .
including things like eating and working and watching tv ? and finally a mind-wandering question : are you thinking about something other than what you 're currently doing ? people could say no -- in other words , i 'm focused only on my task -- or yes -- i am thinking about something else -- and the topic of those thoughts are pleasant , neutral or unpleasant . any of those yes responses are what we called mind-wandering . so what did we find ? this graph shows happiness on the vertical axis , and you can see that bar there representing how happy people are when they 're focused on the present ,
the answer that we 've traditionally given to that is very straightforward , at least in the last 20 years : you go to finland . finland is the best place in the world to see school systems . the finns may be a bit boring and depressive and there 's a very high suicide rate , but by golly , they are qualified . and they have absolutely amazing education systems . so we all troop off to finland , and we wonder at the social democratic miracle of finland and its cultural homogeneity and all the rest of it , and then we struggle to imagine how we might bring lessons back .
who could come there and get employment . and they caught smallpox in the one remaining place that had smallpox , and they went home to die . and when they did , they took smallpox to 10 other countries and reignited the epidemic . and we had to start all over again . but , in the end , we succeeded , and the last case of smallpox : this little girl , rahima banu -- barisal , in bangladesh -- when she coughed or breathed , and the last virus of smallpox left her lungs and fell on the dirt and the sun killed that last virus , thus ended a chain of transmission of history 's greatest horror .
to the 200 million children in india ? last i heard , the preamble still said ,  we , the people of india ,  right ? so , if not us , then who ? if not now , then when ? like i said , contagious is a good word . thank you . do you ever feel completely overwhelmed when you 're faced with a complex problem ? well , i hope to change that in less than three minutes . so , i hope to convince you that complex does n't always equal complicated . so for me , a well-crafted baguette , fresh out of the oven , is complex , but a curry onion green olive poppy cheese bread is complicated .
if science really could move in the field of authenticity of works of art . there would be a cultural revolution to say the least , but also , i would say , a market revolution , let me add . take this example : otto marseus , nice painting , which is  still life  at the pitti gallery , and just have an infrared camera peering through , and luckily for art historians , it just was confirmed that there is a signature of otto marseus . it even says when it was made and also the location . so that was a good result . sometimes , it 's not that good , and so , again , authenticity and science could go together
so here 's the title page . we have a number of authors there . all the ones in bold are eight to 10 years old . the first author is blackawton primary school , because if it were ever referenced , it would be  blackawton et al ,  and not one individual . so we submit it to a public access journal , and it says this . it said many things , but it said this .  i 'm afraid the paper fails our initial quality control checks in several different ways .  in other words , it starts off  once upon a time ,  the figures are in crayon , etc . so we said , we 'll get it reviewed . so i sent it to dale purves ,
the pink dots represent host properties . even four years ago , letting strangers stay in your home seemed like a crazy idea . now the same view in 2010. and now , 2012. there is an airbnb host on almost every main street in paris . now , what 's happening here is people are realizing the power of technology to unlock the idling capacity and value of all kinds of assets , from skills to spaces to material possessions , in ways and on a scale never possible before . it 's an economy and culture called collaborative consumption , and , through it , people like sebastian are becoming micro-entrepreneurs .
our desire to speak very honestly about subjects that people have difficulty speaking honestly about . it seems to us that when people start dissembling , people start lying about things , that 's when it gets really interesting . that 's a subject that we want to dive into . and we 've been surprised to find , as young parents , that there are almost more taboos around parenting than there are around sex . av : it 's true . so like we said , the early years were really wonderful , but they were also really difficult . and we feel like some of that difficulty was because of this false advertisement around parenting .
and world of warcraft has quite a budget . most of the educational games do not . where we started : my colleagues -- mike petner , shawn vashaw , myself -- we started by trying to look at the teachers ' attitudes and find out how do they really feel about gaming , what do they say about it . and we discovered that they talk about the kids in their school , who talk about gaming , in pretty demeaning ways . they say ,  oh , yeah . they 're always talking about that stuff . they 're talking about their little action figures and their little achievements or merit badges , or whatever it is that they get .
and the people were happy . they were satisfied . for many years this went along , and everything was fine .
so what we do in the study is -- and this is just presenting the same information , but turned into a figure to make it easier .
and we all decided to start these things because it 's really the only place we fit . we did n't fit in the normal work . we could n't work for somebody else because we 're too stubborn and we have all these other traits . but kids could be entrepreneurs as well . i 'm a big part of a couple organizations globally called the entrepreneurs ' organization and the young presidents ' organization . i just came back from speaking in barcelona at the ypo global conference , and everyone that i met over there who 's an entrepreneur struggled with school . i have 18 out of the 19 signs of attention deficit disorder diagnosed .
so fetuses are even learning about the particular language that 's spoken in the world that they 'll be born into . a study published last year found that from birth , from the moment of birth , babies cry in the accent of their mother 's native language . french babies cry on a rising note while german babies end on a falling note , imitating the melodic contours of those languages . now why would this kind of fetal learning be useful ? it may have evolved to aid the baby 's survival . from the moment of birth , the baby responds most to the voice of the person who is most likely to care for it --
on the data that you 're developing ? sb : well , i think the only way i know to do it is to have accumulated the advisers that i have who go from practitioners -- who can establish through improvisational play or clowning or whatever -- a state of play . so people know that it 's there . and then you get an fmri specialist , and you get frank wilson , and you get other kinds of hard scientists , including neuroendocrinologists . and you get them into a group together focused on play , and it 's pretty hard not to take it seriously . unfortunately , that has n't been done sufficiently
-- and i was there with a catcher 's mitt . and i was there with my arms open . the nurse was coming at me with this beautiful , beautiful child , and i remember , as she was approaching me , the voices of friends saying ,  the moment they put the baby in your hands , you will feel a sense of love that will come over you that is [ on ] an order of magnitude more powerful than anything you 've ever experienced in your entire life .  so i was bracing myself for the moment . the baby was coming , and i was ready for this mack truck of love
and all of the cars when they 're sitting idle being part of a global grid for computing capability . we find that premise quite exciting . the automobile becomes , then , an appliance , not in a commodity sense , but an appliance , mobile power , mobile platform for information and computing and communication , as well as a form of transportation . and the key to all of this is to make it affordable , to make it exciting , to get it on a pathway where there 's a way to make money doing it . and again , this is a pretty big march to take here . and a lot of people say ,
and getting pakistan finished . they 're going to be the tough ones . bg : now what about the money ? give us a sense of how much the campaign costs a year . and is it easy to raise that money ? and what 's it going to be like the next couple of years ? ba : it 's interesting . we spend right now about 750 million to 800 million dollars a year . that 's what it costs to reach 500 million children . it sounds like a lot of money ; it is a lot of money . but when you 're reaching 500 million children multiple times -- 20 , 30 cents to reach a child --
it happens also , actually , in the most recent book i wrote , called  good business ,  where i interviewed some of the ceos who had been nominated by their peers as being both very successful and very ethical , very socially responsible .
and in our system , we know that simply doing more of this wo n't eat into deep educational inequalities , especially in inner cities and former industrial areas . so that 's why we need three more kinds of innovation .
to conclude , i want to tell you two stories about how mothers teach their children about the world even before they 're born . in the autumn of 1944 , the darkest days of world war ii , german troops blockaded western holland , turning away all shipments of food . the opening of the nazi 's siege was followed by one of the harshest winters in decades -- so cold the water in the canals froze solid . soon food became scarce , with many dutch surviving on just 500 calories a day -- a quarter of what they consumed before the war . as weeks of deprivation stretched into months ,
this sets up consumer-driven healthcare . that 's where this is all starting . let me just give you specifics about why this is a big movement if you 're not aware of it : 1.2 million americans have gotten a nike shoe , which is a body-area network that connects the shoe , the sole of the shoe to the iphone , or an ipod . and this wired magazine cover article really captured a lot of this ; it talked a lot about the nike shoe and how quickly that 's been adopted to monitor exercise physiology and energy expenditure . here are some things , the principles that are guiding principles to keep in mind :
we consider this to be sort of the spirit of ted . and you wonder , is it practical ? and it turns out if i had not been -- unfortunately , we have some light bulb changes . we can probably get it down , but it 's possible it 's gone up to a greater destiny up there -- -- than it ever had . and i wanted to make -- just -- but i want to make just two points . one is , you think it 's frivolous ; there 's nothing to it . and yet if i had not been making ornithopters like that , a little bit cruder , in 1939 -- a long , long time ago --
because i was just floating along . i could n't care less if clients ever called . and clients did n't call . because they could see i was no longer serving them , i was only serving myself . so they took their money and their projects to others who would serve them better . well , it did n't take long for business to drop like a rock . my partner and i , thom , we had to let all our employees go . it was down to just the two of us , and we were about to go under . and that was great . because with no employees , there was nobody for me to manage .
people who spent money on themselves , nothing happened .
i wish that sexual abuse and exploitation in schools would stop .  this is the dream of the african girl . several years ago , there was one african girl . this girl had a son who wished for a piece of doughnut because he was extremely hungry . angry , frustrated , really upset about the state of her society and the state of her children , this young girl started a movement , a movement of ordinary women banding together to build peace . i will fulfill the wish .
in 1981 , it flew 163 miles from paris to england , solely on the power of sunbeams , and established a basis for the pathfinder . the message from all these vehicles is that ideas and technology can be harnessed to produce remarkable gains in doing more with less -- gains that can help us attain a desirable balance between technology and nature . the stakes are high as we speed toward a challenging future . buckminster fuller said it clearly :  there are no passengers on spaceship earth , only crew . we , the crew , can and must do more with less -- much less . 
but you get a little feel from what it can do . ok , here we go . mk : sorry . ok. pm : if you can pass it down when you 're done . yeah , i think -- i lost a little orientation ; i looked up into this light . it hit the building . and the building was poorly placed , actually . but you 're beginning to see what can be done . we 're working on projects now -- even wing-flapping things the size of hawk moths -- darpa contracts , working with caltech , ucla . where all this leads , i do n't know . is it practical ? i do n't know .
and shaking their hand and thanking them for their service , now they have self-worth again . i think it 's very important , because right now somebody needs to step up , and this generation of veterans has the opportunity to do that if they are given the chance . thank you very much . my thing with school lunch is , it 's a social justice issue . i 'm the director of nutrition services for the berkeley unified school district . i have 90 employees and 17 locations , 9,600 kids . i 'm doing 7,100 meals a day and i 've been doing it for two years , trying to change how we feed kids in america .
all over southeast asia , and then abandoned -- 40,000 children all over asia . i had never heard the word amerasian before . i spent a few days photographing children in different countries , and like a lot of photographers and a lot of journalists , i always hope that when my pictures were published , they might actually have an effect on a situation , instead of just documenting it . so , i was so disturbed by what i saw , and i was so unhappy with the article that ran afterwards , that i decided i would take six months off . i was 28 years old . i decided i would find six children in different countries ,
simple .
i went to a very elitist , snobbish , expensive education in india , and that almost destroyed me . i was all set to be a diplomat , teacher , doctor -- all laid out . then , i do n't look it , but i was the indian national squash champion for three years . the whole world was laid out for me . everything was at my feet . i could do nothing wrong . and then i thought out of curiosity i 'd like to go and live and work and just see what a village is like .
and that 's what our mandate is , in a way , to do . thank you . what you 're doing , right now , at this very moment , is killing you .
parents would shuffle kids away from us .
but ,  he said ,  she 's running the orphanage , and she 's been here three days .  this was movie day -- that she organized -- where all the kids went to the movies . a lot of the kids who had been adopted actually wrote back to the other kids , telling them about what their life was like with their new families . so , it was a really big deal when the letters showed up . this is a woman who is now working at the orphanage , whose son had been adopted . gene and gail started studying korean the moment they had gotten my first letter .
do you mind my asking a question ?   would , could , should , or would , should , could .  and  would  is coco chanel 's lover ,  should  is edith sitwell , and  could  is an august sander subject . and ,  he noticed a large stain in the center of the rug .  so , there 's a kind of british understatement , murder-mystery theme that i really love very much . and then ,  be obscure clearly ! be wild of tongue in a way we can understand .  e.b . white wrote us a number of rules , which can either paralyze you and make you loathe him for the rest of time , or you can ignore them , which i do ,
and i 've never played these songs for anybody except the microphone . this is a song that i wrote about the meaning of technology , which goes perfectly with this gathering . i started thinking about -- when i was in college , especially as a blind person , doing a research paper was a major undertaking . you had to go to the library , see if you could get them to find the books for you , you know , footnotes and all that . now you can just go on google . just look it up . i wish i had that when i was in college . anyway , this is a song about :
i would simply say that the jobs we hope to make and the jobs we hope to create are n't going to stick unless they 're jobs that people want . and i know the point of this conference is to celebrate things that are near and dear to us , but i also know that clean and dirty are n't opposites . they 're two sides of the same coin , just like innovation and imitation , like risk and responsibility , like peripetia and anagnorisis , like that poor little lamb , who i hope is n't quivering anymore , and like my time that 's gone . it 's been great talking to you and get back to work , will you ?
i 'm going to go over some science experiments and try to cover three musical experiments . i 'm going to start off by playing a video for you . and this video is a video of keith jarrett , who 's a well-known jazz improviser and probably the most well-known , iconic example of someone who takes improvisation to a really higher level . and he 'll improvise entire concerts off the top of his head , and he 'll never play it exactly the same way again , and so , as a form of intense creativity , i think this is a great example . and so why do n't we go and click the video .
a friend of mine works in transcultural psychiatry , and he is interested in the question of why people do and do n't take their meds . so , dapsone , or something like that , you have to take it for a while . he has a wonderful story of talking to a villager in india and saying ,  have you taken your dapsone ?   yes .   have you taken it every day ?   yes .   have you taken if for a month ?   yes .  what the guy actually meant was that he 'd fed a 30-day dose of dapsone to his dog , that morning . he was telling the truth . because in a different culture ,
he had kids from all over korea living there , and he would find families for these kids . this is a social worker interviewing hyun-sook . now , i had always thought she was completely untouched by all of this , because the grandmother , to me , appeared to be sort of the village wise woman , and the person everybody -- throughout the day , i noticed people kept coming to visit her grandmother . and i always had this mental picture that even though they may have been one of the poorer families in the village , they were one of the most respected families in the village .
they 'll never be able to cope .  not only do our children cope very well , but they excel in it . you should just come across to see how well our children do . there is also this myth that parents from the slums are not interested in their children going to school ; they 'd much rather put them to work . that 's absolute hogwash . all parents all over the world want their children to lead a better life than themselves , but they need to believe that change is possible . video :
and my theory is , that ’ s so the swiss can prove to their californian colleagues that they ’ re not boring . so they have the slide , and they even have a fireman ’ s pole . don ’ t know what they do with that , but they have one . so all of these places have these symbols . now , our big symbol at ideo is actually not so much the place , it ’ s a thing . and it ’ s actually something that we invented a few years ago , or created a few years ago . it ’ s a toy ; it ’ s called a  finger blaster .  and i forgot to bring one up with me . so if somebody can reach under the chair that ’ s next to them ,
you 're supposed to be the creative ones , what the hell is going on around here ?  it was probably one of my better tirades , i have some good ones , but this was probably one of my better ones . and i went into these people ; how could they take bmw 's money , how could they have a holiday for three months and produce nothing , nothing ? because of course they did n't tell us that they had three station wagons full of drawings , model concepts , pictures -- everything i wanted , they 'd locked up in the cars , because they had shown solidarity with the engineers --
let 's start with the hobbies . when you get dementia , it gets harder and harder to enjoy yourself . you ca n't sit and have long talks with your old friends , because you do n't know who they are .
because it makes a difference . what happens is that bacteria have these collective behaviors , and they can carry out tasks that they could never accomplish if they simply acted as individuals . what i would hope that i could further argue to you is that this is the invention of multicellularity . bacteria have been on the earth for billions of years ; humans , couple hundred thousand . we think bacteria made the rules for how multicellular organization works . we think , by studying bacteria , we 're going to be able to have insight about multicellularity in the human body . we know that the principles and the rules ,
or grandchildren , or nieces , or nephews , to school and tell them to learn , you know , learn what 's in those schools . and when you feed these kids bad food , that 's what they 're learning . so that 's really what this is all about . the way we got here is because of big agribusiness . we now live in a country where most of us do n't decide , by and large , what we eat . we see big businesses , monsanto and dupont , who brought out agent orange and stain-resistant carpet . they control 90 percent of the commercially produced seeds in our country . these are -- 10 companies control much of what 's in our grocery stores ,
and i do that in 3d . so there , you can see , is a left-eye view . there 's a right-eye view . so sort of left-eye view , right-eye view . now something 's interesting here . this looks very different than any sand on earth that i 've ever seen , and i 've seen a lot of sand on earth , believe me . look at this hole in the middle . that hole was caused by a micrometeorite hitting the moon . now , the moon has no atmosphere , so micrometeorites come in continuously , and the whole surface of the moon is covered with powder now , because for four billion years
and we are bequeathing to the developing world school systems that they will now spend a century trying to reform .
and he said something which completely solves this problem . he said a teacher than can be replaced by a machine , should be . so , you know , it puts the teacher into a tough bind , you have to think . anyway , so i 'm proposing that an alternative primary education , whatever alternative you want , is required where schools do n't exist , where schools are not good enough , where teachers are not available or where teachers are not good enough , for whatever reason . if you happen to live in a part of the world where none of this applies , then you do n't need an alternative education . so far i have n't come across such an area , except for one case . i wo n't name the area ,
this man is angry because somebody threw onions all over the staircase , and basically -- you know , i guess onions are a theme here . and he says ,  it is impossible not to lie . it is february and not lying is impossible .  and i really spend a lot of time wondering , how much truth do we tell ? what is it that we 're actually -- what story are we actually telling ? how do we know when we are ourselves ? how do we actually know that these sentences coming out of our mouths are real stories , you know , are real sentences ? or are they fake sentences that we think we ought to be saying ?
two hundred million people a year . every 43 seconds a child in africa dies ; 27 will die during my talk . and there 's no way for us here in this country to grasp really what that means to the people involved . another comment of esther 's was that we react when there 's a tragedy like haiti , but that tragedy is ongoing . so what can we do about it ? well , there are a lot of things people have tried for many years for solving malaria . you can spray ; the problem is there are environmental issues . you can try to treat people and create awareness .
because i thought that had been eradicated in the way that smallpox had been eradicated . bruce aylward : oops . jon , polio 's almost been eradicated . but the reality is that polio still exists today . we made this map for jon to try to show him exactly where polio still exists . this is the picture . there 's not very much left in the world . but the reason there 's not very much left is because there 's been an extraordinary public/private partnership working behind the scenes , almost unknown , i 'm sure to most of you here today . it 's been working for 20 years to try and eradicate this disease ,
but you know , many adults are pretty reluctant to engage with role-play . some of it ’ s embarrassment and some of it is because they just don ’ t believe that what emerges is necessarily valid . they dismiss an interesting interaction by saying , you know ,  that ’ s just happening because they ’ re acting it out .  research into kids ' behavior actually suggests that it ’ s worth taking role-playing seriously . because when children play a role , they actually follow social scripts quite closely that they ’ ve learnt from us as adults . if one kid plays  store ,  and another one ’ s playing  house ,  then the whole kind of play falls down . so they get used to quite quickly
so if you give undergraduates five dollars , it looks like coffee to them and they run over to starbucks and spend it as fast as they can . but some people bought a coffee for themselves , the way they usually would , but other people said that they bought a coffee for somebody else . so the very same purchase , just targeted toward yourself or targeted toward somebody else .
they get scared to walk around . they get scared to move . so i 'm doing activities that will build my sense of balance . i 'm doing yoga and tai chi to improve my balance , so that when i start to lose it , i 'll still be able to be mobile . i 'm doing weight-bearing exercise , so that i have the muscle strength so that when i start to wither , i have more time that i can still move around . finally , the third thing . i 'm trying to become a better person . my dad was kind and loving before he had alzheimer 's , and he 's kind and loving now .
and the surgeons grabbed hold of it and said , well , i want to hold it like this , or like that . and all of a sudden a productive conversation was happening about design around a tangible object . and in the end it turned into a real device . and so this behavior is all about quickly getting something into the real world , and having your thinking advanced as a result . at ideo there ’ s a kind of a back-to-preschool feel sometimes about the environment . the prototyping carts , filled with colored paper and play-doh and glue sticks and stuff -- i mean , they do have a bit of a kindergarten feel to them .
we were engaged in , in iraq and afghanistan if we were to suddenly find ourselves in a situation in which we were imposing anything other than a democratic system . anything else would run contrary to our values , it would run contrary to the wishes of the people on the ground , it would run contrary to our interests . i remember in iraq , for example , that we went through a period of feeling that we should delay democracy . we went through a period of feeling that the lesson learned from bosnia was that elections held too early enshrined sectarian violence , enshrined extremist parties ,
and so now we can look one degrees , two degrees , three degrees away from that node and eliminate three-quarters of the diagram outside that sphere of influence . within that sphere , most of those nodes are not actionable , like the harshness of the terrain , and a very small minority are actual military actions .
where 'd that come from ? about six years ago i decided that i would learn arabic , which turns out to be a supremely logical language .
so for any problem , the more you can zoom out and embrace complexity , the better chance you have of zooming in on the simple details that matter most .
he would answer every question correctly on that topic . so , they seem to be able to acquire very quickly . so what was the conclusion over the six years of work ? it was that primary education can happen on its own , or parts of it can happen on its own . it does not have to be imposed from the top downwards . it could perhaps be a self-organizing system , so that was the second bit that i wanted to tell you , that children can self-organize and attain an educational objective . the third piece was on values , and again , to put it very briefly ,
were things like earrings and makeup .
so you get in the aircraft , you 're flying along , and at 20 minutes out , these jumpmasters start giving you commands . they give 20 minutes -- that 's a time warning . you sit there , ok. then they give you 10 minutes . and of course , you 're responding with all of these . and that 's to boost everybody 's confidence , to show that you 're not scared . then they give you ,  get ready .  then they go ,  outboard personnel , stand up .  if you 're an outboard personnel , now you stand up . if you 're an inboard personnel , stand up . and then you hook up , and you hook up your static line .
was at mile 18 of a 25-mile road march , and he chewed my ass for about 40 seconds . and i 'm not sure that was real interaction . but then a couple of years later , when i was a company commander , i went out to the national training center . and we did an operation , and my company did a dawn attack -- you know , the classic dawn attack : you prepare all night , move to the line of departure . and i had an armored organization at that point . we move forward , and we get wiped out -- i mean , wiped out immediately . the enemy did n't break a sweat doing it .
they sometimes store grain in it . i 've even seen it used for a chicken coop . but what does marketing really entail that would make a sanitation solution get a result in diarrhea ? well , you work with the community . you start to talk to them about why open defecation is something that should n't be done in the village , and they agree to that . but then you take the toilet and you position it as a modern , trendy convenience . one state in northern india has gone so far as to link toilets to courtship . and it works -- look at these headlines .
are turned on and at what level they 're turned on . and so our project is seeking to look at this readout , understanding which of these 25,000 genes is turned on . so in order to undertake such a project , we obviously need brains . so we sent our lab technician out . we were seeking normal human brains . what we actually start with is a medical examiner 's office . this a place where the dead are brought in . we are seeking normal human brains . there 's a lot of criteria by which we 're selecting these brains . we want to make sure that we have normal humans between the ages of 20 to 60 ,
and the beauty of the second cure for this disease was that it could be used on infants and one-year-olds .
now , when we do studies -- we have , with other colleagues around the world , done over 8,000 interviews of people -- from dominican monks , to blind nuns , to himalayan climbers , to navajo shepherds -- who enjoy their work .
and donors are using a common platform to map all their projects .
how do you get back an accurate view of the color on mars if you have a really terrible bandwidth to do it with ? and the answer is not complicated but it 's one which i do n't want to go through here , other than to say that the communication systems for doing this are really pretty well understood . also , a fact which you may not know is that the compute capability of this thing is not so different from the compute capability of your desktop computer . this is a fantastic device which is only beginning to be tapped . i do n't know whether the idea of one computer , one child
and so if you 're looking for growth industries to get into , that 's not a good one -- protecting natural creatures . human population is going up ; it 's going to continue for quite a while . good business in obstetricians , morticians , and farming , housing , etc . -- they all deal with human bodies , which require being fed , transported , housed and so on . and the information technology , which connects to our brains , has no limit -- now , that is a wonderful field to be in . you 're looking for growth opportunity ? it 's just going up through the roof . and then , the size of the earth . somehow making these all compatible
play the piano , be with your best friend , perhaps work , if work is what provides flow for you . and then the other areas become less and less positive . arousal is still good because you are over-challenged there . your skills are not quite as high as they should be , but you can move into flow fairly easily by just developing a little more skill .
and of course , by building quick prototypes , we can get out and test our ideas with consumers and users much more quickly than if we ’ re trying to describe them through words . but what about designing something that isn ’ t physical ? something like a service or an experience ? something that exists as a series of interactions over time ? instead of building play , this can be approached with role-play . so , if you ’ re designing an interaction between two people -- such as , i don ’ t know -- ordering food at a fast food joint or something , you need to be able to imagine how that experience might feel over a period of time .
tools like this help turn a shelf full of inscrutable documents into a publicly understandable visual , and what 's exciting is that with this openness , there are today new opportunities for citizens to give feedback and engage with government .
i think that is terrific . you know why ? because -- and i say this as somebody who worked in finance -- 500 billion dollars at least has gone into the emerging markets in the past decade . because investors saw the potential for return at a time of slowing economic growth , and so they created financial products and financial innovation tailored to the emerging markets . how wonderful would it be if we were prepared to replace all of our lofty words with our wallets and invest 500 billion dollars unleashing women 's economic potential ? just think of the benefits
of 26 , for the first time ever , i had a conversation with my dad one on one about men 's health . i had a conversation with my dad about prostate cancer , and i learned that my grandfather had prostate cancer and i was able to share with my dad that he was twice as likely to get that disease , and he did n't know that , and he had n't been getting screened for it .  so now , that guy is getting screened for prostate cancer . so those conversations , getting men engaged in this , at whatever age , is so critically important , and in my view so much more important
so now i live in los angeles , because the prostate cancer foundation of the u.s. is based there , and i always get asked by the media down there , because it 's so celebrity-driven ,  who are your celebrity ambassadors ?  and i say to them ,  last year we were fortunate enough to have 450,000 celebrity ambassadors .  and they go ,  what , what do you mean ?  and it 's like , everything single person , every single mo bro and mo sista that participates in movember is our celebrity ambassador , and that is so , so important and fundamental to our success . now what i want to share with you is
they go around looking for what it is . but then we negotiate on what they 're going to get paid . and then they do n't have a regular check , but they have more opportunities to find more stuff , and they learn the skill of negotiating , and they learn the skill of finding opportunities as well . you breed that kind of stuff . each of my kids has two piggy banks . fifty percent of all the money that they earn or get gifted , 50 percent goes in their house account , 50 percent goes in their toy account .
because , ultimately , if we do n't , then we 're going to have boys who leave elementary school saying ,  well i guess that was just a place for girls . it was n't for me . so i 've got to do gaming , or i 've got to do sports .  if we change these things , if we pay attention to these things , and we re-engage boys in their learning , they will leave the elementary schools saying ,  i 'm smart .  thank you . good morning . so magic is an excellent way for staying ahead of the reality curve , to make possible today what science will make a reality tomorrow . as a cyber-magician , i combine elements of illusion
certainly in hollywood . the way we portray working people on tv -- it 's laughable . if there 's a plumber , he 's 300 pounds and he 's got a giant butt crack . admit it . you see him all the time . that 's what plumbers look like , right ? we turn them into heroes , or we turn them into punch lines . that 's what tv does . we try hard on  dirty jobs  not to do that , which is why i do the work and i do n't cheat . but , we 've waged this war on madison avenue . i mean , so many of the commercials that come out there -- in the way of a message , what 's really being said ?
games and educational material , music downloads , playing video . in short , what all of us do . and over 300 children will become computer literate and be able to do all of these things in six months with one computer . so , how do they do that ? if you calculated the actual time of access , it would work out to minutes per day , so that 's not how it 's happening . what you have , actually , is there is one child operating the computer . and surrounding him are usually three other children , who are advising him on what they should do . if you test them , all four will get the same scores in whatever you ask them .
♫ i can do it all right here in my home . ♫ ♫ yeah , mm-hmm ... ♫ ♫ everything that 's ever been known , ♫ ♫ i can punch it up right here on my phone . ♫ ♫ freedom train , coming soon ♫ ♫ right here in my living room ♫ ♫ from baton rouge to saskatoon ♫ ♫ and all points in between . ♫ ♫ 'cause i got all the answers ♫ ♫ right here on my screen . ♫ ♫ and i got all the answers , yeah . ♫ ♫ i got every book and magazine . ♫ ♫ i got all , i got all , i got all ... ♫
luckily , the genetic testing proved that , in fact , this strand came north , because , had it come from the south , it would have had a much wider impact in terms of transmission . so many more people would have been affected . so what 's the endgame ? well on september 4th , there was a huge mop-up campaign , which is what you do in polio . they went out and where shriram lives , they vaccinated two million people . so in less than a month , we went from one case of paralysis to a targeted vaccination program . and i 'm happy to say only one other person in that area got polio .
that can feel these vibrations in order for us to allow ourselves to feel the pleasure and the beauty of nature ? nature 's beauty is a gift that cultivates appreciation and gratitude . so i have a gift i want to share with you today , a project i 'm working on called happiness revealed , and it 'll give us a glimpse into that perspective from the point of view of a child and an elderly man of that world . child : when i watch tv , it 's just some shows that you just -- that are pretend , and when you explore , you get more imagination than you already had ,
could just light up the entire brain , from our prefrontal cortex all the way back to our cerebellum , how music was becoming a neuropsychiatric modality to help children with autism , to help people struggling with stress and anxiety and depression , how deeply parkinsonian patients would find that their tremor and their gait would steady when they listened to music , and how late-stage alzheimer 's patients , whose dementia was so far progressed that they could no longer recognize their family , could still pick out a tune by chopin at the piano that they had learned when they were children . but i had an ulterior motive of visiting gottfried schlaug ,
he talked about how the mandalas of ancient hindu religion were kind of projected into the sky as an attempt to regain some sense of order after the chaos of war .
there 's consoling .
when we see this funny stripy thing : is that a tiger just about to jump out and kill us ? or is it just some weird shadows on the tree ? we need to figure that out pretty fast . well , at least , we did once . most of us don ’ t need to anymore , i suppose . this is some aluminum foil , right ? you use it in the kitchen . that ’ s what it is , isn ’ t it ? of course it is , of course it is . well , not necessarily . kids are more engaged with open possibilities . now , they ’ ll certainly -- when they come across something new , they ’ ll certainly ask ,  what is it ? 
so these stories together became the herald tribune business cover . and when this story posted , i ran to my computer to send it to the imf official . and i said ,  just in case you 're looking for entrepreneurs to feature at your next investment conference , here are a couple of women .  but think about this . the imf official is hardly the only person to automatically file women under micro . the biases , whether intentional or otherwise , are pervasive , and so are the misleading mental images . if you see the word  microfinance ,  what comes to mind ? most people say women . and if you see the word  entrepreneur , 
we have in italy by leonardo da vinci , and look at the wonderful images of faces that nobody has seen for five centuries . look at these portraits . they 're magnificent . you see leonardo at work . you see the geniality of his creation , right directly on the ground layer of the panel , and see this cool thing , finding , i should rather say , an elephant . because of this elephant , over 70 new images came out , never seen for centuries . this was an epiphany . we came to understand and to prove that the brown coating that we see today was not done by leonardo da vinci , which left us
highly cost-effective to use in places like africa and other parts of the world . nm : so it would n't be any fun to show you that without showing you what actually happens when we hit 'em . this is very satisfying . this is one of the first ones we did . the energy 's a little bit high here . we 'll loop around here in just a second , and you 'll see another one . here 's another one . bang . an interesting thing is , we kill them all the time ; we 've never actually gotten the wings to shut off in midair . the wing motor is very resilient .
as long as we 're teaching our kids that heroism starts when someone scratches a mark on your forehead , or someone tells you that you 're part of a prophecy , they 're missing the most important characteristic of leadership , which is that it comes from within . it 's about following your own dreams -- uninvited , uninvited -- and then working with others to make those dreams come true . political parties : oh boy .
the trends give rise to a great case for pessimism . but there 's also a wonderful case for optimism . let 's review them both . first of all , the megatrends . there 's two degrees , or three degrees of climate change baked into the system . it will cause rising seas . it will cause saline deposited into wells and into lands . it will disproportionately harm the poorest and the most vulnerable , as will the increasing rise of population . even though we 've dodged paul ehrlich 's population bomb , and we will not see 20 billion people in this decade , as he had forecast , we eat as if we were 20 billion .
and project ourselves into an experience . so here are some designers who are trying to understand what it might feel like to sleep in a confined space on an airplane . and so they grabbed some very simple materials , you can see , and did this role-play , this kind of very crude role-play , just to get a sense of what it would be like for passengers if they were stuck in quite small places on airplanes . this is one of our designers , kristian simsarian , and he ’ s putting himself through the experience of being an er patient . now , this is a real hospital , in a real emergency room .
and i study that in the natural world , the interconnectedness of species .
what 's going to happen is , we 're going to have kids that have a life less long than our own . the cdc , the center for disease control , has said , of the children born in the year 2000 -- those seven- and eight-year-olds today -- one out of every three caucasians , one out of every two african-americans and hispanics are going to have diabetes in their lifetime . and if that 's not enough , they 've gone on to say , most before they graduate high school . this means that 40 or 45 percent of all school-aged children could be insulin-dependent within a decade . within a decade .
in this case , a mouse , it does n't initiate virulence right away . it gets in , it starts growing , it starts secreting its quorum sensing molecules . it recognizes when it has enough bacteria that now they 're going to launch their attack , and the animal dies . what we 've been able to do is to give these virulent infections , but we give them in conjunction with our anti-quorum sensing molecules -- so these are molecules that look kind of like the real thing , but they 're a little bit different which i 've depicted on this slide . what we now know is that if we treat the animal
so , the good news is that i have a dog and , though i do n't know if i believe in luck -- i do n't know what i believe in , it 's a very complicated question , but i do know that before i go away , i crank his tail seven times . so , whenever he sees a suitcase in the house , because everybody 's always , you know , leaving , they 're always cranking this wonderful dog 's tail , and he runs to the other room . but i am able to make the transition from working for children and --
and think are so important , we have to teach kids about in school . it has to be so much a part of them that they really get it . because , you know what , many of us are sort of at the end of our careers , and we need to be giving these kids -- these young kids , the next generation -- the tools to save themselves and save the planet . one of the things i do a lot is public-private partnerships . i work with private companies who are willing to do r & amp ; d with me , who are willing to do distribution for me ,
how few of them could even resemble a normal , contented , satisfied , happy life once their job , their home , their security was destroyed by the war . so i became interested in understanding what contributed to a life that was worth living . and i tried , as a child , as a teenager , to read philosophy and to get involved in art and religion and many other ways that i could see as a possible answer to that question . and finally i ended up encountering psychology by chance .
the modern sailplane is superbly efficient . some can glide as flat as 60 feet forward for every foot of descent . they are powered only by the energy they can extract from the atmosphere -- an atmosphere nature stirs up by solar energy . humans and soaring birds have found nature to be generous in providing replenishable energy . sailplanes have flown over 1,000 miles , and the altitude record is over 50,000 feet . the solar challenger was made to serve as a symbol that photovoltaic cells can produce real power and will be part of the world 's energy future .
if they 're wearing a lap-and-shoulder belt , in this raw data , 19.4 percent die . and interestingly , wearing a lap-only seatbelt ,
of the development of different islamic cultures across a vast geographic spread , and , again , hundreds of thousands of people have come to see these galleries since they opened last october . i 'm often asked ,  is digital media replacing the museum ?  and i think those numbers are a resounding rejection of that notion . i mean , do n't get me wrong , i 'm a huge advocate of the web . it gives us a way of reaching out to audiences around the globe , but nothing replaces the authenticity of the object presented with passionate scholarship . bringing people face to face with our objects is a way of bringing them face to face with people
because simple answers may emerge .
the filmmaker mira nair speaks about growing up in a small town in india . its name is bhubaneswar , and here 's a picture of one of the temples in her town . mira nair : in this little town , there were like 2,000 temples . we played cricket all the time . we kind of grew up in the rubble . the major thing that inspired me , that led me on this path , that made me a filmmaker eventually , was traveling folk theater that would come through the town and i would go off and see these great battles of good and evil by two people in a school field
i 'm also quoted -- and i told the person who wrote the textbook -- i 'm now quoted in that exact same university textbook in every canadian university and college studies . in managerial accounting , i 'm chapter eight . i open up chapter eight talking about budgeting . and i told the author , after they did my interview , that i cheated in that same course . and she thought it was too funny to not include it anyway . but kids , you can see these signs in them . the definition of an entrepreneur is  a person who organizes , operates and assumes the risk of a business venture . 
two years ago , i was the highest-rated lecturer at mit 's entrepreneurial master 's program . and it was a speaking event in front of groups of entrepreneurs from around the world . when i was in grade two , i won a city-wide speaking competition , but nobody had ever said ,  hey , this kid 's a good speaker . he ca n't focus , but he loves walking around and getting people energized .  no one said ,  get him a coach in speaking .  they said , get me a tutor in what i suck at . so as kids show these traits -- and we need to start looking for them --
and they kept on using the existing cure that they had on the two-year-olds and up .
and the images for me conjure up these really awful things . well , not so awful . i received a box in the mail and it was wrapped with newspaper and there was the picture of the man on the newspaper and he was dead . and i say ,  i hope he 's not really dead , just enjoying a refreshing lie-down in the snow , but the caption says he is dead .  and actually , he was . i think he 's dead , though i do n't know , maybe he 's not dead .  and this woman leans over in anguish , not about that man , but about all sad things . it happens quite often in february . 
in august , 2011. but within a few weeks , university students were able to use mobile phones and an open-source platform to dramatically map and what is very exciting is that citizens were then today , even bihar is turning around and opening up under a committed leadership that is making government transparent , accessible and responsive to the poor .
average happiness is , of course , inadequate , because it does n't speak to the moment-by-moment experience , and so this is what we think it looks like when you layer in moment-to-moment experience .
so then i measured , and they were using 200 english words with each other -- mispronounced , but correct usage -- words like exit , stop , find , save , that kind of thing , not only to do with the computer but in their day-to-day conversations . so , madantusi seemed to show that language is not a barrier ; in fact they may be able to teach themselves the language if they really wanted to . finally , i got some funding to try this experiment out to see if these results are replicable , if they happen everywhere else . india is a good place to do such an experiment in ,
and the red color shows the opposite .
there we go , the automobile . that was 100 years right there -- did you catch that ? between that one there , and that one there , it changed a lot did n't it ? ok , it 's not marketing ; there 's a very interesting car concept here , but the marketing part is not what i want to talk about here . i want to talk about this . why it means you have to wash a car , what is it , that sensuality you have to touch about it ? that 's the sculpture that goes into it . that sensuality .
because color is almost everywhere , so the biggest change for example is going to an art gallery , i can listen to a picasso , for example . so it 's like i 'm going to a concert hall , because i can listen to the paintings . and supermarkets , i find this is very shocking , it 's very , very attractive to walk along a supermarket . it 's like going to a nightclub . it 's full of different melodies . yeah . especially the aisle with cleaning products . it 's just fabulous . also , the way i dress has changed .
how many people have their blackberries ? we 're plugged in ; we 're connected . i would never suggest for a second that something bad has come out of the tech revolution . good grief , not to this crowd . but i would suggest that innovation without imitation is a complete waste of time . and nobody celebrates imitation the way  dirty jobs  guys know it has to be done . your iphone without those people making the same interface , the same circuitry , the same board , over and over ? all of that ? that 's what makes it equally as possible as the genius that goes inside of it . so , we 've got this new toolbox , you know .
we 're going to have a mustache-themed party , we 're going to have djs , we 're going to celebrate life , and we 're going to change the face of men 's health .  and he just looked at me and laughed , and he said , he said ,  adam , that 's a really novel idea , but we 're an ultraconservative organization .
— you go to the ruins of the colosseum or the ruins of a cathedral someplace — and they take on a new meaning when you watch the weather . i mean , there were afternoons i was down there , and the light goes pink and there 's a mist in the air and you 're standing in the rubble , and i found myself recognizing both the inherent beauty of nature and the fact that nature , as time , is erasing this wound . time is unstoppable , and it transforms the event . it gets further and further away from the day , and light and seasons temper it in some way ,
it did n't make them less happy , it just did n't do much for them .
within the multitasking world .
and the question was , here we do it by taking a sample , we put it in a centrifuge , we spin it , and you get blood cells out . terrific . what happens if you do n't have an electricity , and a centrifuge , and whatever ? and we thought for a while of how you might do this and the way , in fact , you do it is what 's shown here . you get an eggbeater , which is everywhere , and you saw off a blade , and then you take tubing , and you stick it on that . you put the blood in , you spin it -- somebody sits there and spins it .
and informed engagement of every citizen . in other words , if democracy is to be rebuilt , is to become again vigorous and vibrant , it is necessary not just for the public to learn to trust their politicians , but for the politicians to learn to trust the public . thank you very much indeed . i 'd like to take you to another world . and i 'd like to share a 45 year-old love story with the poor , living on less than one dollar a day .
are just irrelevant for the future , except they 're there and we have to deal with them . i spend about 15 percent of my time trying to save the world , the other 85 percent , the usual -- and whatever else we devote ourselves to . and in that 15 percent , the main focus is on human mind , thinking skills , somehow trying to unleash kids from the straightjacket of school , which is putting information and dogma into them , get them so they really think , ask tough questions , argue about serious subjects , do n't believe everything that 's in the book , think broadly or creative . they can be .
for a decision together in a single room and look them in the eye and build their confidence and get trust from them , i 'm now leading a force that 's dispersed , and i 've got to use other techniques . i 've got to use video teleconferences , i 've got to use chat , i 've got to use email , i 've got to use phone calls -- i 've got to use everything i can , not just for communication , but for leadership . a 22-year-old individual operating alone , thousands of miles from me , has got to communicate to me with confidence . i have to have trust in them and vice versa .
like this . and let me mark it so we can recognize it when we see it again . all right . very significant mark . and let 's put it back into the deck , somewhere in the middle , and let 's get started . voice : system ready . acquiring image . marco tempest : for those of you who do n't play cards , a deck of cards is made up of four different suits : hearts , clubs , diamonds and spades . the cards are amongst the oldest of symbols , and have been interpreted in many different ways . now , some say that the four suits represent the four seasons . there 's spring , summer , autumn and â
 i was walking and met a long-time friend whose son was sick with malaria . they had no money , they went to a clinic and i gave her this money . 
and what we tried with the pig was external electrodes on the skin , like you see in an emergency room , and i 'm going to show you why they do n't work very well . and then we put a lead , which is a wire , in the right ventricle inside the heart , which does the electrogram , which is the signal voltage from inside the heart . well , with the pig , at the baseline , before we blocked the pig 's artery to simulate a heart attack , that was the signal . after 43 seconds , even an expert could n't tell the difference , and after three minutes -- well , if you really studied it , you 'd see a difference .
there are formal settings -- schools , colleges , hospitals -- in which innovation can take place , and informal settings -- communities , families , social networks .
and al-jebr roughly translates to  the system for reconciling disparate parts . 
and sometimes i feel like i ca n't really enjoy myself unless it 's like a vacation , like when i get mondays and all those days off . girl 8 : well , sometimes there is a lot of stuff going on because i have music lessons and i 'm on swim team --
and it 's not that i 'm a romantic . i 'm really a realist . the reality is , there 's the woolworth building in a veil of smoke from the site , but it 's now like a scrim across a theater , and it 's turning pink , you know , and down below there are hoses spraying , and the lights have come on for the evening , and the water is turning acid green because the sodium lamps are on , and i 'm thinking ,  my god , who could dream this up ?  but the fact is , i 'm there , it looks like that , you have to take a picture . jb : you have to take a picture . that sense of urgency ,
to remember that they still have the capacity to experience something beautiful and that humanity has not forgotten them . and the spark of that beauty , the spark of that humanity transforms into hope , and we know , whether we choose the path of music or of medicine , that 's the very first thing we must instill within our communities , within our audiences , if we want to inspire healing from within . i 'd like to end with a quote by john keats , the romantic english poet , a very famous quote that i 'm sure all of you know . keats himself had also given up a career in medicine
because it 's being piloted in a school where the students are already getting , let 's say , 80 percent of whatever they could do . you put in this new super-duper technology , and now they get 83 percent . so the principal looks at it and says , 3 percent for 300,000 dollars ? forget it . if you took the same technology and piloted it into one of those remote schools , where the score was 30 percent , and , let 's say , took that up to 40 percent -- that will be a completely different thing . so the relative change that et , educational technology , would make , would be far greater at the bottom of the pyramid than at the top ,
but now we have the answer to our question .
 you know , we want to learn how to read and write . can you teach us ?  so , we started an afterschool for our parents , for our mothers . we had 25 mothers who came regularly after school to study . we want to continue with this program and extend it to all our other schools . ninety-eight percent of our fathers are alcoholics . so , you can imagine how traumatized and how dysfunctional the houses are where our children come from . we have to send the fathers to de-addiction labs and when they come back , most times sober , we have to find a job for them
when the kids arrive they 're confronted with lots of stuff : wood and nails and rope and wheels , and lots of tools , real tools . it 's a six-day immersive experience for the kids . and within that context , we can offer the kids time -- something that seems in short supply in their over-scheduled lives . our goal is to ensure that they leave with a better sense of how to make things than when they arrived , and the deep internal realization that you can figure things out by fooling around . nothing ever turns out as planned ... ever . and the kids soon learn
one woman shoots her face . one woman shoots her husband . one woman straps herself . one woman gives birth to a baby . one woman gives birth to borders . one woman no longer believes love will ever find her . one woman never did . where do refugee hearts go ? broken , dissed , placed where they 're not from , do n't want to be missed . faced with absence . we mourn each one or we mean nothing at all . my spine curves spiral . precipice running to and running from human beings . cluster bombs left behind . de facto landmines . a smoldering grief . harvest contaminated tobacco . harvest bombs . harvest baby teeth .
and sometimes family would pray to the spirits to kill off a girl child so they could have a male child . but over the '70s and '80s , the south korea government decided they wanted to rapidly industrialize , and so what they did was , they started to push women into the workforce . now they 've been asking a question since 1985 :  how strongly do you prefer a first-born son ?  and now look at the chart . that 's from 1985 to 2003. how much do you prefer a first-born son ? so you can see that these economic changes really do have a strong effect on our culture .
phrases we can not say , because if we do so , we might be accosted , jailed , or even killed . and all of this from a puff of air emanating from our mouths . now all this fuss about a single one of our traits tells us there 's something worth explaining . and that is how and why did this remarkable trait evolve , and why did it evolve only in our species ? now it 's a little bit of a surprise that to get an answer to that question , we have to go to tool use in the chimpanzees . now these chimpanzees are using tools , and we take that as a sign of their intelligence .
and so , we went to buffalo , new york , and here is the precursor to it . these are the crash test dummies , waiting for their chance to take the center stage .
who has a tiny chance of getting out of here and going to america .  i said ,  i do n't know if it 's the right decision or not , but i would like you to come to lunch tomorrow and tell the uncle what it 's like to walk down the street , what people say to you , what you do for a living . and just -- i want him to understand what happens if she stays here . and i could be wrong , i do n't know , but i wish you would come tomorrow .  so , these two came to lunch , and we got thrown out of the restaurant .
than the funds we raise .
learning has to be productive in order for it to make sense . and finally , they have a different model of scale , and it 's a chinese restaurant model of how to scale . and i learned it from this guy , who is an amazing character .
this is a device that not only measures cardiac rhythm , as you saw already , but it also goes well beyond that . this is me now . and you can see the ecg . below that 's the actual heart rate and the trend ; to the right of that is a bioconductant . that 's the fluid status , fluid status , that 's really important if you 're monitoring somebody with heart failure . and below that 's temperature , and respiration , and oxygen , and then the position activity . so , this is really striking , because this device measures seven things that are very much vital signs for monitoring someone with heart failure . ok ?
and recycle -- right at the end there -- recycling is the last point i want to make ; but it 's the four r 's , rather than the three r 's -- then i think we 're going to be on our way . so these three are not perfect -- they 're ideas . i think that there are many problems to come , but with help , i 'm sure i 'm going to find solutions . and i hope you all take part . thank you very much . contagious is a good word . even in the times of h1n1 , i like the word . laughter is contagious . passion is contagious . inspiration is contagious .
[ ... changing people 's lives . creating jobs . ] [ fueling growth . ] [ and making a better world . ] [ entrepreneurs are everywhere . ] [ they run small businesses that support our economy , ] [ design tools to help you ... ] [ ... stay connected with friends , family and colleagues around the world . ] [ and they 're finding new ways of helping to solve society 's oldest problems . ] [ do you know an entrepreneur ? ] [ entrepreneurs can be anyone ... ] [ even ... you ! ] [ so seize the opportunity to create the job you always wanted ] [ help heal the economy ]
that does n't make any sense .  you just figure out a way to make more money faster . every week , i would go to the corner store and buy all these pops . then i would go up and deliver them to these 70-year-old women playing bridge . and they 'd give me their orders for the following week . and then i 'd just deliver pop and i 'd just charge twice . and i had this captured market . you did n't need contracts . you just needed to have a supply and demand and this audience who bought into you . these women were n't going to go to anybody else because they liked me , and i kind of figured it out .
and then we looked at the brain activity . i 'm going to try to condense this for you . these are contrast maps that are showing subtractions between what changes when you 're improvising versus when you 're doing something memorized . in red is an area that active in the prefrontal cortex , the frontal lobe of the brain , and in blue is this area that was deactivated . and so we had this focal area called the medial prefrontal cortex that went way up in activity . we had this broad patch of area called the lateral prefrontal cortex that went way down in activity , and i 'll summarize that for you here .
the packaging , and the website , and you need to continue to really touch the user , in many ways . but how do you retain somebody , when it 's never done ? and hosain rahman , the ceo of aliph jawbone , you know , really understands that you need a different structure . so , in a way , the different structure is that we 're partners , it 's a partnership . we can continue to work and dedicate ourselves to this project , and then we also share in the rewards . and here 's another project , another partnership-type approach . this is called y water , and it 's this guy from los angeles , thomas arndt , austrian originally , who came to us ,
but the heart muscle has died . and that is the typical treatment in the advanced world -- not africa -- that 's the typical treatment in the advanced world today . so we developed the angelmed guardian system and we have a device inside this patient , called the implanted angelmed guardian . and when you have a blockage , the alarm goes off and it sends the alarm and the electrogram to an external device , which gets your baseline electrogram from 24 hours ago and the one that caused the alarm , so you can take it to the emergency room and show them , and say , take care of me right away .
 i 'm going to move this down a little and i 'm going to erase half your aura .  and , by god , the neurologist did erase it , and that 's the middle picture : half of the aura erased by a short magnetic pulse . what does that mean ? that means that the magnetic pulse is generating an electric current that 's interfering with the erroneous electrical activity in the brain . and finally he says ,  ok , now i 'm going to --  all of the aura get erased with an appropriately placed magnetic pulse . what is the result ? we designed a magnetic depolarizer that looks like this , that you could have -- a lady , in her pocket book --
we have all this , but what are we going to do with it ? it 's called  all the answers .  ♫ what is the weather in cincinnati ? ♫ ♫ what is the time in tokyo ? ♫ ♫ who is this little child 's daddy ? ♫ ♫ and who the hell needs to know ? ♫ ♫ why do memories of you linger ♫ ♫ when i 'm trying to reach my goal ? ♫ ♫ and why must i move my fingers ♫ ♫ to the music in my soul ? ♫ ♫ i do n't have to know . ♫ ♫ 'cause here i go ... ♫ ♫ and i got all the answers ♫
and leading into movember 2006 , we 'd run through all the money from foster 's , we 'd run through all the money i had , and essentially we had no money left , and we 'd convinced all our suppliers -- creative agencies , web development agencies , hosting companies , whatnot -- to delay their billing until december .
bear in mind there are two things about this . this is a car seat that was installed by someone who has installed 1,000 car seats , who knew exactly how to do it . and also it turned out these bench seats are the very best way to install car seats .
and if there 's a paradox of aging , it 's that recognizing that we wo n't live forever changes our perspective on life in positive ways .
intuitive , you know , inventive people you will ever meet . they 're just fascinating . and they 're like that all over the world . i had the privilege of working in haiti just for two weeks earlier this year . and haiti , if you 've ever been there , is just a tragedy . i mean , there may be 100 explanations for why haiti is the impoverished nation it is , but there is no excuse to see that sort of squalor . but you meet this beekeeper , and i met this beekeeper here , and he is one of the most knowledgeable beekeepers i 've ever met . no formal education , but very knowledgeable .
we take less notice of trivial matters .
 what would the hero do in a movie , if i was writing this as a movie script ?  so i said ,  listen , it 's really cold , i 've come a very long way , do you mind if i just come in for a minute ? i 'm freezing .  so the guy kind of reluctantly let us in and we sat down on the floor . and as we started talking , i saw him yell something , and hyun-sook came and brought us some food . and i had this whole mental picture of , sort of like cinderella . i sort of had this picture of this incredibly wonderful , bright , happy little child , who now appeared to be very withdrawn ,
from the rest of the city , so it 's us and them . what happens to education in that context ? so keep both of those ideas of remoteness . we made a guess . the guess was that schools in remote areas do not have good enough teachers . if they do have , they can not retain those teachers . they do not have good enough infrastructure . and if they had some infrastructure , they have difficulty maintaining it . but i wanted to check if this is true . so what i did last year was we hired a car , looked up on google , found a route into northern india from new delhi
we use current pacemaker defibrillator technology that 's used for the heart . we thought we could adapt it for the brain . the device could be implanted under the scalp to be totally hidden and avoid wire breakage , which occurs if you put it in the chest and you try to move your neck around . form a company to develop a neuro-pacemaker for epilepsy , as well as other diseases of the brain , because all diseases of the brain are a result of some electrical malfunction in it , that causes many , if not all , of brain disorders . we formed a company called neuropace and we started work on responsive neurostimulation ,
and i 'm in the middle of that killing , basically . someone 's love , someone 's baby . this is very difficult , and you have to have a bond with your team that permits you to do this , because their life is wrapped up in that too . they 've got that gene infected in them as well , and they want that to live , more than anything else .
builds on this base for us humans . and so now i 'm going to take you through sort of a way of looking at play , but it 's never just singularly one thing . we 're going to look at body play , which is a spontaneous desire to get ourselves out of gravity . this is a mountain goat . if you 're having a bad day , try this : jump up and down , wiggle around -- you 're going to feel better . and you may feel like this character , who is also just doing it for its own sake . it does n't have a particular purpose , and that 's what 's great about play .
but the harvard lampoon is about to come out with a parody of national geographic , and i shudder to think what they 're going to do to this photograph . oh , the wrath of photoshop . this is a jet landing at san francisco , by bruce dale . he mounted a camera on the tail . a poetic image for a story on tolstoy , by sam abell . pygmies in the drc , by randy olson . i love this photograph because it reminds me of degas ' bronze sculptures of the little dancer . a polar bear swimming in the arctic , by paul nicklen . polar bears need ice to be able to move back and forth --
so i want to talk today about money and happiness , which are two things that a lot of us spend a lot of our time thinking about , either trying to earn them or trying to increase them . and a lot of us resonate with this phrase . so we see it in religions and self-help books , that money ca n't buy happiness .
we might spend time with people we do n't even like because it 's somehow interesting .
this is the sound of a dirty sock . which is like yellow , this one .
because now i can display the food on a plate , so i can eat my favorite song .
evolved on the african savanna about two million years ago , and they made these splendid hand axes that fit wonderfully into your hands . but if we look at the fossil record , we see that they made the same hand axe over and over and over again for one million years . you can follow it through the fossil record . now if we make some guesses about how long homo erectus lived , what their generation time was , that 's about 40,000 generations of parents to offspring , and other individuals watching , in which that hand axe did n't change . it 's not even clear
after a tornado , he regains that . going back , that same 18-year-old boy graduates from high school in kansas city , missouri , joins the army , the army gives him a rifle , they send him to iraq . every day he looks into the same sets of eyes around him . he leaves the wire . he knows that those people have his back . he 's slept in the same sand . they 've lived together . they 've eaten together . they 've bled together . he goes home to kansas city , missouri . he gets out of the military . he takes his uniform off . he does n't have that community anymore .
if its purpose is more important than the act of doing it , it 's probably not play . and there 's a whole other type of play , which is object play . and this japanese macaque has made a snowball , and he or she 's going to roll down a hill . and -- they do n't throw it at each other , but this is a fundamental part of being playful . the human hand , in manipulation of objects , is the hand in search of a brain ; the brain is in search of a hand ; and play is the medium by which those two are linked in the best way .
the air she breathes , the food and drink she consumes , the chemicals she 's exposed to , even the emotions she feels -- are shared in some fashion with her fetus . they make up a mix of influences as individual and idiosyncratic as the woman herself . the fetus incorporates these offerings into its own body , makes them part of its flesh and blood . and often it does something more . it treats these maternal contributions as information , as what i like to call biological postcards from the world outside . so what a fetus is learning about in utero is not mozart 's  magic flute  but answers to questions much more critical to its survival .
and so , in fact , if you know you have these kleptoparasitic bees , you know that your environment is healthy , because they 're top-of-the-food-chain bees . and in fact , there is now a red list of pollinators that we 're worried have disappeared , and on top of that list are a lot of these kleptoparasites , but also these bumblebees . and in fact , if you guys live on the west coast , go to these websites here , and they 're really looking for people to look for some of these bumblebees , because we think some have gone extinct . or some , the population has declined . and so it 's not just honeybees that are in trouble ,
and this seemed very interesting to me . and i started reading his books after that lecture . and that was carl jung , whose name or work i had no idea about . then i came to this country to study psychology and i started trying to understand the roots of happiness . this is a typical result that many people have presented , and there are many variations on it . but this , for instance , shows that about 30 percent of the people surveyed in the united states since 1956 say that their life is very happy . and that has n't changed at all . whereas the personal income ,
to a little town in colorado , called craig . it 's only a couple dozen square miles . it 's in the rockies . and the job in question was sheep rancher . my role on the show , for those of you who have n't seen it -- it 's pretty simple . i 'm an apprentice , and i work with the people who actually do the jobs in question . and my responsibilities are to simply try and keep up and give an honest account of what it 's like to be these people , for one day in their life . the job in question : herding sheep . great . we go to craig and we check in to a hotel
we have the traffic police and municipal corporation helping us . it gets taken over by children . they are skating . they are doing street plays . they are playing , all free , for all children . atul karwal : aproch is an organization which has been doing things for kids earlier . and we plan to extend this to other parts of the city . kiran bir sethi : and the city will give free time . and ahmedabad got the first child-friendly zebra crossing in the world . geet sethi : when a city gives to the children , in the future the children will give back to the city .
and she did this over the course of a couple of days , until the point where she got so frustrated with him that she started putting them directly on top of his head . which just resulted in a fantastic photograph . eventually , though , paul thinks that she just figured that he was never going to survive . this is her just puffing out , you know , snorting out in disgust . and lost interest with him , and went back to what she does best . paul set out to photograph a relatively mysterious and unknown creature , and came back with not just a collection of photographs ,
i think what ’ s very different about design is that we go through these two very distinctive modes of operation . we go through a sort of generative mode , where we ’ re exploring many ideas ; and then we come back together again , and come back looking for that solution , and developing that solution . i think they ’ re two quite different modes : divergence and convergence . and i think it ’ s probably in the divergent mode that we most need playfulness . perhaps in convergent mode we need to be more serious . and so being able to move between those modes is really quite important . so , it ’ s where there ’ s a
a bill introduced by senator kefalas that would have required athletes , kids under 18 , to wear a helmet when they 're riding their bike died in committee . it died in large part because it lacked constituent buy-in ; it lacked stakeholder traction . now i 'm not here to tell you what kind of legislation you should or should n't support , but i am going to tell you that , if it matters to you , your legislators need to know that . speak up also with coaching staff . ask about what kind of protective equipment is available . what 's the budget for protective equipment ? how old it is ? maybe offer to spearhead a fundraiser
last year , it was the second-most downloaded paper by biology letters , and the feedback from not just scientists and teachers but the public as well . and i 'll just read one .  i have read 'blackawton bees ' recently . i do n't have words to explain exactly how i am feeling right now . what you guys have done is real , true and amazing . curiosity , interest , innocence and zeal are the most basic and most important things to do science . who else can have these qualities more than children ? please congratulate your children 's team from my side .  so i 'd like to conclude with a physical metaphor .
because i 've traveled with it , moved it , from apartment to apartment to apartment . sound familiar ? did you know that we americans have about three times the amount of space we did 50 years ago ? three times .
hr : so there you go . this whole thesis really came home to me when i went to visit a college in kansas city -- working-class college . certainly , when i was in college , i had certain expectations about my life -- that my husband and i would both work , and that we would equally raise the children . but these college girls had a completely different view of their future . basically , the way they said it to me is that they would be working 18 hours a day , that their husband would maybe have a job , but that mostly he would be at home taking care of the kiddies .
i will not side with you or dance to bombs because everyone is dancing . everyone can be wrong . life is a right , not collateral or casual . i will not forget where i come from . i will craft my own drum . gather my beloved near , and our chanting will be dancing . our humming will be drumming . i will not be played . i will not lend my name nor my rhythm to your beat . i will dance and resist and dance and persist and dance . this heartbeat is louder than death . your war drum ai n't louder than this breath . haaa . what 's up ted people ? let me hear you make some noise .
and it was n't perfect . many children still died ,
i had also had the privilege since the last 37 years to work on several masterpieces as you can see behind me , but basically to do what ? well , to assess , for example , the state of conservation . see here the face of the madonna of the chair that when just shining a uv light on it you suddenly see another , different lady , aged lady , i should rather say . there is a lot of varnish still sitting there , several retouches , and some over cleaning . it becomes very visible . but also , technology has helped to write new pages of our history , or at least to update pages of our histories .
for example , the  lady with the unicorn ,  another painting by rafael , well , you see the unicorn . a lot has been said and written about the unicorn , but if you take an x-ray of the unicorn , it becomes a puppy dog . and — — no problem , but , unfortunately , continuing with the scientific examination of this painting came out that rafael did not paint the unicorn , did not paint the puppy dog , actually left the painting unfinished , so all this writing about the exotic symbol of the unicorn — — unfortunately , is not very reliable . well , also , authenticity . just think for a moment
because they could n't leave it there , because it 's still valuable . but what nick did was he brought back a story that went beyond the old-school method of just straight ,  is n't this an amazing world ?  and instead , created a story that touched our audiences deeply . instead of just knowledge of this park , he created an understanding and an empathy for the elephants , the rangers and the many issues surrounding human-wildlife conflicts . now let 's go over to india . sometimes you can tell a broad story in a focused way . we were looking at the same issue that richard wurman touches upon in his new world population project .
clay was with us in port-au-prince . he was also with us in chile . earlier this year , in march , clay took his own life . this was a tragedy , but it really forced us to refocus what it is that we were doing . you know , clay did n't kill himself because of what happened in iraq and afghanistan . clay killed himself because of what he lost when he came home . he lost purpose . he lost his community . and perhaps most tragically , he lost his self-worth . and so , as we evaluated , and as the dust settled from this tragedy , we realized that , of those two problems --
is only equally , or maybe even slightly less , important than the other , which is the piece of innovation on these breakthroughs . these breakthroughs , we need to move those at full speed , and we can measure that in terms of companies , pilot projects , regulatory things that have been changed . there 's a lot of great books that have been written about this . the al gore book ,  our choice  and the david mckay book ,  sustainable energy without the hot air .  they really go through it and create a framework that this can be discussed broadly , because we need broad backing for this . there 's a lot that has to come together .
and along came a brilliant inventor , a scientist , who came up with a partial cure for that disease .
and if we 're going to solve problems and look at the world really differently , whether it 's in governance or business or environmental issues , job creation , maybe we can think about how to reframe those problems as having both things be true .
kbs : and because of that , ahmedabad is known as india 's first child-friendly city . so , you 're getting the pattern . first 200 children at riverside . then 30,000 children in ahmedabad , and growing . it was time now to infect india . so , on august 15th , again , independence day , 2009 , empowered with the same process , we empowered 100,000 children to say ,  i can .  how ? we designed a simple toolkit , converted it into eight languages , and reached 32,000 schools . we basically gave children a very simple challenge . we said , take one idea , anything that bothers you , choose one week , and change a billion lives .
we need an honest debate . but the trouble is so many people talk so much rubbish about work-life balance . all the discussions about flexi-time or dress-down fridays or paternity leave only serve to mask the core issue , which is that certain job and career choices are fundamentally incompatible with being meaningfully engaged on a day-to-day basis with a young family . now the first step in solving any problem is acknowledging the reality of the situation you 're in . and the reality of the society that we 're in is there are thousands and thousands of people out there leading lives of quiet , screaming desperation ,
open knowledge , open aid , open governance , and together , they represent three key shifts that are transforming development and that also hold greater hope for the problems i witnessed in uganda and in bihar .
and i ultimately want to recycle that , put it back into the loos , maybe wash hands with it , i do n't know . so , water is a very important aspect . i started meditating on that and created a restaurant called waterhouse . if i could get waterhouse to be a no-carbon restaurant that is consuming no gas to start with , that would be great . i managed to do it . this restaurant looks a little bit like acorn house -- same chairs , same tables . they 're all english and a little bit more sustainable . but this is an electrical restaurant . the whole thing is electric , the restaurant and the kitchen .
they 're glorified drill and practice . they do n't have the depth , the rich narrative that really engaging video games have , that the boys are really interested in . so we need to design better games . we need to talk to teachers and parents and school board members and politicians . we need to make sure that people see that we need more men in the classroom . we need to look carefully at our zero tolerance policies . do they make sense ? we need to think about how to uncompress this curriculum if we can , trying to bring boys back into a space that is comfortable for them .
our genetic information is organized into a set of 46 volumes , and when we did that , we had to be able to account for each of those 46 volumes , because in some cases with autism , there 's actually a single volume that 's missing . we had to get more granular than that , though , and so we had to start opening those books , and in some cases , the genetic change was more subtle . it might have been a single paragraph that was missing , or yet , even more subtle than that , a single letter , one out of three billion letters that was changed , that was altered ,
what the poor thought was important would be reflected in the college .  so the elders gave me some very sound and profound advice .
only i later realized that what he fed me was food for his entire family for two days .
when we look at a flower . so if you look at this flower here , and you 're a little bug , if you 're on that surface of that flower , that 's what the terrain would look like . the petal of that flower looks like that , so the ant is kind of crawling over these objects , and if you look a little bit closer at this stigma and the stamen here , this is the style of that flower , and you notice that it 's got these little -- these are like little jelly-like things that are what are called spurs . these are nectar spurs . so this little ant that 's crawling here , it 's like
we 've also found that you can reduce the fresh air requirements into the building , while maintaining industry indoor air-quality standards .
one of the reasons he chose to take this rather large video camera with him was because he didn ’ t want the doctors and nurses thinking he was actually sick , and sticking something into him that he was going to regret later . so anyhow , he went there with his video camera , and it ’ s kind of interesting to see what he brought back . because when we looked at the video when he got back , we saw 20 minutes of this . and also , the amazing thing about this video -- as soon as you see it you immediately project yourself into that experience .
but we 're really , really happy about who they are . it turns out they 're really great . i want to close by showing you a videotape that 's a version of a future game in the rockett series that our graphic artists and design people put together , that we feel would please that four percent of reviewers .  rockett 28 !  rockett : it 's like i 'm just waking up , you know ? bl : thanks . one of my favorite parts of my job at the gates foundation is that i get to travel to the developing world , and i do that quite regularly . and when i meet the mothers
people from a wide range of ages , from 18 to late 80s , a wide range of incomes , education levels , people who are married , divorced , widowed , etc . they collectively represent every one of 86 occupational categories and hail from over 80 countries . what i 'd like to do with the rest of my time with you today is talk a little bit about one of the areas that we 've been investigating , and that 's mind-wandering . as human beings , we have this unique ability to have our minds stray away from the present . this guy is sitting here working on his computer ,
that particular headline comes to me from a market research firm . they were basically asked by one of their clients who was going to buy houses in that neighborhood in the future . and they expected that it would be young families , or young men , just like it had always been . but in fact , they found something very surprising . it was young , single women who were the major purchasers of houses in the neighborhood . and so they decided , because they were intrigued by this finding , to do a nationwide survey . so they spread out all the census data , and what they found , the guy described to me as a shocker ,
and it 's the same wherever you go . it 's reliable and people know exactly where they are .
we would see where we were going , we would see the first indication of what could be the successive phenomenon to the suv in america . and so i had these ideas in my head , that this is going to be great . i mean , i 'm going to see so much work , it 's so intense -- i know probably las vegas meant a lot about it , and i 'm not really sure where the grand canyon came in either -- but somehow all this is going to come together ,
i conducted a test over 500 children spread across all over india , and asked them -- i gave them about 68 different values-oriented questions and simply asked them their opinions . we got all sorts of opinions . yes , no or i do n't know . i simply took those questions where i got 50 percent yeses and 50 percent noes -- so i was able to get a collection of 16 such statements . these were areas where the children were clearly confused , because half said yes and half said no . a typical example being ,  sometimes it is necessary to tell lies .  they do n't have a way to determine which way to answer this question ;
and using this intense study of individuals , we find that it 's not one particular generation that 's doing better than the others , but the same individuals over time come to report relatively greater positive experience .
nowadays people are sitting 9.3 hours a day , which is more than we 're sleeping , at 7.7 hours . sitting is so incredibly prevalent , we do n't even question how much we 're doing it , and because everyone else is doing it , it does n't even occur to us that it 's not okay .
six months ago , a group of business activists gathered together to join with the republican governor in california to pass ab 32 ,
that , perhaps surprisingly , is actually taking the nuclear approach . there are some innovations in nuclear : modular , liquid . and innovation really stopped in this industry quite some ago , so the idea that there 's some good ideas laying around is not all that surprising . the idea of terrapower is that , instead of burning a part of uranium -- the one percent , which is the u235 -- we decided ,  let 's burn the 99 percent , the u238 .  it is kind of a crazy idea . in fact , people had talked about it for a long time , but they could never simulate properly whether it would work or not ,
but she was seeing him in different ways . as a third example , consider consumer products . so one reason why you might like something is its utility . you can put shoes on your feet ; you can play golf with golf clubs ; and chewed up bubble gum does n't do anything at all for you . but each of these three objects has value above and beyond what it can do for you based on its history . the golf clubs were owned by john f. kennedy and sold for three-quarters of a million dollars at auction . the bubble gum was chewed up by pop star britney spears
when time horizons are long and nebulous , as they typically are in youth , people are constantly preparing , trying to soak up all the information they possibly can , taking risks , exploring .
like any other war . the infrastructure 's the first one ; declining trade-school enrollments are the second one . every single year : fewer electricians , fewer carpenters , fewer plumbers , fewer welders , fewer pipefitters , fewer steamfitters . the infrastructure jobs that everybody is talking about creating are those guys -- the ones that have been in decline , over and over . meanwhile , we 've got two trillion dollars -- at a minimum , according to the american society of civil engineers -- that we need to expend to even make a dent in the infrastructure , which is currently rated at a d minus . so , if i were running for anything , and i 'm not ,
thank you . some 17 years ago , i became allergic to delhi 's air .
it 's different . here 's from big sur , like they 're little jewels . there are places in africa where they do the mining of jewels , and you go to the sand where the rivers have the sand go down to the ocean , and it 's like literally looking at tiny jewels through the microscope . so every grain of sand is unique . every beach is different . every single grain is different . there are no two grains of sand alike in the world . every grain of sand is coming somewhere and going somewhere . they 're like a snapshot in time .
i was held in four different children 's homes . on the third children 's home , at 15 , i started to rebel , and what i did was , i got three tins of paint , airfix paint that you use for models , and i was -- it was a big children 's home , big victorian children 's home -- and i was in a little turret at the top of it , and i poured them , red , yellow and green , the colors of africa , down the tiles . you could n't see it from the street , because the home was surrounded by beech trees . for doing this , i was incarcerated for a year
i 've kept the trunking ; i 've got in some recycled fridges ; i 've got some recycled tills ; i 've got some recycled trolleys . i mean , the whole thing is is super-sustainable . in fact , i 'm trying and i 'm going to make this the most sustainable supermarket in the world . that 's zero food waste . and no one 's doing that just yet . in fact , sainsbury 's , if you 're watching , let 's have a go . try it on . i 'm going to get there before you . so nature does n't create waste does n't create waste as such . everything in nature is used up in a closed continuous cycle with waste being the end of the beginning ,
summers were hard , hard work , in the heat of tennessee summers . he had the expectations of his senatorial father and washington , d.c. and although i think he certainly had the capacity for play -- because i do know something about that -- he was n't as empowered , i think , as he now is by paying attention to what is his own passion and his own inner drive , which i think has its basis in all of us in our play history . so what i would encourage on an individual level to do , is to explore backwards as far as you can go
so that year really taught us the importance of being patient and really understanding the local market before you become so bold as to set lofty targets .
one thing comes out very clearly : you see the blue bubbles and people say hiv is very high in africa . i would say , hiv is very different in africa . you 'll find the highest hiv rate in the world in african countries , and yet you 'll find senegal , down here -- the same rate as united states . and you 'll find madagascar , and you 'll find a lot of african countries about as low as the rest of the world . it 's this terrible simplification that there 's one africa and things go on in one way in africa . we have to stop that . it 's not respectful , and it 's not very clever
we talked to the parents , tried to convince them about sending their children to school . we played with the children , and came back home really tired , exhausted , but with images of bright faces , twinkling eyes , and went to sleep . we were all excited to start , but the numbers hit us then : 200 million children between four to 14 that should be going to school , but do not ; 100 million children who go to school but can not read ; 125 million who can not do basic maths . we also heard that 250 billion indian rupees was dedicated for government schooling . ninety percent of it was spent on teachers ' salary
in an assessment center which was actually a remand center . it was a virtual prison for young people . by the way , years later , my social worker said that i should never have been put in there . i was n't charged for anything . i had n't done anything wrong . but because i had no family to inquire about me , they could do anything to me . i 'm 17 years old , and they had a padded cell . they would march me down corridors in last-size order . they -- i was put in a dormitory with a confirmed nazi sympathizer . all of the staff were ex-police -- interesting --
well , so , for this last year , with the help of cisco who sponsored me , for some balmy reason , to do this , i 've been looking somewhere else .
thank you . anyway , we would fill up with our own adrenaline and our own cortisol , and then we 'd kill or be killed , we 'd eat or we 'd be eaten , and then suddenly we 'd de-fuel , and we 'd go back to normal . okay . so the problem is , nowadays , with modern man— — when we feel in danger , we still fill up with our own chemical but because we ca n't kill traffic wardens — — or eat estate agents , the fuel just stays in our body over and over , so we 're in a constant state of alarm , a constant state . and here 's another thing that happened .
i can shape a pot out of clay and choose a glaze , but then i have to let it go to the fire and the smoke , and what 's wonderful is the surprises that happen , like this crackle pattern , because it 's really stressful on these pots . they go from 1,500 degrees to room temperature in the space of just a minute . raku is a wonderful metaphor for the process of creativity . i find in so many things that tension between what i can control and what i have to let go happens all the time , whether i 'm creating a new radio show
we can continue the scroll to find out , for example , on the staircase , the whole iconography is going to be changed . there are a lot of laymen reconstructing from the ruins of an old temple a new temple , and there are a lot of figures showing up . see ? this is not just a curiosity , because it changes not just the iconography as you see it , but the iconology , the meaning of the painting , and we believe this is a cool way , easy way , that everybody could have access to , to become more the protagonist of your own discovery , and not just
we asked them how happy they were , and then we gave them an envelope . and one of the envelopes had things in it that said ,  by 5:00 pm today , spend this money on yourself . 
but because the rest of the world has grown increasingly poorer . last week , bill clinton at the ted awards said ,  this situation is unprecedented , unequal , unfair and unstable .  so there 's lots of reason for pessimism . darfur is , at its origin , a resource war . last year , there were 85,000 riots in china , 230 a day , that required police or military intervention . most of them were about resources . we are facing an unprecedented number , scale of disasters . some are weather-related , human-rights related , epidemics .
they died a somewhat natural death with no injury to the brain , no history of psychiatric disease , no drugs on board -- we do a toxicology workup . and we 're very careful about the brains that we do take . we 're also selecting for brains in which we can get the tissue , we can get consent to take the tissue within 24 hours of time of death . because what we 're trying to measure , the rna -- which is the readout from our genes -- is very labile , and so we have to move very quickly . one side note on the collection of brains :
thank you .
and this was kind of a shocker to me . and then here 's my favorite quote from one of the girls :  men are the new ball and chain .  now you laugh , but that quote has kind of a sting to it , right ? and i think the reason it has a sting is because thousands of years of history do n't reverse themselves without a lot of pain , and that 's why i talk about us all going through this together . the night after i talked to these college girls , i also went to a men 's group in kansas , and these were exactly the kind of victims of the manufacturing economy
after we had done that with a pretty large team of people and discovered what we thought the salient issues were with girls and boys and playing -- because , after all , that 's really what this is about -- we moved to the second phase of our work , where we interviewed adult experts in academia , some of the people who 'd produced the literature that we found relevant . also , we did focus groups with people who were on the ground with kids every day , like playground supervisors . we talked to them , confirmed some hypotheses and identified some serious questions about gender difference and play .
you have to be a cop-out or a wash-out or a dropout to come to our college .
and i think they have the same neurotransmitters that we do and a similar cortical architecture -- that play may be pretty important for our survival . and , and , and -- there are a lot more animal studies that i could talk about . now , this is a consequence of play deprivation . this took a long time -- i had to get homer down and put him through the fmri and the spect and multiple eegs , but as a couch potato , his brain has shrunk . and we do know that in domestic animals and others , when they 're play deprived , they do n't -- and rats also -- they do n't develop a brain that is normal .
but anyway , so we were in venice , and this is our room . and i had this dream that i was wearing this fantastic green gown , and i was looking out the window , and it was really a beautiful thing . and so , i was able to put that into this story , which is an alphabet , and hopefully go on to something else . the letter c had other things in it . i was fortunate also , to meet the man who 's sitting on the bed , though i gave him hair over here and he does n't have hair . well , he has some hair but -- well , he used to have hair .
and that 's the way to make yourself happier . it 's in fact , that you should stop thinking about which product to buy for yourself and try giving some of it to other people instead .
charles limb : this is a plastic midi piano keyboard that we use for the jazz experiments . and it 's a 35-key keyboard that is designed to fit both inside the scanner , be magnetically safe , have minimal interference that would contribute to any artifact and have this cushion so that it can rest on the players ' legs while they 're lying down in the scanner , playing on their back . and it works like this -- this does n't actually produce any sound . it sends out what 's called a midi signal -- or a musical instrument digital interface -- through these wires into the box and then the computer ,
and that 's desperately what we need again on a global scale .
in our study , they are more positive , but they 're also more likely than younger people to experience mixed emotions -- sadness at the same time you experience happiness ; you know , that tear in the eye when you 're smiling at a friend .
sb : we have 80 percent attendance for all our parents-teachers meeting . sometimes it 's even 100 percent , much more than many privileged schools . fathers have started to attend . it 's very interesting . when we started our school the parents would give thumbprints in the attendance register . now they have started writing their signature . the children have taught them . it 's amazing how much children can teach . we have , a few months ago , actually late last year , we had a few mothers who came to us and said ,
so how can this be ? well in our research , we 've found that these changes are grounded fundamentally in the uniquely human ability to monitor time -- not just clock time and calendar time , but lifetime .
would give her the crackers if she liked the crackers , but they would give her the broccoli if she liked the broccoli . on the other hand , 15 month-olds would stare at her for a long time if she acted as if she liked the broccoli , like they could n't figure this out . but then after they stared for a long time , they would just give her the crackers , what they thought everybody must like . so there are two really remarkable things about this . the first one is that these little 18 month-old babies have already discovered this really profound fact about human nature ,
it 's the kids that need it the most , who get this really , really lousy food . it 's the kids who have parents and grandparents and uncles and aunts that ca n't even afford to pay for school lunch that gets this food . and those are the same kids who are going to be getting sick . those are the same kids who we should be taking care of . we can all make a difference . that every single one of us , whether we have children , whether we care about children , whether we have nieces or nephews , or anything -- that we can make a difference .
and be able to fly the plane better . mk : all right , we 'll try to do a few laps around and bring it back in . here we go . pm : the video worked right for the first few and i do n't know why it -- there it goes . oh , that was only a minute , but i think you 'd be safe to have that near the end of the flight , perhaps . we get to do the classic . all right . if this hits you , it will not hurt you . ok. thank you very much . thank you . but now , as they say in infomercials ,
it 's voluntary .
to think that way . i had the fortune to live and work for a time in the united states . i found out that salt lake city and san francisco were different . and so it is in africa -- it 's a lot of difference . so , why is it so high ? is it war ? no , it 's not . look here . war-torn congo is down there -- two , three , four percent . and this is peaceful zambia , neighboring country -- 15 percent . and there 's good studies of the refugees coming out of congo -- they have two , three percent infected , and peaceful zambia -- much higher .
to come up with a way to improve health care in the usa , where we have problems that africa does n't have . and by reducing malpractice litigation -- malpractice litigation is not an african problem ; it 's an american problem . so , to get quickly to my first wish -- the brain operates by electrical signals . if the electrical signals create a brain disorder , electro-stimulation can overcome that disorder by acting on the brain 's neurons . in other words , if you 've screwed up electrical signals , maybe , by putting other electrical signals from a computer in the brain , we can counteract that . a signal in the brain that triggers brain dysfunction
they attract people to learning because it 's really a dance project or a circus project or , the best example of all -- el sistema in venezuela -- it 's a music project . and so you attract people through that into learning ,
because beekeepers are among the most fascinating people you 'll ever meet . if this was a group of beekeepers , you would have everyone from the card-carrying nra member who 's , you know , live free or die , to the , you know , the self-expressed quirky san francisco backyard pig farmer . and you get all of these people in the same room , and they 're all engaged and they 're getting along , and they 're all there because of the passion for bees . now , there 's another part of that community which are the commercial beekeepers , the ones who make their livelihood from beekeeping alone . and these tend to be some of the most independent , tenacious ,
but we came together at the end of the month and we celebrated our journey , and it was a real journey .
but our mba programs do n't teach kids to be entrepreneurs . they teach them to go work in corporations . so who 's starting these companies ? it 's these random few people . even in popular literature , the only book i 've ever found -- and this should be on all of your reading lists -- the only book i 've ever found that makes the entrepreneur into the hero is  atlas shrugged .  everything else in the world tends to look at entrepreneurs and say that we 're bad people . i look at even my family . both my grandfathers were entrepreneurs . my dad was an entrepreneur . both my brother and sister and i , all three of us own companies as well .
they will do it themselves . i came to speak to you like that . another factor in gando is rain . when the rains come , we hurry up to protect our fragile walls against the rain . do n't confound with christo and jeanne-claude . it is simply how we protect our walls .
and administrators ' salary . and yet , india has nearly the highest teacher absenteeism in the world , with one out of four teachers not going to school at all the entire academic year . those numbers were absolutely mind-boggling , overwhelming , and we were constantly asked ,  when will you start ? how many schools will you start ? how many children will you get ? how are you going to scale ? how are you going to replicate ?  it was very difficult not to get scared , not to get daunted . but we dug our heels and said ,  we 're not in the number game . we want to take one child at a time
so the most common question i get asked , and i 'm going to answer it now so i do n't have to do it over drinks tonight , is how did this come about ? how did movember start ? well , normally , a charity starts with the cause , and someone that is directly affected by a cause . they then go on to create an event , and beyond that , a foundation to support that .
it grows and is nurtured . it 's then harvested . it 's then distributed , and distribution is a massive issue . it 's then sold and bought , and it 's then delivered to me . i basically take it , prepare it , and then people consume it -- hopefully they enjoy it . the last stage is basically waste , and this is is pretty much where everybody disregards it . there are different types of waste . there 's a waste of time ; there 's a waste of space ; there 's a waste of energy ; and there 's a waste of waste . and every business i 've been working on over the past five years , i 'm trying to lower each one of these elements .
we had mo bros from canada , from the u.s. , and from the u.k. emailing us and calling us and saying , hey , there 's nothing for prostate cancer .
it was n't easy . mcqueen had worked throughout his career with a small team of designers and managers who were very protective of his legacy , but andrew went to london and worked with them over the summer and won their confidence , and that of the designers who created his amazing fashion shows , which were works of performance art in their own right , and we proceeded to do something at the museum , i think , we 've never done before . it was n't just your standard installation . in fact , we ripped down the galleries to recreate entirely different settings , a recreation of his first studio , a hall of mirrors ,
have we deployed it in all the developed countries and we 're in the process of getting it elsewhere ? that 's super important . that 's a key element of making that report card . so , backing up from there , what should the 2020 report card look like ? well , again , it should have the two elements . we should go through these efficiency measures to start getting reductions : the less we emit , the less that sum will be of co2 , and , therefore , the less the temperature . but in some ways , the grade we get there , doing things that do n't get us all the way to the big reductions ,
of information , but it has been pretty good for showing a lot of other things about information technology -- computers , their use , internet , etc . and what 's important is it just goes straight up through the top of the curve , and has no real limits to it . now try and contrast these . this is the size of the earth going through that same -- -- frame . and to make it really clear , i 've put all four on one graph . there 's no need to see the little detailed words on it . that first one is humans-versus-nature ; we 've won , there 's no more gain . human population .
james nachtwey , who was honored at last year 's ted , took a look at the sweep of the medical system that is utilized to handle the american wounded coming out of iraq . it is like a tube where a wounded soldier enters on one end and exits back home , on the other . jim started in the battlefield . here , a medical technician tends to a wounded soldier on the helicopter ride back to the field hospital . here is in the field hospital . the soldier on the right has the name of his daughter tattooed across his chest , as a reminder of home . from here , the more severely wounded are transported
today , i 'm inspired by these changes , and i 'm excited that at the world bank , we are embracing these new directions , a significant departure from my work in uganda 20 years ago .
you know a chinese restaurant when you see it . these people work with the chinese restaurant model -- same principles , different applications and different settings -- not the mcdonald 's model .
and language is the result . language evolved to solve the crisis of visual theft . language is a piece of social technology for enhancing the benefits of cooperation -- for reaching agreements , for striking deals and for coordinating our activities . and you can see that , in a developing society that was beginning to acquire language , not having language would be a like a bird without wings . just as wings open up this sphere of air for birds to exploit , language opened up the sphere of cooperation for humans to exploit . and we take this utterly for granted , because we 're a species that is so at home with language ,
and we are at a crossroads right now in this great effort over the last 20 years . we have a new vaccine , we have new resolve , and we have new tactics . we have the chance to write an entirely new polio-free chapter in human history . but if we blink now , we will lose forever the chance to eradicate an ancient disease . here 's a great idea to spread : end polio now . help us tell the story . help us build the momentum so that very soon every child , every parent everywhere can also take for granted a polio-free life forever .
the designers and i sat at the other end of the table , really quiet . and i was just fucking furious , furious . ok ? probably because they had all the fun and i did n't , you know . that 's what you get furious about right ? and somebody asked me about catherine , my wife , you know , did she fly out with me or something ? i said ,  no ,  and it triggered a set of thoughts about my wife . and i recalled that when catherine and i were married , the priest gave a very nice sermon , and he said something very important .
this is a tri-star , and so they let natasha actually sit in the jump seat . and the pilot , jeff cowley , actually went back and adopted one of the other kids at the orphanage after meeting natasha . this is 28 hours later in atlanta . it 's a very long flight . just to make things even crazier , gail , natasha 's new mom , was three days away from giving birth to her own daughter . so you know , if you were writing this , you 'd say ,  no , we 've got to write the script differently .  this is the first night showing natasha her new cousins and uncles and aunts .
it really got them involved in the idea of , you know , there are people who live with mosquitos . so , with energy , all i could come up with is this . i decided that releasing fireflies would be my contribution to the environment here this year . so here we have some natural fireflies . i 'm told they do n't bite ; in fact , they might not even leave that jar . now , there 's all sorts of gimmicky solutions like that one , but they do n't really add up to much . we need solutions -- either one or several -- that have unbelievable scale and unbelievable reliability ,
they really wanted to be able to welcome hyun-sook into their family . and one of the things father keene told me when i came back from one of these trips -- hyun-sook had chosen the name natasha , which i understood was from her watching a  rocky and bullwinkle  cartoon on the american air force station . this may be one of those myth-buster things that we 'll have to clear up here , in a minute . so , my friend gene flew over with his son , tim . gail could n't come . and they spent a lot of time huddled over a dictionary . and this was gene showing the uncle where atlanta was on the map , where he lived .
i also realized i should have got infected when i was seven . so , when i started riverside school 10 years ago it became a lab , a lab to prototype and refine a design process that could consciously infect the mind with the  i can  bug . and i uncovered that if learning is embedded in real-world context , that if you blur the boundaries between school and life , then children go through a journey of  aware ,  where they can see the change ,  enable ,  be changed , and then  empower ,  lead the change . and that directly increased student wellbeing . children became more competent ,
and it 's a very powerful and poignant reminder of how the beauty of music has the ability to speak where words fail , in this case literally speak . seeing this video of gabby giffords reminded me of the work of dr. gottfried schlaug , one of the preeminent neuroscientists studying music and the brain at harvard , and schlaug is a proponent of a therapy called melodic intonation therapy , which has become very popular in music therapy now . schlaug found that his stroke victims who were aphasic , could not form sentences of three- or four-word sentences , but they could still sing the lyrics to a song ,
we 're supposed to spend a third of our life in sleep . what if , on your phone , which will be available in the next few weeks , you had every minute of your sleep displayed ? and this is , of course , as you can see , the awake is the orange . the rem sleep , rapid eye movement , dream state , is in light green ; and light is gray , light sleep ; and deep sleep , the best restorative sleep , is that dark green . how about counting every calorie ? and this is ability , in real time , to actually take measurements of caloric intake as well as expenditure , through a band-aid .
this is a tremendous leap forward in transparency and accountability of aid . and this leads me to the third , and in my view , the most significant shift in development : open governance . governments today are opening up
13 , 15 hours on dirt roads -- and there is no community that i 've gone into that i have n't seen intelligent girls . but sadly , the vision of a great future , or the dream of a great future , is just a dream , because you have all of these vices . teen pregnancy , like i said , is epidemic . so what troubles me is that i was at that place and somehow i 'm at this place , and i just do n't want to be the only one at this place . i 'm looking for ways for other girls to be with me . i want to look back 20 years from now
so we decided we would create a series of products . and some of the watches there , attempting to be beautiful and humorous --
and then we put a florescent tag on it . we take that tagged material and we put it on to something called a microarray . now this may look like a bunch of dots to you , but each one of these individual dots is actually a unique piece of the human genome that we spotted down on glass . this has roughly 60,000 elements on it , so we repeatedly measure various genes of the 25,000 genes in the genome . and when we take a sample and we hybridize it to it , we get a unique fingerprint , if you will , quantitatively of what genes are turned on in that sample .
and why is this important ? well , this is the most expensive bed . what if we could reduce the need for hospital beds ? well , we can . first of all , heart failure is the number one reason for hospital admissions and readmissions in this country . the cost of heart failure is 37 billion dollars a year , which is 80 percent related to hospitalization . and in the course of 30 days after a hospital stay for a medicare greater than 65 years or older , is -- 27 percent are readmitted in 30 days , and by six months , over 56 percent are readmitted . so , can we improve that ? well the idea is
thank you . one in four people suffer from some sort of mental illness , so if it was one , two , three , four , it 's you , sir . you . yeah . with the weird teeth . and you next to him . you know who you are . actually , that whole row is n't right . that 's not good . hi . yeah . real bad . do n't even look at me . i am one of the one in four . thank you . i think i inherit it from my mother , who , used to crawl around the house on all fours . she had two sponges in her hand , and then she had two
and it 's done by machines and stuff like that .  well , they reproduce it , but the originals are all done by hand . it 's done by men and women who believe a lot in their craft . and they put that same kind of tension into the sculpting of a car that you do in a great sculpture that you would go and look at in a museum . that tension between the need to express , the need to discover , then you put something new into it , and at the same time you have bounds of craftsmanship . rules that say , this is how you handle surfaces ;
punches you straight in the face -- 58 gs . in case you missed it , we 'll look again . so look to the right-hand side of the screen . what would you say ? how many gs ? close . seventy-two . would it be crazy to know , 103 gs . the average concussive impact is 95 gs . now , when the kid on the right does n't get up , we know they 've had a concussion . but how about the kid on the left , or the athlete that leaves the field of play ? how do we know if he or she has sustained a concussion ? how do we know that legislation that would require that they be pulled from play ,
who 's learned how to use a tool to get food . on the other hand , we have our friend the domestic chicken . and chickens and ducks and geese and turkeys are basically as dumb as dumps . so they 're very , very good at pecking for grain , and they 're not much good at doing anything else . well it turns out that the babies , the new caledonian crow babies , are fledglings . they depend on their moms to drop worms in their little open mouths for as long as two years , which is a really long time in the life of a bird . whereas the chickens are actually mature
and what do we teach in these schools ? democracy , citizenship , how you should measure your land , what you should do if you 're arrested , what you should do if your animal is sick . this is what we teach in the night schools . but all the schools are solar-lit . every five years we have an election . between six to 14 year-old children participate in a democratic process , and they elect a prime minister . the prime minister is 12 years old . she looks after 20 goats in the morning , but she 's prime minister in the evening . she has a cabinet , a minister of education , a minister for energy , a minister for health .
or maybe you 've called to mind the toddler phase when children are learning how to walk and talk and use a fork . maybe you 've encountered the zero-to-three movement , which asserts that the most important years for learning are the earliest ones . and so your answer to my question would be : learning begins at birth . well today i want to present to you an idea that may be surprising and may even seem implausible , but which is supported by the latest evidence from psychology and biology . and that is that some of the most important learning we ever do happens before we 're born ,
with partners mutopo and jovoto.com . i wanted it all -- home office , sit down dinner for 10 , room for guests , and all my kite surfing gear . with over 300 entries from around the world , i got it , my own little jewel box . by buying a space that was 420 sq . ft. instead of 600 , immediately i 'm saving 200 grand . smaller space is going to make for smaller utilities -- save some more money there , but also a smaller footprint . and because it 's really designed around an edited set of possessions -- my favorite stuff -- and really designed for me , i 'm really excited to be there .
and that 's erosion by solar radiation . so what i 've been trying to tell you today is things even as ordinary as a grain of sand can be truly extraordinary if you look closely and if you look from a different and a new point of view . i think that this was best put by william blake when he said ,  to see a world in a grain of sand and a heaven in a wild flower , hold infinity in the palm of your hand , and eternity in an hour .  thank you . what 's in the box ? whatever it is must be pretty important ,
some people , i would never relate , but they sound similar .
the postal office is always very concerned when they get , you know , your three-pound packages of bees . and you can install this in your hive and replace that dead-out . so it means that beekeepers are very good at replacing dead-outs , and so they 've been able to cover those losses . so even though we 've lost 30 percent of the colonies every year , the same number of colonies have existed in the country , at about 2.4 million colonies . now , those losses are tragic on many fronts , and one of those fronts is for the beekeeper . and it 's really important to talk about beekeepers first ,
and it 's got it down to these few cases that you can see here on this graphic . but just last year , we had an incredible shock and realized that almost just is n't good enough with a virus like polio . and this is the reason : in two countries that had n't had this disease for more than probably a decade , on opposite sides of the globe , there was suddenly terrible polio outbreaks . hundreds of people were paralyzed . hundreds of people died -- children as well as adults . and in both cases , we were able to use genetic sequencing to look at the polio viruses ,
but enormously different motivations here .
and they 're having a conversation about joey and johnny who beat each other up on the playground .  what are we going to do with these boys ?  the answer to that question changes depending on who 's sitting around that table . are there men around that table ? are there moms who 've raised boys around that table ? you 'll see , the conversation changes depending upon who 's sitting around the table . third reason that boys are out of sync with school today : kindergarten is the old second grade , folks . we have a serious compression of the curriculum happening out there . when you 're three , you better be able to write your name legibly ,
when it 's exposed to too much heat , and we can tell that it 's not a good vaccine to use on a child -- it 's not potent ; it 's not going to protect them . even then , kids need many doses of the vaccine . but the third challenge we have -- and probably even bigger one , the biggest challenge -- is that , in contrast to smallpox where you could always see your enemy -- every single person almost who was infected with smallpox had this telltale rash . so you could get around the disease ; you could vaccinate around the disease and cut it off .
this is a public budget . and as you can see , it 's not really accessible or understandable to an ordinary citizen to tackle this problem , governments are using new tools to visualize the budget so it 's more understandable to the public .
i said ,  i want to live and dig wells for five years . 
strongly preferring first-born sons . if you think about this , if you just open your eyes to this possibility and start to connect the dots , you can see the evidence everywhere . you can see it in college graduation patterns , in job projections , in our marriage statistics , you can see it in the icelandic elections , which you 'll hear about later , and you can see it on south korean surveys on son preference , that something amazing and unprecedented is happening with women . certainly this is not the first time that we 've had great progress with women . the '20s and the '60s also come to mind .
and madhav said ,  why do we have to do it that way ? why ca n't we do it more like the chinese restaurants ?  there are chinese restaurants everywhere , but there is no chinese restaurant chain .
steven levitt : yeah , that 's a great question . in my data , and in another data set i 've looked at for new jersey crashes , i find very small differences in injury . so in this data , it 's statistically insignificant differences in injury between car seats and lap-and-shoulder belts . in the new jersey data , which is different , because it 's not just fatal crashes , but all crashes in new jersey that are reported , it turns out that there is a 10 percent difference in injuries , but generally they 're the minor injuries . now , what 's interesting , i should say this as a disclaimer ,
if you do n't design your life , someone else will design it for you , and you may just not like their idea of balance . it 's particularly important -- this is n't on the world wide web , is it ? i 'm about to get fired -- it 's particularly important that you never put the quality of your life in the hands of a commercial corporation . now i 'm not talking here just about the bad companies -- the  abattoirs of the human soul ,  as i call them . i 'm talking about all companies . because commercial companies are inherently designed to get as much out of you [ as ]
between what we see in the world and what we hope for , looking squarely at rejection , at heartbreak , at war , at death . that 's a tough space to stand in . the educator parker palmer calls it  the tragic gap ,  tragic not because it 's sad but because it 's inevitable , and my friend dick nodel likes to say ,  you can hold that tension like a violin string and make something beautiful .  that tension resonates in the work of the photographer joel meyerowitz , who at the beginning of his career was known for his street photography , for capturing a moment on the street , and also for his beautiful photographs
you and i can go on and buy it for them . the teacher writes you a thank you note . the kids write you a thank you note .
the innovative use of site , all of these things come to play in the amazing work of the fantastic french company royal de luxe . royal de luxe 's giant puppets come into a city and they live there for a few days . for  the sultan 's elephant ,  royal de luxe came to central london and brought it to a standstill with their story of a giant little girl and her friend , a time-traveling elephant . for a few days , they transformed a massive city into a community where endless possibility reigned . the guardian wrote ,  if art is about transformation , then there can be no more transformative experience .
also , those very sounds by the characters that are available in european languages .
my brothers and i dug in , and that 's when my father came home .
someone invited me to a meeting , but could n't manage to fit me in to a regular sort of conference room meeting , and said ,  i have to walk my dogs tomorrow . could you come then ?  it seemed kind of odd to do , and actually , that first meeting , i remember thinking ,  i have to be the one to ask the next question ,  because i knew i was going to huff and puff during this conversation .
what did get me moving was a social interaction .
you 're not going to start with a 100,000-dollar instrument and bring it down to no-cost . it is n't going to work . so , the approach that we took was the other way around . to ask ,  what is the cheapest possible stuff that you could make a diagnostic system out of , and get useful information , add function ?  and what we 've chosen is paper . what you see here is a prototypic device . it 's about a centimeter on the side . it 's about the size of a fingernail . the lines around the edges are a polymer . it 's made of paper and paper , of course , wicks fluid , as you know , paper , cloth -- drop wine on the tablecloth ,
would they give me academic journals so i could scribble in the margins ?
i like eating . i like playing .  and if you ask him what he wants to do , he will say ,  i want to horsing .  now ,  horsing  is going for a horse ride . so , parusharam comes to my office every day . he comes for a tummy rub , because he believes that will give me luck . when i started parikrma i began with a great deal of arrogance of transforming the world . but today i have been transformed . i have been changed with my children . i 've learned so much from them : love , compassion , imagination and such creativity . parusharam is parikrma with a simple beginning but a long way to go .
and she said ,  i knew it was he .  so , i was the one who should have kept the book , but it was a really wonderful moment . and she dated george gershwin , so , you know , get out . gershwin died at the age of 38. he 's buried in the same cemetery as my husband . i do n't want to talk about that now . i do want to talk -- the absolute icing on this cemetery cake is the barricini family mausoleum nearby . i think the barricini family should open a store there and sell chocolate . and i would like to run it for them .
much more deeply than it was affecting women . and i remembered back to about 10 years ago when i read a book by susan faludi called  stiffed : the betrayal of the american man ,  in which she described how hard the recession had hit men , and i started to think about whether it had gotten worse this time around in this recession . and i realized that two things were different this time around . the first was that these were no longer just temporary hits that the recession was giving men -- that this was reflecting a deeper underlying shift in our global economy .
among other things , if you want to show off how rich you are , how powerful you are , it 's always better to own an original than a forgery because there 's always going to be fewer originals than forgeries . i do n't doubt that that plays some role , but what i want to convince you of today is that there 's something else going on . i want to convince you that humans are , to some extent , natural born essentialists . what i mean by this is we do n't just respond to things as we see them , or feel them , or hear them . rather , our response is conditioned on our beliefs ,
but changing the way i thought about science was surprisingly easy . once we played the games and then started to think about the puzzle , i then realized that science is n't just a boring subject , and that anyone can discover something new . you just need an opportunity . my opportunity came in the form of beau , and the blackawton bee project . thank you.bl : thank you very much . i grew up in europe , and world war ii caught me when i was between seven and 10 years old . and i realized how few of the grown-ups that i knew were able to withstand the tragedies that the war visited on them --
my initial work focused on uganda , where i focused
but the more we 've tried to disavow this finding , the more evidence we find to support it .
it needs to be used , needs to be applied , needs to be shown to the world outside -- that these knowledge and skills are relevant even today . so the college works following the lifestyle and workstyle of mahatma gandhi .
and at nine years old , i walked around in the city of sudbury selling license plate protectors door to door to houses . and i remember this one customer so vividly because i also did some other stuff with these clients .
ca : it 's a nuclear power plant that is its own waste disposal solution . bg : yeah . well , what happens with the waste , you can let it sit there -- there 's a lot less waste under this approach -- then you can actually take that , and put it into another one and burn that . and we start off actually by taking the waste that exists today , that 's sitting in these cooling pools or dry casking by reactors -- that 's our fuel to begin with . so , the thing that 's been a problem from those reactors is actually what gets fed into ours , and you 're reducing the volume of the waste quite dramatically
the three plants are areca palm , mother-in-law 's tongue and money plant .
a second later , with a big thumb and a well calloused forefinger , he had the scrotum firmly in his grasp . and he pulled it toward him , like so , and he took the knife and he put it on the tip . now you think you know what 's coming , michael -- you do n't , ok ? he snips it , throws the tip over his shoulder , and then grabs the scrotum and pushes it upward , and then his head dips down , obscuring my view , but what i hear is a slurping sound , and a noise that sounds like velcro being yanked off a sticky wall and i am not even kidding .
we just could n't seem to get the virus rooted out . and then to make the matters even worse , the virus started to spread out of these four places , especially northern india and northern nigeria , into much of africa , asia , and even into europe , causing horrific outbreaks in places that had not seen this disease for decades . and then , in one of the most important , tenacious and toughest reservoirs of the polio virus in the world , we found that our vaccine was working half as well as it should have . in conditions like this , the vaccine just could n't get the grip it needed to
maybe the best construction tool we have might be the post-it notes . it ’ s pretty barren . but by giving project teams and the clients who they ’ re working with permission to think with their hands , quite complex ideas can spring into life and go right through to execution much more easily . this is a nurse using a very simple -- as you can see -- plasticine prototype , explaining what she wants out of a portable information system to a team of technologists and designers that are working with her in a hospital . and just having this very simple prototype allows her to talk about what she wants in a much more powerful way .
one of the things that concerns us is whether or not there really is an epidemic of autism .
you have to work with your hands . you have to have a dignity of labor . you have to show that you have a skill that you can offer to the community and provide a service to the community .
and for flowers bees are the messengers of love . and that 's a really great expression , because really , bees are the sex workers for flowers . they are , you know -- they get paid for their services . they get paid by pollen and nectar , to move that male sperm , the pollen , from flower to flower . and there are flowers that are self-infertile . that means they ca n't -- the pollen in their bloom ca n't fertilize themselves . so in an apple orchard , for instance , you 'll have rows of 10 apples of one variety , and then you have another apple tree that 's a different type of pollen .
and like i said , we 'll ask questions here , not answer them . but we want to get at the root of what is creative genius , neurologically , and i think , with these methods , we 're getting close to being there . and i think hopefully in the next 10 , 20 years you 'll actually see real , meaningful studies that say science has to catch up to art , and maybe we 're starting now to get there . and so i want to thank you for your time . i appreciate it . i 'm standing in front of you today in all humility , wanting to share with you my journey of the last six years
her fate will be having sex with him every day , as a favor for getting her in school . globally , we have policies , international instruments , work leaders .
so by convention , they created a rule in which they borrowed the ck sound ,  ck  sound , from the classical greek in the form of the letter kai . later when this material was translated into a common european language , which is to say latin , they simply replaced the greek kai with the latin x .
so , they have a second enzyme that makes a second signal and it has its own receptor , and this molecule is the trade language of bacteria . it 's used by all different bacteria and it 's the language of interspecies communication . what happens is that bacteria are able to count how many of me and how many of you . they take that information inside , and they decide what tasks to carry out depending on who 's in the minority and who 's in the majority of any given population . then again we turn to chemistry , and we figured out what this generic molecule is --
and once that happened , once this material was in latin , it formed the basis for mathematics textbooks for almost 600 years .
we need to have this dialogue be a more rational , more understandable dialogue , including the steps that the government takes . this is an important wish , but it is one i think we can achieve . thank you . thank you . chris anderson : thank you . thank you . thank you . so to understand more about terrapower , right -- i mean , first of all , can you give a sense of what scale of investment this is ? bil gates : to actually do the software , buy the supercomputer , hire all the great scientists , which we 've done , that 's only tens of millions , and even once we test our materials out in a russian reactor
one example among many .
he 's still , because of his earlier stuff , still associated with the skeptic camp , but he 's realized that 's a pretty lonely camp , and so , he 's making the r & amp ; d point . and so there is a thread of something that i think is appropriate . the r & amp ; d piece , it 's crazy how little it 's funded . ca : well bill , i suspect i speak on the behalf of most people here to say i really hope your wish comes true . thank you so much . bg : thank you . i 'm going to talk today about the pleasures of everyday life . but i want to begin with a story of an unusual and terrible man .
it works really , really well . and we sat down , we did the physics of eggbeaters and self-aligning tubes and all the rest of that kind of thing , sent it off to a journal . we were very proud of this , particularly the title , which was  eggbeater as centrifuge .  and we sent it off , and by return mail it came back . i called up the editor and i said ,  what 's going on ? how is this possible ?  the editor said , with enormous disdain ,  i read this . and we 're not going to publish it , because we only publish science .  and it 's an important issue
it opens our hearts , and makes us realize we are a part of nature and we 're not separate from it . when we see ourselves in nature , it also connects us to every one of us , because it 's clear that it 's all connected in one . when people see my images , a lot of times they 'll say ,  oh my god .  have you ever wondered what that meant ? the  oh  means it caught your attention , makes you present , makes you mindful . the  my  means it connects with something deep inside your soul . it creates a gateway for your inner voice to rise up and be heard . and  god  ?
then it goes to a network operations center , where they get your data from your patient database that 's been put in at some central location , say , in the united states . then it goes to a diagnostic center , and within one minute of your heart attack , your signal appears on the screen of a computer and the computer analyzes what your problem is . and the person who 's there , the medical practitioner , calls you -- this is also a cell phone -- and says ,  mr. smith , you 're in deep doo-doo ; you have a problem . we 've called the ambulance . the ambulance is on the way .
and i also have to build their faith . and that 's a new kind of leadership for me . we had one operation where we had to coordinate it from multiple locations . an emerging opportunity came -- did n't have time to get everybody together . so we had to get complex intelligence together , we had to line up the ability to act . it was sensitive , we had to go up the chain of command , convince them that this was the right thing to do and do all of this on electronic medium . we failed . the mission did n't work . and so now what we had to do
gene and gail know everyone in atlanta -- they 're the most social couple imaginable . so , at this point , natasha does n't speak a word of english , other than what little father keene taught her . this is kylie , her sister , who 's now a doctor , on the right . this is a deal i had with natasha , which is that when we got to atlanta she could take -- she could cut off my beard . she never liked it very much . she learned english in three months . she entered seventh grade at her own age level . pledge of allegiance for the first time . this is her cooking teacher .
and those are pillars of his life , but also pillars of the mission of one laptop per child . but the third pillar that he talked about was design . and at the time , i was n't really working on computers . i did n't really want to , from the previous adventure . but what he said was really significant , is that design was going to be why the kids were going to love this product , how we were going to make it low cost , robust . and plus , he said he was going to get rid of the caps lock key -- -- and the num lock key , too .
not just the testicles on my chin . i got a lot wrong . so , we 're thinking -- by we , i mean me -- that the thing to do is to talk about a pr campaign for work , manual labor , skilled labor . somebody needs to be out there talking about the forgotten benefits . i 'm talking about grandfather stuff , the stuff a lot us probably grew up with but we 've kind of -- you know , kind of lost a little . barack wants to create two and a half million jobs . the infrastructure is a huge deal . this war on work , that i suppose exists , has casualties
and used them to try and understand what were those genes causing autism in those cases ? to do that , we actually had to comprehensively be able to look at all that genetic information and determine what those differences were between the mother , the father and the child . in doing so , i apologize , i 'm going to use an outdated analogy of encyclopedias rather than wikipedia , but i 'm going to do so to try and help make the point that as we did this inventory , we needed to be able to look at massive amounts of information .
and we consume so much that again , a rise of 6.5 billion to 9.5 billion in our grandchildren 's lifetime will disproportionately hurt the poorest and the most vulnerable . that 's why they migrate to cities . that 's why in june of this year , we passed , as a species , 51 percent of us living in cities , and bustees , and slums , and shantytowns . the rural areas are no longer producing as much food as they did . the green revolution never reached africa . and with desertification , sandstorms , the gobi desert , the ogaden , we are finding increasing difficulty of a hectare to produce as many calories as it did even 15 years ago .
in a nutshell , this research suggests that among retired nfl players with three or more career concussions , the incidents of early-onset dementing disease is much greater than it is for the general population . so you 've all seen that -- new york times , you 've seen it . what you may not be familiar with is that this research was spearheaded by nfl wives who said ,  is n't it weird that my 46-year-old husband is forever losing his keys ? is n't it weird that my 47-year-old husband is forever losing the car ? is n't it weird that my 48-year-old husband is forever losing his way home in the car , from the driveway ? 
how do you become a magician ? is it a 9-to-5 job ? of course not ! you 've got to practice 24/7 . i do n't literally mean 24 hours , seven days a week . 24/7 is a little bit of an exaggeration , but it does take practice . now , some people will say , well , magic , that must be the work of some evil supernatural force . whoa . well , to this , i just say , no no . actually , in german , it 's nein nein . magic is n't that intense . i have to warn you , though , if you ever play with someone who deals cards like this , do n't play for money .
when i eventually reveal the nature of my profession , they look at me as though i 'm somewhere between a snake , a monkey and an iguana , and through all of this , i feel , strongly , that something is going wrong . four hundred years of maturing democracy , colleagues in parliament who seem to me , as individuals , reasonably impressive , an increasingly educated , energetic , informed population , and yet a deep , deep sense of disappointment . my colleagues in parliament include , in my new intake , family doctors , businesspeople , professors , distinguished economists , historians , writers , army officers ranging from colonels down to regimental sergeant majors . all of them , however , including myself , as we walk underneath
now because we have n't fully processed this information , it 's kind of coming back to us in our pop culture in these kind of weird and exaggerated ways , where you can see that the stereotypes are changing . and so we have on the male side what one of my colleagues likes to call the  omega males  popping up , who are the males who are romantically challenged losers who ca n't find a job . and they come up in lots of different forms . so we have the perpetual adolescent . we have the charmless misanthrope . then we have our bud light guy who 's the happy couch potato .
what simplicity means . i know what it is but i do n't actually know what it means . so , i actually was interested enough in this to put together several groups of people . and the most recent involved a couple of people at mit , one of them being an exceptionally bright kid who is one of the very few people i would think of who 's an authentic genius . we all struggled for an entire day to think about simplicity . and i want to give you the answer of this deep scientific thought . so , in a sense , you get what you pay for .
and like all of these successful and responsible ceos say , you ca n't have just one of these things be successful if you want a meaningful and successful job .
and i 'm not an artist .  he 's right . we all wrestle with experience and challenge , limits and loss . creativity is essential to all of us , whether we 're scientists or teachers , parents or entrepreneurs . i want to leave you with another image of a japanese tea bowl . this one is at the freer gallery in washington , d.c. it 's more than a hundred years old and you can still see the fingermarks where the potter pinched it . but as you can also see , this one did break at some point in its hundred years . but the person who put it back together , instead of hiding the cracks ,
we all go back so far , and in this present moment , on this day , all the people you meet , all that life from generations and from so many places all over the world flows together and meets you here like a life-giving water , if you only open your heart and drink . open your heart to the incredible gifts that civilization gives to us . you flip a switch and there is electric light . you turn a faucet and there is warm water and cold water , and drinkable water . it 's a gift that millions and millions in the world will never experience .
a self-organizing system . a self-organizing system is one where a structure appears without explicit intervention from the outside . self-organizing systems also always show emergence , which is that the system starts to do things , which it was never designed for . which is why you react the way you do , because it looks impossible . i think i can make a guess now -- education is self-organizing system , where learning is an emergent phenomenon . it 'll take a few years to prove it , experimentally , but i 'm going to try . but in the meanwhile , there is a method available . one billion children , we need 100 million mediators --
who are these people ? what are these tribes ? and david remnick , who was really wonderful about it , had one problem . he did n't like al zheimers , because he thought it would insult people with alzheimer 's . but you know , we said ,  david , who 's going to know ? they 're not .  so it stayed in , and it was , and , you know , it was a good thing . you know , in the course of my life , i never know what 's going to happen and that 's kind of the beauty part . and we were on cape cod , a place , obviously , of great inspiration , and i picked up this book ,  the elements of style ,  at a yard sale .
and that problem is now , in a purely engineering way , solved . and the procedure that we have is simply to start with paper . you run it through a new kind of printer called a wax printer . the wax printer does what looks like printing . it is printing . you put that on , you warm it a little bit , the wax prints through so it absorbs into the paper , and you end up with the device that you want . the printers cost 800 bucks now . they 'll make , we estimate that if you were to run them 24 hours a day they 'd make about 10 million tests a year .
so again we persisted , and foster 's brewing came to the party and gave us our first ever sponsorship , and that was enough for me to quit my job , i did consulting on the side .
but tell me that you study trabeculae , which is the mesh-like structure of our bones because it 's important to understanding and treating osteoporosis . and when you 're describing your science , beware of jargon . jargon is a barrier to our understanding of your ideas . sure , you can say  spatial and temporal ,  but why not just say  space and time ,  which is so much more accessible to us ? and making your ideas accessible is not the same as dumbing it down . instead , as einstein said , make everything as simple as possible , but no simpler . you can clearly communicate your science without compromising the ideas .
it expands , so that those three days in paris seem to be more full of consciousness and experience than all the months of being a walking , talking , faculty meeting-attending zombie back home . and by the way , that coffee , that wonderful coffee you 've been drinking downstairs , actually mimics the effect of those baby neurotransmitters . so what 's it like to be a baby ? it 's like being in love in paris for the first time after you 've had three double-espressos . that 's a fantastic way to be , but it does tend to leave you waking up crying at three o'clock in the morning .
that doctor without borders . on the other hand , i had played the violin my entire life . music for me was more than a passion . it was obsession . it was oxygen . i was lucky enough to have studied at the juilliard school in manhattan , and to have played my debut with zubin mehta and the israeli philharmonic orchestra in tel aviv , and it turned out that gottfried schlaug had studied as an organist at the vienna conservatory , but had given up his love for music to pursue a career in medicine . and that afternoon , i had to ask him ,  how was it for you making that decision ? 
that 's half of what the alaskan pipeline would cost . but the real exciting vision that we see truly is home refueling , much like recharging your laptop or recharging your cellphone . so we 're pretty excited about the future of hydrogen . we think it 's a question of not whether , but a question of when . what we 've targeted for ourselves -- and we 're making great progress for this goal -- is to have a propulsion system based on hydrogen and fuel cells , designed and validated , that can go head-to-head with the internal combustion engine -- we 're talking about obsoleting the internal combustion engine --
so i 've been hearing color all the time for eight years , since 2004 , so i find it completely normal now
originally the sample was aged 18 to 94. and we studied whether and how their emotional experiences changed as they grew older .
it was a website called nerve.com , the tagline of which was  literate smut .  it was in theory , and hopefully in practice , a smart online magazine about sex and culture . av : that spawned a dating site . but you can understand the jokes that we get . sex begets babies . you follow instructions on nerve and you should end up on babble , which we did . and we might launch a geriatric site as our third . we 'll see . rg : but for us , the continuity between nerve and babble was not just the life stage thing , which is , of course , relevant , but it was really more about
and that nobody ever came to visit them , and that for the first time in six years , when she heard us play , she stopped shaking without medication . suddenly , what we 're finding with these concerts , away from the stage , away from the footlights , out of the tuxedo tails , the musicians become the conduit for delivering the tremendous therapeutic benefits of music on the brain to an audience that would never have access to this room , would never have access to the kind of music that we make . just as medicine serves to heal more than the building blocks of the body alone ,
we 've got a different solution . now , one of these styrofoam chests will last for about four hours with ice in it . and we thought , well , that 's not really good enough . so we made this thing . this lasts six months with no power ; absolutely zero power , because it loses less than a half a watt . now , this is our second generations prototype . the third generation prototype is , right now , in uganda being tested . now , the reason we were able to come up with this is two key ideas : one is that this is similar to a cryogenic dewar , something you 'd keep liquid nitrogen or liquid helium in .
they 're also fairly wealthy and affluent and all these other sorts of things .
robin and i , acting as collaborators , keep the landscape of the projects tilted towards completion . success is in the doing , and failures are celebrated and analyzed . problems become puzzles and obstacles disappear . when faced with particularly difficult setbacks or complexities , a really interesting behavior emerges : decoration . decoration of the unfinished project is a kind of conceptual incubation . from these interludes come deep insights and amazing new approaches to solving the problems that had them frustrated just moments before . all materials are available for use . even those mundane , hateful , plastic grocery bags can become a bridge stronger than anyone imagined .
natasha told me that a lot of the kids thought she was stuck up , because they would talk to her and she would n't answer , and they did n't realize she did n't actually speak english very well , in the beginning . but what i noticed , again as an observer , was she was choosing who was going to be on her team , and seemed to be very popular very , very quickly . now , remember the picture , how much she looked like her grandmother , at the beginning ? people were always telling natasha how much she looks like her mother , gail . this is a tense moment in the first football game , i think .
that 's the first time i 've ever played it . it 's a  feel the fear and do it anyway  kind of thing . this next song is a song that started out as a dream -- a childhood dream . it was one of the titles that i was sort of thinking about calling my record , except there 's a couple of problems . one thing is , it 's unpronounceable . and it 's a made-up word . it 's called  tembererana .  and the song is based on what i think was my first childhood attempts to think about invisible forces . so  tembererana  was these dreams , in which i would be running away
reaching success , i always focused on clients and projects , and ignored the money . then all this money started pouring in . and i got distracted by it . and suddenly i was on the phone to my stockbroker and my real estate agent , when i should have been talking to my clients . and reaching success , i always did what i loved . but then i got into stuff that i did n't love , like management . i am the world 's worst manager , but i figured i should be doing it , because i was , after all , the president of the company . well , soon a black cloud formed over my head
and it starts with basic information about where it is , in case you actually want to go and see it after you 've read the article -- where , the time , the website . same with this -- it 's a movie review , an art review , a book review -- where the reading is in case you want to go . a restaurant -- you might not want to just read about it , maybe you want to go to the restaurant . so they tell you where it is , what the prices are , the address , the phone number , etc .
the car seat did absolutely nothing whatsoever . that 's some more evidence , so in some sense -- i was criticized by a scientist , who said ,  you could never publish a study with an n of 4 ,  meaning those four crashes .
so , we 're real , and we 've touched several hundreds of thousands of little girls . we 've made half-a-billion impressions with marketing and pr for this brand , purple moon . ninety-six percent of them , roughly , have been positive ; four percent of them have been  other .  i want to talk about the other , because the politics of this enterprise , in a way , have been the most fascinating part of it , for me . there are really two kinds of negative reviews that we 've received . one kind of reviewer is a male gamer who thinks he knows what games ought to be , and wo n't show the product to little girls .
and stress , worry , anger all decrease with age . now social scientists call this the paradox of aging .
the reverend thomas bayes , who was a statistician and mathematician in the 18th century . and essentially what bayes did was to provide a mathematical way using probability theory to characterize , describe , the way that scientists find out about the world . so what scientists do is they have a hypothesis that they think might be likely to start with . they go out and test it against the evidence . the evidence makes them change that hypothesis . then they test that new hypothesis and so on and so forth . and what bayes showed was a mathematical way that you could do that . and that mathematics is at the core
so we went out and found these dodgeball teams and infiltrated them . and we did the exact same thing as before . so some teams , we give people on the team money , they spend it on themselves . other teams , we give them money to spend on their dodgeball teammates .
and i can benefit from your efforts , without having to put in the time and energy that you did into developing them . if i can watch which lure you use to catch a fish , or i can watch how you flake your hand axe to make it better , or if i follow you secretly to your mushroom patch , i can benefit from your knowledge and wisdom and skills , and maybe even catch that fish before you do . social learning really is visual theft . and in any species that acquired it , it would behoove you to hide your best ideas , lest somebody steal them from you .
and have been able to see the big picture . so as we are facing all the multiple crises in our world at the moment , what is good for us on a personal level , what 's going to bring more joy , gratitude , effectiveness in our lives and be the best for our own careers is also what is best for the world . so i urge you to shut your eyes and discover the great ideas that lie inside us , to shut your engines and discover the power of sleep . thank you . so if someone asked you for the three words that would sum up
you fall outside the door , you 're caught in the slipstream . the first thing you do is lock into a tight body position -- head down in your chest , your arms extended , put over your reserve parachute . you do that because , 27 years before , an airborne sergeant had taught me to do that . i have no idea whether it makes any difference , but he seemed to make sense , and i was n't going to test the hypothesis that he 'd be wrong . and then you wait for the opening shock for your parachute to open . if you do n't get an opening shock , you do n't get a parachute --
but once the annual rains began , the herd would begin migrating to feeding grounds outside the park . and that 's when they ran into trouble . for outside the safety of the park were poachers , who would hunt them down only for the value of their ivory tusks . the matriarch that they were radio tracking , after weeks of moving back and forth , in and out of the park , came to a halt outside the park . annie had been killed , along with 20 members of her herd . and they only came for the ivory . this is actually one of the rangers . they were able to chase off one of the poachers and recover this ivory ,
in your lives , as an individual , as a family with autism ? we 're going to need individuals of all ages , from the young to the old , and with all different shapes and sizes of the autism spectrum disorder to make sure that we can have an impact . so i invite all of you to join the mission and to help to be able to make the lives of individuals with autism so much better and so much richer .
literally a life-saving donation .
to size and strength , which is what 's helped men along all these years . what the economy requires now is a whole different set of skills . you basically need intelligence , you need an ability to sit still and focus , to communicate openly , to be able to listen to people and to operate in a workplace that is much more fluid than it used to be , and those are things that women do extremely well , as we 're seeing . if you look at management theory these days , it used to be that our ideal leader sounded something like general patton , right ? you would be issuing orders from above .
a few things to consider are having examples , stories and analogies . those are ways to engage and excite us about your content . and when presenting your work , drop the bullet points . have you ever wondered why they 're called bullet points ? what do bullets do ? bullets kill , and they will kill your presentation . a slide like this is not only boring , but it relies too much on the language area of our brain , and causes us to become overwhelmed . instead , this example slide by genevieve brown is much more effective . it 's showing that the special structure of trabeculae are so strong that they actually inspired
daughter , son , wife in a firefight in real time and you ca n't do anything about it . think about knowing that over time . and it 's a new cumulative pressure on leaders . and you have to watch and take care of each other . i probably learned the most about relationships . i learned they are the sinew which hold the force together . i grew up much of my career in the ranger regiment . and every morning in the ranger regiment , every ranger -- and there are more than 2,000 of them -- says a six-stanza ranger creed . you may know one line of it , it says ,
how do we take their contributions to their jobs , their communities and their families , and convert that value into reputation capital ? ultimately , when we get it right , reputation capital could create a massive positive disruption in who has power , trust and influence . a three-digit score , your traditional credit history , that only 30 percent of us actually know what it is , will no longer be the determining factor in how much things cost , what we can access , and , in many instances , limit what we can do in the world . indeed , reputation is a currency that i believe will become more powerful than our credit history in the 21st century .
but an amazing experience and a great story . it is these kinds of stories , ones that go beyond the immediate or just the superficial that demonstrate the power of photojournalism . i believe that photography can make a real connection to people , and can be employed as a positive agent for understanding the challenges and opportunities facing our world today . thank you . i grew up in bihar , india 's poorest state ,
the next question everyone wonders is , what caused autism ? and a common misconception is that vaccines cause autism .
not so with movember . movember started in a very traditional australian way . it was on a sunday afternoon .
and when i would feel sorry for myself as nine or 10 year-old girls do , she would say to me ,  my dear , on a scale of major world tragedies , yours is not a three .  and when i was applying to business school and felt certain i could n't do it and nobody i knew had done it , i went to my aunt who survived years of beatings at the hand of her husband and escaped a marriage of abuse with only her dignity intact . and she told me ,
it will stratify society as much as it liberates it .
and the girl , who 's on her left , turned to me and looked at the queen straight in the eye and said ,  please tell her i 'm the prime minister . 
 be the change you want to see in the world , 
if you know that those two words are synonymous for design . i had a very , very meaningful relationship with my team that day , and it 's stayed that way ever since . and i hope that you too find that there 's more to design , and more towards the art of the design , than doing it yourself . it 's true that the trust and the love , that makes it worthwhile . thanks so much . nature 's my muse and it 's been my passion . as a photographer for national geographic , i 've portrayed it for many .
they 're proteins that are controlling things like ion channel movement . they 're controlling who nervous system cells partner up with . and they 're controlling basically everything that the nervous system has to do . so if we zoom in to an even deeper level , all of those proteins are encoded by our genomes . we each have 23 pairs of chromosomes . we get one from mom , one from dad . and on these chromosomes are roughly 25,000 genes . they 're encoded in the dna . and the nature of a given cell driving its underlying biochemistry is dictated by which of these 25,000 genes
to a more thoughtful and balanced definition of what a life well lived looks like . and that , i think , is an idea worth spreading . when i was considering a career in the art world , i took a course in london , and one of my supervisors was this irascible italian called pietro , who drank too much , smoked too much and swore much too much . but he was a passionate teacher , and i remember one of our earlier classes with him , he was projecting images on the wall , asking us to think about them , and he put up an image of a painting .
these puppets are made out of recycled world bank reports . so this decentralized , demystified approach of solar-electrifying villages , we 've covered all over india from ladakh up to bhutan -- all solar-electrified villages by people who have been trained .
i was at a ski resort in switzerland without any money to actually enjoy myself , because the snow had melted and i did n't have money to go to a movie . but i found that on the -- i read in the newspapers that there was to be a presentation by someone in a place that i 'd seen in the center of zurich , and it was about flying saucers [ that ] he was going to talk . and i thought , well , since i ca n't go to the movies , at least i will go for free to listen to flying saucers . and the man who talked at that evening lecture was very interesting .
some of you would eat it if it 's beef , but not pork . few of you would eat it if it 's a rat or a human . some of you would eat it only if it 's a strangely colored piece of tofu . that 's not so surprising . but what 's more interesting is how it tastes to you will depend critically on what you think you 're eating . so one demonstration of this was done with young children . how do you make children not just be more likely to eat carrots and drink milk , but to get more pleasure from eating carrots and drinking milk --
but also because of their willingness to explore and their ability to unselfconsciously surrender themselves to the experience . in short , we admire their willingness to play . playful exploration , playful building and role-play : those are some of the ways that designers use play in their work . and so far , i admit , this might feel like it ’ s a message just to go out and play like a kid . and to certain extent it is , but i want to stress a couple of points . the first thing to remember is that play is not anarchy . play has rules , especially when it ’ s group play . when kids play tea party , or they play cops and robbers ,
books that are good for children and for adults . but the painting reflects --
in the 21st century , new trust networks , and the reputation capital they generate , will reinvent the way we think about wealth , markets , power and personal identity , in ways we ca n't yet even imagine . thank you very much . being a child , and sort of crawling around the house , i remember these turkish carpets , and there were these scenes , these battle scenes , these love scenes . i mean , look , this animal is trying to fight back this spear from this soldier . and my mom took these pictures actually , last week , of our carpets , and i remember this to this day . there was another object , this sort of towering piece of furniture
the whole hadron collider family needs unlocking . the lesson of brian 's presentation , in a way -- all those fantastic pictures -- is this really : that vantage point determines everything that you see . what brian was saying was science has opened up successively different vantage points from which we can see ourselves , and that 's why it 's so valuable . so the vantage point you take determines virtually everything that you will see . the question that you will ask will determine much of the answer that you get . and so if you ask this question : where would you look to see the future of education ?
so , life has changed dramatically since i hear color ,
they said ,  yes . 
people who believed in what i was doing anyway . what i needed to do was get food out to a broader spectrum of people . so people -- i.e. , perhaps , more working-class -- or perhaps people who actually believe in a cooperative . this is a social enterprise , not-for-profit cooperative supermarket . it really is about the social disconnect between food , communities in urban settings and their relationship to rural growers -- connecting communities in london to rural growers . really important . so i 'm committing to potatoes ; i 'm committing to milk ; i 'm committing to leeks and broccoli -- all very important stuff . i 've kept the tiles ; i 've kept the floors ;
how do you provide medically relevant information at as close as possible to zero cost ? how do you do it ? let me just give you two examples . the rigors of military medicine are not so dissimilar from the third world -- poor resources , a rigorous environment , a series of problems in lightweight , and things of this kind -- and also not so different from the home healthcare and diagnostic system world . so , the technology that i want to talk about is for the third world , for the developing world , but it has , i think , much broader application , because information is so important in the healthcare system .
to buy us 20 or 30 years to get our act together . now , that 's just an insurance policy . you hope you do n't need to do that . some people say you should n't even work on the insurance policy because it might make you lazy , that you 'll keep eating because you know heart surgery will be there to save you . i 'm not sure that 's wise , given the importance of the problem , but there 's now the geoengineering discussion about -- should that be in the back pocket in case things happen faster , or this innovation goes a lot slower than we expect ? ca : climate skeptics : if you had a sentence or two to say to them ,
 well actually , we 're having a lot of success extracting good information with our torture at the moment ,  or the government of saudi arabia to say ,  well , our economic growth 's okay , thank you very much , considerably better than yours , so maybe we do n't need to go ahead with this program on women 's rights .  the point about democracy is not instrumental . it 's not about the things that it brings . the point about democracy is not that it delivers legitimate , effective , prosperous rule of law . it 's not that it guarantees peace with itself or with its neighbors . the point about democracy is intrinsic . democracy matters because it reflects an idea of equality
improvement is increasingly difficult to organize ; our faith in these systems , incredibly fraught .
so with that model , i then cold-called the ceo of the prostate cancer foundation . i said to him ,  i 've got the most amazing idea that 's going to transform your organization .  and i did n't want to share with him the idea over the phone , so i convinced him to meet with me for coffee in melbourne in 2004. and we sat down , and i shared with him my vision of getting men growing mustaches across australia , raising awareness for this cause , and funds for his organization . and i needed a partnership to legitimately do that . and i said ,  we 're going to come together at the end ,
we are trading lessons on everything from sushi-making to coding on skillshare , and we 're even sharing our pets on dogvacay . now welcome to the wonderful world of collaborative consumption that 's enabling us to match wants with haves in more democratic ways . now , collaborative consumption is creating the start of a transformation in the way we think about supply and demand , but it 's also a part of a massive value shift underway , where instead of consuming to keep up with the joneses , people are consuming to get to know the joneses . but the key reason why it 's taking off now so fast
cl : okay . so i 'm going to stop that there . so what do we see in his brain ? well , this is actually four rappers ' brains . and what we see , we do see language areas lighting up , but then -- eyes closed -- when you are free-styling versus memorizing , you 've got major visual areas lighting up . you 've got major cerebellar activity , which is involved in motor coordination . you have heightened brain activity when you 're doing a comparable task , when that one task is creative and the other task is memorized . it 's very preliminary , but i think it 's kind of cool . so just to conclude , we 've got a lot of questions to ask ,
that is not changed except by its most exceptional . so why would n't we celebrate and elevate these change makers and job creators rather than overlook them ? this topic of resilience is very personal to me and in many ways has shaped my life . my mom was a single mom who worked at the phone company during the day and sold tupperware at night so that i could have every opportunity possible . we shopped double coupons and layaway and consignment stores , and when she got sick with stage four breast cancer and could no longer work , we even applied for food stamps .
just in sort of shallow knee-deep water . the squid is nocturnal , so during the day it buries itself in the sand and sleeps , but then at night it has to come out to hunt . on bright nights when there is lots of starlight or moonlight that light can penetrate the depth of the water the squid lives in , since it 's just in those couple feet of water . what the squid has developed is a shutter that can open and close over this specialized light organ housing the bacteria . then it has detectors on its back so it can sense how much starlight or moonlight is hitting its back .
i 've seen him lose his intellect , his sense of humor , his language skills , but i 've also seen this : he loves me , he loves my sons , he loves my brother and my mom and his caregivers . and that love makes us want to be around him , even now . even when it 's so hard . when you take away everything that he ever learned in this world , his naked heart still shines . i was never as kind as my dad , and i was never as loving . and what i need now is to learn to be like that . i need a heart so pure that if it 's stripped bare by dementia , it will survive .
she says ,  i bought a present for my mom .
with that increased awareness , more parents , more pediatricians , more educators learned to recognize the features of autism .
a water diviner is a professional . a traditional midwife is a professional . a traditional bone setter is a professional . these are professionals all over the world . you find them in any inaccessible village around the world . and we thought that these people should come into the mainstream and show that the knowledge and skills that they have is universal .
and try to understand how what people are doing , who they 're with , what they 're thinking about , and all the other factors that describe our day , how those might relate to those changes in happiness , we might be able to discover some of the things that really have a big influence on happiness . we 've been fortunate with this project to collect quite a lot of data , a lot more data of this kind than i think has ever been collected before , over 650,000 real-time reports from over 15,000 people . and it 's not just a lot of people , it 's a really diverse group ,
but i think , as a community , we still have a lot to learn . it 's staggering , if you think about coca-cola . they sell 1.5 billion servings every single day . that 's like every man , woman and child on the planet having a serving of coke every week . so why does this matter ? well , if we 're going to speed up the progress and go even faster on the set of millennium development goals that we 're set as a world , we need to learn from the innovators , and those innovators come from every single sector . i feel that , if we can understand what makes something like coca-cola ubiquitous ,
we have something much better for you , which we 're working on : planes that are only six inches -- 15 centimeters -- in size . and matt 's plane was on the cover of popular science last month , showing what this can lead to . and in a while , something this size will have gps and a video camera in it . we 've had one of these fly nine miles through the air at 35 miles an hour with just a little battery in it . but there 's a lot of technology going . there are just milestones along the way of some remarkable things . this one does n't have the video in it ,
what 's the best way of communicating in the world today ? television ? no .
so people get wrapped up in it . and we took a team of designers , and we sent them off to america . and we gave them a budget , what we thought was a set of deliverables , a timetable , and nothing else . like i said , i just had a phone number that connected me to them . and a group of engineers worked in germany , and the idea was they would work separately on this problem of what 's the successor to the suv . they would come together , compare notes . then they would work apart ,
16.7 percent die . and actually , the theory tells you that the lap-only seatbelt 's got to be worse than the lap-and-shoulder belt . and that just reminds you that when you deal with raw data , there are hundreds of confounding variables that may be getting in the way .
that 's not very nice , but , after all , we had to find out what the answer is . so we took two copper stents and we put it in the artery of this pig , and let me show you the result that 's very gratifying as far as people who have heart disease are concerned . so there it was , thursday morning we stopped the pig 's medication and there is his electrogram , the signal from inside the pig 's heart coming out by radio telemetry . then , on friday at 6:43 , he began to get certain signs , which later we had the pig run around -- i 'm not going to go into this early stage .
like , how did -- how did i get here ? how did -- you know -- i mean -- how did i get here ? it 's just -- it 's one of those moments where the brain goes off on it 's own : and suddenly , i 'm standing there , in the rockies , and all i can think of is the aristotelian definition of a tragedy . you know , aristotle says a tragedy is that moment when the hero comes face to face with his true identity . and i 'm like ,  what is this jacked-up metaphor ? i do n't like what i 'm thinking right now .  and i ca n't get this thought out of my head ,
and feeds them them to his swine . why ? because there 's so much protein in the stuff we do n't eat his pigs grow at twice the normal speed , and he is one rich pig farmer , and he is good for the environment , and he spends his days doing this incredible service , and he smells like hell , but god bless him . he 's making a great living . you ask him ,  did you follow your passion here ?  and he 'd laugh at you . the guy 's worth -- he just got offered like 60 million dollars for his farm and turned it down , outside of vegas . he did n't follow his passion .
girl : are you ready ? audience : yes ! girl : are you ready ? audience : yes ! kbs : so , the charter of compassion starts right here . street plays , auctions , petitions . i mean , they were changing lives . it was incredible . so , how can we still stay immune ? how can we stay immune to that passion , that energy , that excitement ? i know it 's obvious , but i have to end with the most powerful symbol of change , gandhiji . 70 years ago , it took one man to infect an entire nation with the power of  we can .  so , today who is it going to take to spread the infection from 100,000 children
that they left at their desk . but it does n't have to be that way . some sage and repeatedly furry monks at this place called the d.school designed a meeting that you can literally step out of when it 's over . take the meeting off , and have peace of mind that you can come back to me . because when you need it again , the meeting is literally hanging in your closet . the wearable meeting . because when you put it on , you immediately get everything you need to have a fun and productive and useful meeting . but when you take it off --
♫ into a world where the good was the aim of the game ♫ ♫ and the sum of invisible power ♫ ♫ had a name . ♫ ♫ it 's the same name . ♫ ♫ tembererana , hey , tembererana ... ♫ ♫ da , da , da , da , da , da , da ♫ ♫ tembere , tembere , tembere , tembererana ♫ ♫ tembere , tembere , tembere , tembererana , hey ♫ ♫ tembererana , hey ♫ ♫ tembererana ... ♫ my big idea is a very , very small idea that can unlock billions of big ideas that are at the moment dormant inside us . and my little idea that will do that
we also have our very own dream team . why is this happening ? why this confidence ? is it the exposure ? we have professors from mit , berkeley , stanford , indian institute of science who come and teach our children lots of scientific formulas , experiments , much beyond the classroom . art , music are considered therapy and mediums of expression . we also believe that it 's the content that is more important . it is not the infrastructure , not the toilets , not the libraries , but it is what actually happens in this school that is more important . creating an environment of learning , of inquiry , of exploration is what is true education .
about the power of language . according to that story , early humans developed the conceit that , by using their language to work together , they could build a tower that would take them all the way to heaven . now god , angered at this attempt to usurp his power , destroyed the tower , and then to ensure that it would never be rebuilt , he scattered the people by giving them different languages -- confused them by giving them different languages . and this leads to the wonderful irony that our languages exist to prevent us from communicating . even today , we know that there are words we can not use ,
but then we see extraordinary differences . so look at these two .
something that you can do , perhaps earn a living from . so i met this character , steven . he 'd spent three years in nairobi living on the streets because his parents had died of aids . and he was finally brought back into school , not by the offer of gcses , but by the offer of learning how to become a carpenter , a practical making skill . so the trendiest schools in the world , high tech high and others , they espouse a philosophy of learning as productive activity .
just say to them , 'that 's cool . that 's fantastic . what is that ? can you do that again ? can you show me some more ? '  she did that for two months . the scores went up to 50 , which is what the posh schools of new delhi , with a trained biotechnology teacher were getting . so i came back to newcastle with these results and decided that there was something happening here that definitely was getting very serious . so , having experimented in all sorts of remote places , i came to the most remote place that i could think of . approximately 5,000 miles from delhi
or simply watching . as a result , they ca n't improve on others ' ideas or learn from others ' mistakes -- benefit from others ' wisdom . and so they just do the same thing over and over and over again . in fact , we could go away for a million years and come back and these chimpanzees would be doing the same thing with the same sticks for the termites and the same rocks to crack open the nuts . now this may sound arrogant , or even full of hubris . how do we know this ? because this is exactly what our ancestors , the homo erectus , did . these upright apes
the most far-reaching legislation in environmental history . al gore made presentations in the house and the senate as an expert witness . can you imagine ? we 're seeing an entente cordiale between science and religion that five years ago i would not have believed , as the evangelical community has understood the desperate situation of global warming . and now 4,000 churches have joined the environmental movement . it is something to be greatly optimistic about . the european 20-20-20 plan is an amazing breakthrough , something that should make all of us feel that hope is on the horizon . and on april 14th , there will be step up day , where there will be a thousand
so , i was convinced . we designed it to be iconic , to look different . to look like it 's for a kid , but not like a toy . and then the integration of all these great technologies , which you 've heard about , the wi-fi antennas that allow the kids to connect ; the screen , which you can read in sunlight ; the keyboard , which is made out of rubber , and it 's protected from the environment . you know , all these great technologies really happened because of the passion and the olpc people and the engineers . they fought the suppliers , they fought the manufacturers . i mean , they fought like animals
well , we need lots of companies working on this , hundreds . in each of these five paths , we need at least a hundred people . and a lot of them , you 'll look at and say ,  they 're crazy .  that 's good . and , i think , here in the ted group , we have many people who are already pursuing this . bill gross has several companies , including one called esolar that has some great solar thermal technologies . vinod khosla 's investing in dozens of companies that are doing great things and have interesting possibilities , and i 'm trying to help back that . nathan myhrvold and i actually are backing a company
when we started trying to eradicate polio about 20 years ago , more than twice as many countries were infected than had been when we started off with smallpox . and there were more than 10 times as many people living in these countries . so it was a massive effort . the second challenge we had was -- in contrast to the smallpox vaccine , which was very stable , and a single dose protected you for life -- the polio vaccine is incredibly fragile . it deteriorates so quickly in the tropics that we 've had to put this special vaccine monitor on every single vial so that it will change very quickly
 you will find a job . take the leap .  the women in my family are not exceptions . the women in this room and watching in l.a. and all around the world are not exceptions . we are not a special interest group . we are the majority . and for far too long , we have underestimated ourselves and been undervalued by others . it is time for us to aim higher when it comes to women , to invest more and to deploy our dollars to benefit women all around the world . we can make a difference , and make a difference , not just for women , but for a global economy
on negotiating reforms with the finance ministry of uganda so they could access our loans .
my accent with english improved a lot . and i learned football , volleyball , frisbee , lots of games . and i would n't want to go to bangalore . let me stay here . such beautiful food , i enjoyed it . it was so beautiful . i enjoyed eating food like [ unclear ] would come and ask me ,  yes ma'am , what you want ?  it was so good to hear !
a fragrance , and plants actually communicate with one another through their fragrances . i want to talk about something really ordinary , just ordinary sand . i became interested in sand about 10 years ago , when i first saw sand from maui , and in fact , this is a little bit of sand from maui . so sand is about a tenth of a millimeter in size . each sand grain is about a tenth of a millimeter in size . but when you look closer at this , look at what 's there . it 's really quite amazing . you have microshells there . you have things like coral . you have fragments of other shells . you have olivine .
so we are on the verge , 2015 , of an amazing achievement , the schoolification of the world . every child up to the age of 15 who wants a place in school will be able to have one in 2015. it 's an amazing thing . but it is , unlike cars , which have developed so rapidly and orderly , actually the school system is recognizably an inheritance from the 19th century , from a bismarkian model of german schooling that got taken up by english reformers , and often by religious missionaries , taken up in the united states as a force of social cohesion , and then in japan and south korea as they developed .
you make it flow under and over . but now the question is : how do you make it flow under and over in a piece of paper ? the answer is that what you do , and the details are not terribly important here , is to make something more elaborate : you take several different layers of paper , each one containing its own little fluid system , and you separate them by pieces of , literally , double-sided carpet tape , the stuff you use to stick the carpets onto the floor . and the fluid will flow from one layer into the next . it distributes itself , flows through further holes ,
sugata mitra : i took the experiment to south africa . this is a 15 year-old boy . boy : ... just mention , i play games like animals , and i listen to music . sm : and i asked him ,  do you send emails ?  and he said ,  yes , and they hop across the ocean .  this is in cambodia , rural cambodia -- a fairly silly arithmetic game , which no child would play inside the classroom or at home . they would , you know , throw it back at you . they 'd say ,  this is very boring .  if you leave it on the pavement and if all the adults go away ,
which has something to do with this . our conclusions from our studies so far , at three research centers , is there is a marked improvement in pain levels after using it just once . the most severe headaches responded better after we did it several times , and the unexpected finding indicates that even established headaches , not only those with aura , get treated and get diminished . and auras can be erased and the migraine , then , does not occur . and that is the migraine invention that we are talking about and that we are working on . the third and last invention began with an idea .
and they can make basically what 's a reference atlas . this is a more detailed map . our scientists then use this to go back to another piece of that tissue and do what 's called laser scanning microdissection . so the technician takes the instructions . they scribe along a place there . and then the laser actually cuts . you can see that blue dot there cutting . and that tissue falls off . you can see on the microscope slide here , that 's what 's happening in real time . there 's a container underneath that 's collecting that tissue . we take that tissue , we purify the rna out of it using some basic technology ,
the more things that i can be happy and busy doing when my brain 's not running the show anymore . they say that people who are engaged in activities are happier , easier for their caregivers to look after , and it may even slow the progress of the disease . that all seems like win to me . i want to be as happy as i can for as long as i can . a lot of people do n't know that alzheimer 's actually has physical symptoms , as well as cognitive symptoms . you lose your sense of balance , you get muscle tremors , and that tends to lead people to being less and less mobile .
and a little bit of rubble , and i raised my camera to take a peek , just to see if there was something to see , and some cop , a lady cop , hit me on my shoulder , and said ,  hey , no pictures !  and it was such a blow that it woke me up , in the way that it was meant to be , i guess . and when i asked her why no pictures , she said ,  it 's a crime scene . no photographs allowed .  and i asked her ,  what would happen if i was a member of the press ?  and she told me ,  oh , look back there ,  and back a block was the press corps
but other teams we say ,  here 's 15 euro . spend it on one of your teammates this week . buy them something as a gift or a present and give it to them . and then we can see , well now we 've got teams that spend on themselves and we 've got these prosocial teams who we give money to make the team a little bit better . the reason i have a ridiculous pinata there is one of the teams pooled their money and bought a pinata , and they all got around and smashed the pinata and all the candy fell out and things like that .
and the government is responsive . so for instance ,
to own and live the memory of their own childhood . it is that simple . my own mother — and i should say this here — she same to this country in the late '60s , and she was , you know , she found herself pregnant , as women did in the late '60s . you know what i mean ? they found themselves pregnant . and she sort of , she had no idea of the context in which she 'd landed . in the 1960s -- i should give you some context -- in the 1960s , if you were pregnant and you were single , you were seen as a threat to the community .
i drove to the mall in my car , bought a present , gave it to my mom . 
that 's what makes those little dots on the page . and , of course , there 's signal processing and digital cameras . so what if we could put all that together to shoot them out of the sky with lasers ? now , in our company , this is what we call  the pinky-suck moment .  what if we could do that ? now , just suspend disbelief for a moment , and let 's think of what could happen if we could do that . well , we could protect very high-value targets like clinics . clinics are full of people that have malaria . they 're sick , and so they 're less able to defend themselves from the mosquitoes .
older people are happy .
so we started the barefoot college , and we redefined professionalism . who is a professional ? a professional is someone who has a combination of competence , confidence and belief .
we raised the money , and we 're thrilled that we did , because in this phase of one 's life , the incredibly scarce resource is time . and if you 're really passionate about what you do every day -- which we are -- and you 're also passionate about your relationship , this is the only way we know how to do it . and so the final question that we would ask is : can we collectively bend that happiness chart upwards ? it 's great that we have these transcendent moments of joy , but they 're sometimes pretty quick . and so how about that average baseline of happiness ? can we move that up a little bit ?
heroes : how do we view leadership ? look at these 10 movies . what do they have in common ? anyone ? they all have heroes who were chosen . someone came up to them and said ,  you 're the chosen one . there 's a prophesy . you have to save the world .  and then someone goes off and saves the world because they 've been told to , with a few people tagging along .
we 're not trying to teach anybody any specific thing .
so i started this talk talking about the tush , so i 'll end with the bottom line , which is , walk and talk .
or as the ballet dancer alonzo king said ,  what 's interesting about you is you .  for the true selves of companies to come through , openness is paramount , but radical openness is not a solution , because when everything is open , nothing is open .  a smile is a door that is half open and half closed ,  the author jennifer egan wrote . companies can give their employees and customers more control or less . they can worry about how much openness is good for them , and what needs to stay closed . or they can simply smile , and remain open to all possibilities . thank you .
we want to live in lake wobegon where every child is above average , but what this does to our children is really not healthy . it 's not developmentally appropriate , and it 's particularly bad for boys . so what do we do ? we need to meet them where they are . we need to put ourselves into boy culture . we need to change the mindset of acceptance in boys in elementary schools . more specifically , we can do some very specific things . we can design better games . most of the educational games that are out there today are really flashcards .
so we 'd racked up at this stage about 600,000 dollars worth of debt . so if movember 2006 did n't happen , the four founders , well , we would 've been broke , we would 've been homeless , sitting on the street with mustaches . but we thought , you know what , if that 's the worst thing that happens , so what ? we 're going to have a lot of fun doing it , and it taught us the importance of taking risks and really smart risks .
first we figured out how this bacterium does this , but then we brought the tools of molecular biology to this to figure out really what 's the mechanism . and what we found -- so this is now supposed to be , again , my bacterial cell -- is that vibrio fischeri has a protein -- that 's the red box -- it 's an enzyme that makes that little hormone molecule , the red triangle . and then as the cells grow , they 're all releasing that molecule into the environment , so there 's lots of molecule there . and the bacteria also have a receptor on their cell surface that fits like a lock and key with that molecule .
and so , you can see that the lap-only seatbelts start to look worse once you do that .
both half the population and a special interest group . oftentimes i get into very interesting discussions with reporters who say to me ,  gayle , these are great stories , but you 're really writing about the exceptions .  now that makes me pause for just a couple reasons . first of all , for exceptions , there are a lot of them and they 're important . secondly , when we talk about men who are succeeding , we rightly consider them icons or pioneers or innovators to be emulated . and when we talk about women , they are either exceptions to be dismissed or aberrations to be ignored . and finally , there is no society anywhere in all the world
go to the website and start yourself on the process of thinking , again , less about  how can i spend money on myself ?  and more about  if i 've got five dollars or 15 dollars , what can i do to benefit other people ?  because ultimately when you do that , you 'll find that you 'll benefit yourself much more .
and a somewhat uncertain pain thing -- in fact , the ipcc report , that 's not necessarily the worst case , and there are people in the rich world who look at ipcc and say ,  ok , that is n't that big of a deal .  the fact is it 's that uncertain part that should move us towards this . but my dream here is that , if you can make it economic , and meet the co2 constraints , then the skeptics say ,  ok , i do n't care that it does n't put out co2 , i kind of wish it did put out co2 , but i guess i 'll accept it because it 's cheaper than what 's come before . 
but as social scientists , we continue to ask about possible alternatives .
but like any basic research , when you 're really forced to do things that are way beyond existing technology , you can get there with micro-technology , nanotechnology . you can do amazing things when you realize what nature has been doing all along . as you get to these small scales , you realize we have a lot to learn from nature -- not with 747s -- but when you get down to the nature 's realm , nature has 200 million years of experience . it never makes a mistake . because if you make a mistake , you do n't leave any progeny . we should have nothing but success stories from nature ,
and change the way , not attributions being made , but at least lay the ground for a more objective , or , i should rather say , less subjective attribution , as it is done today . but i would say the discovery that really caught my imagination , my admiration , is the incredibly vivid drawing under this layer , brown layer , of  the adoration of the magi .  here you see a handmade setting xyz scanner with an infrared camera put on it , and just peering through this brown layer of this masterpiece to reveal what could have been underneath . well , this happens to be the most important painting
holding a flask of a liquid culture of a bacterium , a harmless beautiful bacterium that comes from the ocean , named vibrio fischeri . this bacterium has the special property that it makes light , so it makes bioluminescence , like fireflies make light . we 're not doing anything to the cells here . we just took the picture by turning the lights off in the room , and this is what we see . what was actually interesting to us was not that the bacteria made light , but when the bacteria made light . what we noticed is when the bacteria were alone , so when they were in dilute suspension , they made no light .
but it 's a fundamental part of the play scene . so what does play do for the brain ? well , a lot . we do n't know a whole lot about what it does for the human brain , because funding has not been exactly heavy for research on play . i walked into the carnegie asking for a grant . they 'd given me a large grant when i was an academician for the study of felony drunken drivers , and i thought i had a pretty good track record , and by the time i had spent half an hour talking about play , it was obvious that they were not -- did not feel that play was serious .
with the feathered end forward . it was a tough job , and boy it made me have a lot of respect for nature . this was the full size of the original creature . we did things on land , in the air , on water -- vehicles of all different kinds , usually with some electronics or electric power systems in them . i find they 're all the same , whether its land , air or water . i 'll be focusing on the air here . this is a solar-powered airplane -- 165 miles carrying a person from france to england as a symbol that solar power is going to be an important part
and i think the best way to achieve that , and get a feeling for any flaws in your design , is to act it out . so we do quite a lot of work at ideo trying to convince our clients of this . they can be a little skeptical ; i ’ ll come back to that . but a place , i think , where the effort is really worthwhile is where people are wrestling with quite serious problems -- things like education or security or finance or health . and this is another example in a healthcare environment of some doctors and some nurses and designers acting out a service scenario around patient care .
could store less than 10 minutes of all the energy . and so , in fact , we need a big breakthrough here , something that 's going to be a factor of 100 better than the approaches we have now . it 's not impossible , but it 's not a very easy thing . now , this shows up when you try to get the intermittent source to be above , say , 20 to 30 percent of what you 're using . if you 're counting on it for 100 percent , you need an incredible miracle battery . now , how we 're going to go forward on this -- what 's the right approach ? is it a manhattan project ? what 's the thing that can get us there ?
♫ why must i become so livid ♫ ♫ about the news i hear today ? ♫ ♫ i do n't have to know . ♫ ♫ and here i go ... ♫ ♫ 'cause i got all the answers ♫ ♫ right here in my hand . ♫ ♫ and i got all the answers . ♫ ♫ see , i do n't have to understand ♫ ♫ 'cause i got all the answers . ♫ ♫ i think i 'll browse on through ♫ ♫ the tabloid news ♫ ♫ while i sip my tea . ♫ ♫ mm , it 's good to be so free . ♫ ♫ i never ever have to be alone . ♫
they disappeared , quite honestly , and all i got was postcards . now , i got some postcards of these guys in las vegas , and i got some postcards of these guys in the grand canyon ,
uttar pradesh and bihar -- 500,000 children every single month . sanitation is terrible , and our old vaccine , you remember , worked half as well as it should have . and yet , the impossible is happening . today marks exactly six months -- and for the first time in history , not a single child has been paralyzed in uttar pradesh or bihar . india 's not unique . in umar 's home country of nigeria , a 95 percent reduction in the number of children paralyzed by polio last year . and in the last six months , we 've had less places reinfected by polio than at any other time in history .
and the thing which you 'd most like to analyze , we 're a fair distance from . it 's what 's called  fever of undiagnosed origin .  someone comes into the clinic , they have a fever , they feel bad . what do they have ? do they have t.b. ? do they have aids ? do they have a common cold ? the triage problem . that 's a hard problem for reasons that i wo n't go through . there are an awful lot of things that you 'd like to distinguish among . but then there are a series of things : aids , hepatitis , malaria , tb , others and simpler ones , such as guidance of treatment . now even that 's more complicated than you think .
and this is a picture of what the device looked like , that 's placed into the cranial bone . this is probably a better picture . here we have our device in which we put in a frame . there 's a cut made in the scalp ; it 's opened ; the neurosurgeon has a template ; he marks it around , and uses a dental burr to remove a piece of the cranial bone exactly the size of our device . and tonight , you 'll be able to see the device in the tent . and then with four screws , we put in a frame , then we snap in the device and we run with wires --
of landscapes -- of tuscany , of cape cod , of light . joel is a new yorker , and his studio for many years was in chelsea , with a straight view downtown to the world trade center , and he photographed those buildings in every sort of light . you know where this story goes . on 9/11 , joel was n't in new york . he was out of town , but he raced back to the city , and raced down to the site of the destruction . joel meyerowitz : and like all the other passersby , i stood outside the chain link fence on chambers and greenwich , and all i could see was the smoke
in fact , the original research study that suggested that was the case was completely fraudulent . it was actually retracted from the journal lancet , in which it was published , and that author , a physician , had his medical license taken away from him . the institute of medicine , the centers for disease control , have repeatedly investigated this and there is no credible evidence that vaccines cause autism .
with thousands of other people watching this performance , but she was ready . she was ready to open up to what it sparked in her , and it led her , as she said , down this path to become an award-winning filmmaker . so being open for that experience that might change you is the first thing we need to embrace . artists also speak about how some of their most powerful work comes out of the parts of life that are most difficult . the novelist richard ford speaks about a childhood challenge that continues to be something he wrestles with today . he 's severely dyslexic . richard ford : i was slow to learn to read , went all the way
through the 24/7 newsreels . it 's in our galleries that we can unpack the civilizations , the cultures , that we 're seeing the current manifestation of . whether it 's libya , egypt , syria , it 's in our galleries that we can explain and give greater understanding . i mean , our new islamic galleries are a case in point , opened 10 years , almost to the week , after 9/11 . i think for most americans , knowledge of the islamic world was pretty slight before 9/11 , and then it was thrust upon us in one of america 's darkest hours , and the perception was through the polarization of that terrible event . now , in our galleries , we show 14 centuries
and it enables us to address even the most difficult of questions . the best questions are the ones that create the most uncertainty . they 're the ones that question the things we think to be true already . right ? it 's easy to ask questions about how did life begin , or what extends beyond the universe , but to question what you think to be true already is really stepping into that space . so what is evolution 's answer to the problem of uncertainty ? it 's play . now play is not simply a process . experts in play will tell you that actually it 's a way of being .
and we even know something about the way the brain does this . so what happens when we pay attention is that the prefrontal cortex , the sort of executive part of our brains , sends a signal that makes a little part of our brain much more flexible , more plastic , better at learning , and shuts down activity in all the rest of our brains . so we have a very focused , purpose-driven kind of attention . if we look at babies and young children , we see something very different . i think babies and young children seem to have more of a lantern of consciousness than a spotlight of consciousness .
all this different stuff that i have to do , and sometimes it gets overwhelming . girl 9 : my friend justine kinda took my friend kelly , and now they 're being mean to me . girl 10 : well , sometimes it gets annoying when your brothers and sisters , or brother or sister , when they copy you and you get your idea first and they take your idea and they do it themselves . girl 11 : because my older sister , she gets everything and , like , when i ask my mom for something , she 'll say ,  no  -- all the time . but she gives my sister everything . brenda laurel : i want to show you , real quickly , just a minute
to anticipate all the pairwise possibilities . the european union employs a permanent staff of about 2,500 translators . and in 2007 alone -- and i 'm sure there are more recent figures -- something on the order of 1.3 million pages were translated into english alone . and so if language really is the solution to the crisis of visual theft , if language really is the conduit of our cooperation , the technology that our species derived to promote the free flow and exchange of ideas , in our modern world , we confront a question . and that question is whether in this modern , globalized world we can really afford to have all these different languages .
and actually go spend some time with the kids , and try to tell their story a little bit better than i thought i had done for time magazine . in the course of doing the story , i was looking for children who had n't been photographed before , and the pearl buck foundation told me that they worked with a lot of americans who were donating money to help some of these kids . and a man told me , who ran the pearl buck foundation in korea , that there was a young girl , who was 11 years old , being raised by her grandmother . and the grandmother had never let any westerners ever see her .
our education systems , you do all that stuff afterward , if you 're lucky , sport , drama , music . these things , they teach through .
those strange stone gargoyles just down the road , feel that we 've become less than the sum of our parts , feel as though we have become profoundly diminished . and this is n't just a problem in britain . it 's a problem across the developing world , and in middle income countries too . in jamaica , for example -- look at jamaican members of parliament , you meet them , and they 're often people who are rhodes scholars , who 've studied at harvard or at princeton , and yet , you go down to downtown kingston , and you are looking at one of the most depressing sites that you can see in any middle-income country in the world :
and this collusion of incredible creativity , under these incredible surroundings , and these incredibly stressed-out engineers , would create some incredible solutions . well , what i did n't know was , and what we found out was -- these guys , they ca n't even like talk to each other under those conditions . you get a divergence of newtonian and quantum thinking at that point , you have a split in your dialog that is so deep , and so far ,
and so , as a consequence , a few years later , another scientist -- perhaps maybe this scientist not quite as brilliant as the one who had preceded him , but building on the invention of the first one -- came up with a second cure .
his was a lonely struggle , because bihar was also india 's most corrupt state , where public officials were enriching themselves , [ rather ] than serving the poor who had no means to express their anguish if their children had no food or no schooling .
one woman said she bought a stuffed animal for her niece .
for british grandmothers , after my kuppam experiment . well , you know , they 're very vigorous people , british grandmothers . 200 of them volunteered immediately . the deal was that they would give me one hour of broadband time , sitting in their homes , one day in a week . so they did that , and over the last two years , over 600 hours of instruction has happened over skype , using what my students call the granny cloud . the granny cloud sits over there . i can beam them to whichever school i want to . teacher : you ca n't catch me .
i can stand here right now and see , as i go tearing into the water after him , the moments slowing down and freezing into this arrangement . i can see the rocks are over here . there 's a wave about to crash onto him . i can see his hands reaching out , and i can see his face in terror , looking at me , saying ,  help me , dad .  i got him . the wave broke over us . we got back on shore ; he was fine . we were a little bit rattled . but this flashbulb memory , as it 's called , is when all the elements came together to define
one problem is there are some sounds in arabic that just do n't make it through a european voice box without lots of practice .
 what do you want to do in a village ? no job , no money , no security , no prospect . 
and i said ,  that 's a great idea . 
so there was a dividing wall between our office and the urban slum . they cut a hole inside that wall -- which is how it has got the name hole-in-the-wall -- and put a pretty powerful pc into that hole , sort of embedded into the wall so that its monitor was sticking out at the other end , a touchpad similarly embedded into the wall , put it on high-speed internet , put the internet explorer there , put it on altavista.com -- in those days -- and just left it there . and this is what we saw . so that was my office in iit . here 's the hole-in-the-wall .
thank you frans de waal , wherever you are , i love you and i 'd give anything to meet you .
instead of talking about little green men , he talked about how the psyche of the europeans had been traumatized by the war , and now they 're projecting flying saucers into the sky .
as opposed to -- this is what we try and serve . we really need to change this whole paradigm with kids and food . we really have to teach children that chicken is not a giraffe . you know , that vegetables are actually colorful , that they have flavor , that carrots grow in the ground , that strawberries grow in the ground . there 's not a strawberry tree or a carrot bush . you know , we have to change the way we teach kids about these things . there 's a lot of stuff we can do . there 's a lot of schools doing farm-to-school programs . there 's a lot of schools
to pursue poetry , but he died when he was a year older than me . and keats said ,  beauty is truth , and truth beauty . that is all ye know on earth , and all ye need to know .  people love their automobiles . they allow us to go where we want to when we want to . they 're a form of entertainment , they 're a form of art , a pride of ownership . songs are written about cars . prince wrote a great song :  little red corvette .  he did n't write  little red laptop computer  or  little red dirt devil .  he wrote about a car . and one of my favorites has always been ,
we 've pretty much accepted the fact , though , that we are the women in the organization at bmw -- bmw is a very manly type business , -- men , men , men ; it 's engineers . and we 're kind of the female side to that . that 's ok , that 's cool . you go off and be manly . we 're going to be a little bit more female . because what we 're interested in is finding form that 's more than just a function . we 're interested in finding beauty that 's more than just an aesthetic ;
and it describes how he feels when composing is going well . and he says by describing it as an ecstatic state . now ,  ecstasy  in greek meant simply to stand to the side of something . and then it became essentially an analogy for a mental state where you feel that you are not doing your ordinary everyday routines .
and i encourage you to look at that . now , not all of us have meadows , or lawns that we can convert , and so you can always , of course , grow a meadow in a pot . bees apparently , can be the gateway to , you know , other things . so i 'm not saying that you should plant a meadow of pot , but a pot in a meadow . but you can also have this great community of city or building-top beekeepers , these beekeepers that live -- this is in paris where these beekeepers live . and everyone should open a beehive , because it is the most amazing , incredible thing .
who the hell are you to accuse me of something like this ? '  and i said , you know ,  look ,  i said ,  you 're absolutely right . i do n't pretend to understand what 's going on here .  i said ,  all i know is , i 've been photographing a lot of these children .  i said ,  i 'm in love with your niece , i think she 's an incredibly special child .  and i said ,  look , i will fly my friends over here from the united states if you want to meet them , to see if you approve of them . i just think that -- what little i know about the situation ,
but the difference is that , back then , it was driven by a very passionate feminist movement that was trying to project its own desires , whereas this time , it 's not about passion , and it 's not about any kind of movement . this is really just about the facts of this economic moment that we live in . the 200,000-year period in which men have been top dog is truly coming to an end , believe it or not , and that 's why i talk about the  end of men .  now all you men out there , this is not the moment where you tune out or throw some tomatoes ,
and infant mortality . but others would n't be discovered for many years . decades after the  hunger winter ,  researchers documented that people whose mothers were pregnant during the siege have more obesity , more diabetes and more heart disease in later life than individuals who were gestated under normal conditions . these individuals ' prenatal experience of starvation seems to have changed their bodies in myriad ways . they have higher blood pressure , poorer cholesterol profiles and reduced glucose tolerance -- a precursor of diabetes . why would undernutrition in the womb result in disease later ? one explanation is that fetuses are making the best of a bad situation .
so these are just a few of an enormous number of gifts to which we can open your heart . and so i wish you that you will open your heart to all these blessings , and let them flow through you , that everyone whom you will meet on this day will be blessed by you , just by your eyes , by your smile , by your touch , just by your presence . let the gratefulness overflow into blessing all around you , and then it will really be a good day . louie schwartzberg : thank you . thank you very much . the  dirty jobs  crew and i were called
how do you sleep at night when you 're rustling with a problem of that magnitude ? and i tell them i sleep like a baby : i wake up crying every two hours . actually the theme of this conference , i think , has hit on really one of the major keys to pull that off -- and that 's relationships and working together . thank you very much . . chris anderson : larry , larry , wait , wait , wait , wait , larry , wait , wait one sec . just -- i 've got so many questions i could ask you . i just want to ask one . you know , i could be wrong about this ,
so , arousal is the area where most people learn from , because that 's where they 're pushed beyond their comfort zone and to enter that -- going back to flow -- then they develop higher skills . control is also a good place to be , because there you feel comfortable , but not very excited . it 's not very challenging any more . and if you want to enter flow from control , you have to increase the challenges . so those two are ideal and complementary areas from which flow is easy to go into . the other combinations of challenge and skill become progressively less optimal . relaxation is fine -- you still feel ok .
but if it comes for me , i 'm going to be ready . thank you . having spent 18 years as a child of the state in children 's homes and foster care , you could say that i 'm an expert on the subject , and in being an expert , i want to let you know that being an expert does in no way make you right in light of the truth . if you 're in care , legally the government is your parent , loco parentis . margaret thatcher was my mother . let 's not talk about breastfeeding . harry potter was a foster child . pip from  great expectations  was adopted ;
and those in microbusiness ca n't grow out of them . recently i was at the state department in washington and i met an incredibly passionate entrepreneur from ghana . she sells chocolates . and she had come to washington , not seeking a handout and not seeking a microloan . she had come seeking serious investment dollars so that she could build the factory and buy the equipment she needs to export her chocolates to africa , europe , the middle east and far beyond -- capital that would help her to employ more than the 20 people that she already has working for her , and capital that would fuel her own country 's
after this awful event occurs , rocket gets to decide how she feels about it .
and that 's part of what the national institute for play is all about . and this is one of the ways you can study play -- is to get a 256-lead electroencephalogram . i 'm sorry i do n't have a playful-looking subject , but it allows mobility , which has limited the actual study of play . and we 've got a mother-infant play scenario that we 're hoping to complete underway at the moment . the reason i put this here is also to queue up my thoughts about objectifying what play does . the animal world has objectified it . in the animal world , if you take rats , who are hardwired to play at a certain period of their juvenile years
with a deoxyhemoglobin change in concentration . deoxyhemoglobin can be detected by mri , whereas oxyhemoglobin ca n't . so through this method of inference -- and we 're measuring blood flow , not neural activity -- we say that an area of the brain that 's getting more blood was active during a particular task , and that 's the crux of how fmri works . and it 's been used since the '90s to study really complex processes . now i 'm going to review a study that i did , which was jazz in an fmri scanner . and this was done with a colleague of mine , alan braun , at the nih . this is a short video of how we did this project .
or else we 'll consider it a developmental delay . by the time you 're in first grade , you should be able to read paragraphs of text with maybe a picture , maybe not , in a book of maybe 25 to 30 pages . if you do n't , we 're probably going to be putting you into a title 1 special reading program . and if you ask title 1 teachers , they 'll tell you they 've got about four or five boys for every girl that 's in their program , in the elementary grades . the reason that this is a problem is because the message that boys are getting is  you need to do
and then the child turned two , and i started using the cheap and easy treatment , and i wonder  -- and she wondered , like all parents who lose children wonder --  if there is n't something that i could have done , like keep on using that complicated , expensive cure .  and she told all the other people , and she said ,  how could it possibly be that something that 's cheap and simple works as well as something that 's complicated and expensive ?  and the people thought ,  you know , you 're right . it probably is the wrong thing to do to switch and use the cheap and simple solution . 
reformers in parliament are now investigating dubious contracts .
and they 'd decided not to show me anything , in order to give the chance for problem solving a chance to start , because they had n't realized , of course , that they could n't do problem creating . so we went to lunch -- and i 've got to tell you , this was one seriously quiet lunch . the engineers all sat at one end of the table ,
inside of a couple hours to a couple of weeks . but kids are more vulnerable to brain injury . in fact , high school athletes are three times more likely to sustain catastrophic injuries relative even to their college-age peers , and it takes them longer to return to a symptom-free baseline . after that first injury , their risk for second injury is exponentially greater . from there , their risk for a third injury , greater still , and so on . and here 's the really alarming part : we do n't fully understand the long-term impact of multiple injuries . you guys may be familiar with this research that 's coming out of the nfl .
and we luckily have an opportunity for you .
it also produced something which i call an inversion of expertise , because we had so many changes at the lower levels in technology and tactics and whatnot , that suddenly the things that we grew up doing was n't what the force was doing anymore . so how does a leader stay credible and legitimate when they have n't done what the people you 're leading are doing ? and it 's a brand new leadership challenge . and it forced me to become a lot more transparent , a lot more willing to listen , a lot more willing to be reverse-mentored from lower . and yet , again , you 're not all in one room .
we ca n't risk alienating them by testing seatbelts relative to car seats .  now , eventually , one did . under the conditions of anonymity , they said they would be happy to do this test for us -- so anonymity , and 1,500 dollars per seat that we crashed .
is that reputation is largely contextual . just because sebastian is a wonderful host does not mean that he can assemble ikea furniture . the big challenge is figuring out what data makes sense to pull , because the future 's going to be driven by a smart aggregation of reputation , not a single algorithm . it 's only a matter of time before we 'll be able to perform a facebook- or google-like search and see a complete picture of someone 's behaviors in different contexts over time . i envision a realtime stream of who has trusted you , when , where and why , your reliability on taskrabbit , your cleanliness as a guest on airbnb ,
which is just turning around there . there 's the cerebellum ; that 's keeping you upright right now . it 's keeping me standing . it 's involved in coordinated movement . on the side here , this is temporal cortex . this is the area where primary auditory processing -- so you 're hearing my words , you 're sending it up into higher language processing centers . towards the front of the brain is the place in which all of the more complex thought , decision making -- it 's the last to mature in late adulthood . this is where all your decision-making processes are going on . it 's the place where you 're deciding right now
and i 'm not hearing anger , i 'm hearing terror . so , i open the window , and i look out , and there 's flames coming up the side of our hotel , and the hotel 's on fire . so , i run over to gene , and i wake him up , and i say ,  gene , do n't freak out , i think the hotel 's on fire .  and now there 's smoke and flames coming by our windows -- we 're on the eleventh floor . so , the two of us were just like ,  oh my god , oh my god .  so , we 're trying to get natasha up , and we ca n't talk to her . and you know what kids are like when they 've been asleep for like an hour ,
maybe your wedding ring , maybe your child 's baby shoes -- so that if it was lost , you could n't get it back . you could get something that looked like it or felt like it , but you could n't get the same object back . with my colleagues george newman and gil diesendruck , we 've looked to see what sort of factors , what sort of history , matters for the objects that people like . so in one of our experiments , we asked people to name a famous person who they adored , a living person they adored . so one answer was george clooney . then we asked them ,  how much would you pay for george clooney 's sweater ? 
brian cox from cern . i think cern is the home of the large hadron collider . what ever happened to the small hadron collider ? where is the small hadron collider ? because the small hadron collider once was the big thing . now , the small hadron collider is in a cupboard , overlooked and neglected . you know when the large hadron collider started , and it did n't work , and people tried to work out why , it was the small hadron collider team who sabotaged it because they were so jealous .
 you failed in your exam ?  i said ,  no . 
it creates a very high peak power and it lets you do all kinds of interesting things ; in particular , it lets you find hemozoin . so here 's an image of red blood cells , and now we can actually map where the hemozoin and where the malaria parasites are inside those red blood cells . and using both this technique and other optical techniques , we think we can make those diagnostics . we also have another hemozoin-oriented therapy for malaria : a way , in acute cases , to actually take the malaria parasite and filter it out of the blood system . sort of like doing dialysis , but for relieving the parasite load .
and they did . stories of change poured in from all over india , from nagaland in the east , to jhunjhunu in the west , from sikkim in the north , to krishnagiri in the south . children were designing solutions for a diverse range of problems . right from loneliness to filling potholes in the street to alcoholism , and 32 children who stopped 16 child marriages in rajasthan . i mean , it was incredible . basically again reaffirming that when adults believe in children and say ,  you can ,  then they will . infection in india . this is in rajasthan , a rural village . child : our parents are illiterate and we want to teach them how to read and write .
but when they grew to a certain cell number all the bacteria turned on light simultaneously . the question that we had is how can bacteria , these primitive organisms , tell the difference from times when they 're alone , and times when they 're in a community , and then all do something together . what we 've figured out is that the way that they do that is that they talk to each other , and they talk with a chemical language . this is now supposed to be my bacterial cell . when it 's alone it does n't make any light . but what it does do is to make and secrete small molecules
more reasons to be optimistic : in the '60s , and i am a creature of the '60s , there was a movement . we all felt that we were part of it , that a better world was right around the corner , that we were watching the birth of a world free of hatred and violence and prejudice . today , there 's another kind of movement . it 's a movement to save the earth . it 's just beginning . five weeks ago , a group of activists from the business community gathered together to stop a texas utility from building nine coal-fired electrical plants that would have contributed to destroying the environment .
six percent for heart disease , seven percent for type 2 diabetes , which is what my father died of . now , any of those stats should convince each of us to get off our duff more , but if you 're anything like me , it wo n't .
that seems to be implicated in some ways in the fine motor control that 's associated with language . the reason why i do n't believe that tells us that the neanderthals had language is -- here 's a simple analogy : ferraris are cars that have engines . my car has an engine , but it 's not a ferrari . now the simple answer then is that genes alone do n't , all by themselves , determine the outcome of very complicated things like language . what we know about this foxp2 and neanderthals is that they may have had fine motor control of their mouths -- who knows . but that does n't tell us they necessarily had language .
that 's great , except the places that have malaria really bad , they do n't have health care systems . a vaccine would be a terrific thing , only they do n't work yet . people have tried for a long time . there are a couple of interesting candidates . it 's a very difficult thing to make a vaccine for . you can distribute bed nets , and bed nets are very effective if you use them . you do n't always use them for that . people fish with them . they do n't always get to everyone . and bed nets have an effect on the epidemic , but you 're never going to make it extinct with bed nets .
if anybody read our faxes they 'd think we 're talking about computers . it turned out it was quite clever because deep blue , in a company like bmw , has a hook --  deep blue ,  wow , cool name .
there 's a new industry in town , a 22 billion-dollar , 2.2 billion sq . ft. industry : that of personal storage . so we 've got triple the space , but we 've become such good shoppers that we need even more space . so where does this lead ? lots of credit card debt , huge environmental footprints , and perhaps not coincidentally , our happiness levels flat-lined over the same 50 years . well i 'm here to suggest there 's a better way , that less might actually equal more . i bet most of us have experienced at some point the joys of less : college -- in your dorm , traveling -- in a hotel room ,
for the national science foundation , national institute of mental health or anybody else to really look at it in this way seriously . i mean you do n't hear about anything that 's like cancer or heart disease associated with play . and yet i see it as something that 's just as basic for survival -- long term -- as learning some of the basic things about public health . jh : stuart brown , thank you very much .
the owner of the first laptop to ever appear in brazil . 1994 , rodrigo started something called cdi , which took computers donated by corporations , put them into community centers in favelas and created places like this . what turned juanderson around was technology for learning that made learning fun and accessible . or you can go to places like this . this is kibera , which is the largest slum in east africa . millions of people living here , stretched over many kilometers . and there i met these two , azra on the left , maureen on the right . they just finished their kenyan certificate
or when somebody works like this . it 's that same kind of commitment , that same kind of beauty . now , now i get to the point . i want to talk about cars as art . art , in the platonic sense , is truth ; it 's beauty , and love . now this is really where designers in car business diverge from the engineers . we do n't really have a problem talking about love . we do n't have a problem talking about truth or beauty in that sense . that 's what we 're searching for -- when we 're working our craft , we are really trying to find that truth out there .
is a good way to protect a $ 100,000 graduate education . so , should vander play football ? i ca n't say no , but i can guarantee that every time he leaves the house that kid 's wearing a helmet -- like to the car , or at school . so whether athlete , scholar , over-protected kid , neurotic mom , or otherwise , here 's my baby , vander , reminding you to mind your matter . thank you . you hear that this is the era of environment -- or biology , or information technology ... well , it 's the era of a lot of different things that we 're in right now . but one thing for sure :
will it be born into a world of abundance or scarcity ? will it be safe and protected , or will it face constant dangers and threats ? will it live a long , fruitful life or a short , harried one ? the pregnant woman 's diet and stress level in particular provide important clues to prevailing conditions like a finger lifted to the wind . the resulting tuning and tweaking of a fetus ' brain and other organs are part of what give us humans our enormous flexibility , our ability to thrive in a huge variety of environments , from the country to the city , from the tundra to the desert .
her father sells flowers on the roadside . and this little boy has been coming to school for five years . but is n't it strange that little boys all over the world love fast bikes ? he has n't seen one , he has n't ridden one , of course , but he has done a lot of research through google search . you know , when we started with our english medium schools we also decided to adopt the best curriculum possible , the icse curriculum . and again , there were people who laughed at me and said ,  do n't be crazy
imagine if the private sector advertised in the same way -- if nike wanted to sell a pair of shoes and put an ad in the paper like that . now that would never happen . you 'll never see an ad like that because nike actually wants you to buy their shoes . whereas the city of toronto clearly does n't want you involved with the planning process , otherwise their ads would look something like this -- with all the information basically laid out clearly .
so at the end of the next four years , i decided that groups of children can navigate the internet to achieve educational objectives on their own . at that time , a large amount of money had come into newcastle university to improve schooling in india . so newcastle gave me a call . i said ,  i 'll do it from delhi .  they said ,  there 's no way you 're going to handle a million pounds-worth of university money sitting in delhi .  so in 2006 , i bought myself a heavy overcoat and moved to newcastle . i wanted to test the limits of the system . the first experiment i did out of newcastle
telephone ? no .
there are big picture schools in the u.s. and australia . there are kunskapsskolan schools in sweden .
and what i came to understand is , we needed to teach children the symbiotic relationship between a healthy planet , healthy food and healthy kids . and that if we do n't do that , the antithesis , although we 've heard otherwise , is we 're really going to become extinct , because we 're feeding our children to death . that 's my premise . we 're seeing sick kids get sicker and sicker . and the reason this is happening , by and large , is because of our food system and the way the government commodifies food , the way the government oversees our food , the way the usda puts food on kids ' plates that 's unhealthy , and allows unhealthy food into schools .
this woman is an extraordinary grandmother . 55 years old , and she 's solar-electrified 200 houses for me in afghanistan . and they have n't collapsed .
he 's invited all the best people . bl : i 'm going to fast-forward to the decision point because i know i do n't have a lot of time .
from working for adults to children , and back and forth , because , you know , i can say that i 'm immature , and in a way , that 's true . i do n't really -- i mean , i could tell you that i did n't understand , i 'm not proud of it , but i did n't understand let 's say 95 percent of the talks at this conference . but i have been taking beautiful notes of drawings and i have a gorgeous onion from murray gell-mann 's talk .
this includes the little system in arabic called al-jebra .
behind a screen in a trial week , i was offered the position . and it was a dream . it was a wild dream to perform in an orchestra , to perform in the iconic walt disney concert hall in an orchestra conducted now by the famous gustavo dudamel , but much more importantly to me to be surrounded by musicians and mentors that became my new family , my new musical home . but a year later , i met another musician who had also studied at juilliard , one who profoundly helped me find my voice and shaped my identity as a musician . nathaniel ayers was a double bassist at juilliard , but
who is at the national academy of science , one of the leading neuroscientists in the world , and he says ,  this is the most original science paper i have ever read  — —  and it certainly deserves wide exposure .  larry maloney , expert in vision , says ,  the paper is magnificent . the work would be publishable if done by adults .  so what did we do ? we send it back to the editor . they say no . so we asked larry and natalie hempel to write a commentary situating the findings for scientists , right , putting in the references , and we submit it to biology letters .
who 's pictured here being interrogated at nuremberg . now goering was , by all accounts , a terrible man . even for a nazi , he was a terrible man . his american interrogators described him as an amicable psychopath . but you could feel sympathy for the reaction he had when he was told that his favorite painting was actually a forgery . according to his biographer ,  he looked as if for the first time he had discovered there was evil in the world .  and he killed himself soon afterwards . he had discovered after all that the painting he thought was this was actually that . it looked the same ,
and for me , this sort of deep and enduring fascination with sound is what led me to both be a surgeon and also to study the science of sound , particularly music . and so i 'm going to try to talk to you over the next few minutes about my career in terms of how i 'm able to actually try to study music and really try to grapple with all these questions of how the brain is able to be creative . i 've done most of this work at johns hopkins university , but also at the national institute of health where i was previously .
but the worst thing about it was that you could n't use it on the youngest children , on infants , and on one-year-olds .
so that 's wrong , and , in fact , if you think that , you 're actually just not spending it right .
my father , who is 92 , likes to say ,  let 's stop talking only about how to save the old folks and start talking about how to get them to save us all . 
and we 're discovering , with our research , that 's often very local to the node you care about within one or two degrees .
so now , several hundred of these walking meetings later , i 've learned a few things .
this is a lot of volume . so that 's a tough one . next would be nuclear . it also has three big problems : cost , particularly in highly regulated countries , is high ; the issue of the safety , really feeling good about nothing could go wrong , that , even though you have these human operators , that the fuel does n't get used for weapons . and then what do you do with the waste ? and , although it 's not very large , there are a lot of concerns about that . people need to feel good about it .
so my concept of what a design studio was probably -- i was n't up to speed on where these guys were . however , the engineers back in munich had taken on this kind of newtonian solution , and they were trying to find how many cup holders can dance on the head of a pin , and , you know , these really serious questions that are confronting the modern consumer . and one was hoping that these two teams would get together ,
we wanted to know if babies and young children could understand this really profound thing about other people . now the question is : how could we ask them ? babies , after all , ca n't talk , and if you ask a three year-old to tell you what he thinks , what you 'll get is a beautiful stream of consciousness monologue about ponies and birthdays and things like that . so how do we actually ask them the question ? well it turns out that the secret was broccoli . what we did -- betty rapacholi , who was one of my students , and i -- was actually to give the babies two bowls of food :
girl 5 : for a girl 's game also usually they 'll have really pretty scenery with clouds and flowers .
in a crash in which at least one person dies , themselves die .
last year we had 450,000 mo bros spread across the world and together we raised 77 million dollars .
we 've said , well maybe older people report more positive emotions because they 're cognitively impaired .
it 's an extraordinary thing .
it 's that will to live , that need to survive , to express itself , that comes in a car , and takes over people like me . and we tell other people ,  do this , do this , do this ,  until this thing comes alive . we are completely infected . and beauty can be the result of this infectiousness ; it 's quite wonderful . this sculpture is , of course , at the heart of all of it , and it 's really what puts the craftsmanship into our cars . and it 's not a whole lot different , really , when they 're working like this ,
we need four shoulder-high plants per person , and in terms of plant care , we need to wipe the leaves every day in delhi , and perhaps once a week in cleaner-air cities .
if we do , we will find that the collective voices of the poor will be heard in bihar , in uganda , and beyond .
went to the roof , and all the women said ,  clear out . the men should clear out because we do n't want to share this technology with the men .
in the rich world , perhaps the top one billion , we probably could cut back and use less , but every year , this number , on average , is going to go up , and so , over all , that will more than double the services delivered per person . here we have a very basic service : do you have lighting in your house to be able to read your homework ? and , in fact , these kids do n't , so they 're going out and reading their school work under the street lamps . now , efficiency , e , the energy for each service , here finally we have some good news . we have something that 's not going up .
because democratic governments respect their own people and respect their neighbors , freedom will bring peace . distinguished academics at the same time argued that democracies had this incredible range of side benefits . they would bring prosperity , security , overcome sectarian violence , ensure that states would never again harbor terrorists . since then , what 's happened ? well , what we 've seen is the creation , in places like iraq and afghanistan , of democratic systems of government which have n't had any of those side benefits . in afghanistan , for example , we have n't just had one election or two elections . we 've gone through three elections , presidential and parliamentary . and what do we find ?
well , if we 're going to do it for epilepsy , why the hell not try it for something else ? then you saw what that device looked like , that the woman was using to fix her migraines ? i tell you this : that 's something which some research engineer like me would concoct , not a real designer of good equipment . we want to have some people , who really know how to do this , perform human engineering studies to develop the optimum design for the portable device for treating migraine headaches . and some of the sponsors of this ted meeting are such organizations . then we 're going to challenge the ted attendees
okay . who here , it does nothing for them ? they just do n't like it . i 'm not going to make a claim about who 's right , but i will make an empirical claim about people 's intuitions , which is that , if you like the work of jackson pollock , you 'll tend more so than the people who do n't like it to believe that these works are difficult to create , that they require a lot of time and energy and creative energy . i use jackson pollock on purpose as an example because there 's a young american artist who paints very much in the style of jackson pollock ,
to places that their genes adapt them to , with social learning and language , we could transform the environment to suit our needs . and so we prospered in a way that no other animal has . language really is the most potent trait that has ever evolved . it is the most valuable trait we have for converting new lands and resources into more people and their genes that natural selection has ever devised . language really is the voice of our genes . now having evolved language , though , we did something peculiar , even bizarre . as we spread out around the world , we developed thousands of different languages .
than when they are n't mind-wandering . if mind-wandering were a slot machine , it would be like having the chance to lose 50 dollars , 20 dollars or one dollar . right ? you 'd never want to play . so i 've been talking about this , suggesting , perhaps , that mind-wandering causes unhappiness , but all i 've really shown you is that these two things are correlated . it 's possible that 's the case , but it might also be the case that when people are unhappy , then they mind-wander . maybe that 's what 's really going on . how could we ever disentangle these two possibilites ? well , one fact that we can take advantage of , i think a fact
i love this picture because my daughter , who 's now almost 40 , is in this picture , but it reminds me of her storytelling and her imagination , her ability to spin yarns at this age -- preschool . a really important part of being a player is imaginative solo play . and i love this one , because it 's also what we 're about . we all have an internal narrative that 's our own inner story . the unit of intelligibility of most of our brains is the story . i 'm telling you a story today about play . well , this bushman , i think , is talking about the fish that got away that was that long ,
getting men engaged in their health , having them have a better understanding about the health risks that they face .
is that i think we miss an opportunity to find these kids who have the entrepreneurial traits , and to groom them or show them that being an entrepreneur is actually a cool thing . it 's not something that is a bad thing and is vilified , which is what happens in a lot of society . kids , when we grow up , have dreams , and we have passions , and we have visions , and somehow we get those things crushed . we get told that we need to study harder or be more focused or get a tutor . my parents got me a tutor in french , and i still suck in french .
they just grow and divide , and grow and divide -- so a kind of boring life , except that what i would argue is that you have an amazing interaction with these critters . i know you guys think of yourself as humans , and this is sort of how i think of you . this man is supposed to represent a generic human being , and all of the circles in that man are all of the cells that make up your body . there is about a trillion human cells that make each one of us who we are and able to do all the things that we do ,
maybe not attempting , hopefully succeeding . that to be able to talk about content , to break apart what you normally expect , to use humor and surprise , elegance and humanity in your work was really important to us . it was a very high , it was a very impersonal time in design and we wanted to say , the content is what 's important , not the package , not the wrapping . you really have to be journalists , you have to be inventors , you have to use your imagination more importantly than anything .
and most of all the lives of those two billion will be far worse . so , what do we have to do ? what am i appealing to you to step forward and drive ? we need to go for more research funding . when countries get together in places like copenhagen , they should n't just discuss the co2 . they should discuss this innovation agenda , and you 'd be stunned at the ridiculously low levels of spending on these innovative approaches . we do need the market incentives -- co2 tax , cap and trade -- something that gets that price signal out there . we need to get the message out .
and the education they got was pitiful .
that are linked causally to genes . but what you get out of such an exercise is simply a list of genes . it tells you the what , but it does n't tell you the where . and so it 's very important for those researchers that we 've created this resource . now they can come in and they can start to get clues about activity . they can start to look at common pathways -- other things that they simply have n't been able to do before . so i think this audience in particular can understand the importance of individuality . and i think every human , we all have different genetic backgrounds ,
but you have to realize that even the simplest acts of exchange that we engage in are utterly dependent upon language . and to see why , consider two scenarios from early in our evolution . let 's imagine that you are really good at making arrowheads , but you 're hopeless at making the wooden shafts with the flight feathers attached . two other people you know are very good at making the wooden shafts , but they 're hopeless at making the arrowheads . so what you do is -- one of those people has not really acquired language yet . and let 's pretend the other one is good at language skills .
and her work was worth many tens of thousands of dollars -- in large part because she 's a very young artist . this is marla olmstead who did most of her work when she was three years old . the interesting thing about marla olmstead is her family made the mistake of inviting the television program 60 minutes ii into their house to film her painting . and they then reported that her father was coaching her . when this came out on television , the value of her art dropped to nothing . it was the same art , physically , but the history had changed . i 've been focusing now on the visual arts ,
when he was trading fours with me , improvising versus memorized , his language areas lit up , his broca 's area , which is inferior frontal gyrus on the left . he actually had it also homologous on the right . this is an area thought to be involved in expressive communication . this whole notion that music is a language -- well maybe there 's a neurologic basis to it in fact after all , and we can see it when two musicians are having a musical conversation . and so we 've done this actually on eight subjects now , and we 're just getting all the data together , so hopefully we 'll have something to say about it meaningfully .
the cheap one still did n't work on the kids who were younger .
fetal heart rate , or intrauterine contractions , and not having to worry so much that things are fine as the pregnancy , and moving over into the time of delivery ? and then as we go further , today we have continuous glucose sensors . right now , they are under the skin , but in the future , they wo n't have to be implanted . and of course , the desired range -- trying to keep glucose between 75 and less than 200 , checking it every five minutes in a continuous glucose sensor -- you 'll see how that can impact diabetes . and what about sleep ? we 're going to zoom in on that a little bit .
and yet he could be thinking about the vacation he had last month , wondering what he 's going to have for dinner . maybe he 's worried that he 's going bald . this ability to focus our attention on something other than the present is really amazing . it allows us to learn and plan and reason in ways that no other species of animal can . and yet it 's not clear what the relationship is between our use of this ability and our happiness . you 've probably heard people suggest that you should stay focused on the present .  be here now ,  you 've probably heard a hundred times .
they were out in the city convincing everybody that child labor just had to be abolished . and look at ragav , that moment when his face changes because he 's been able to understand that he has shifted that man 's mindset . and that ca n't happen in a classroom . so , when ragav experienced that he went from  teacher told me ,  to  i am doing it .  and that 's the  i can  mindshift . and it is a process that can be energized and nurtured . but we had parents who said ,  okay , making our children good human beings is all very well , but what about math and science and english ?
and we do n't invest in what 's invisible to us . but this is the face of resilience . six years ago , i started writing about women entrepreneurs during and after conflict . i set out to write a compelling economic story , one that had great characters , that no one else was telling , and one that i thought mattered . and that turned out to be women . i had left abc news and a career i loved at the age of 30 for business school , a path i knew almost nothing about . none of the women i had grown up with in maryland
of the apollo missions that happened 40 years ago . and i started taking pictures with my three-dimensional microscopes . this was the first picture i took . it was kind of amazing . i thought it looked kind of a little bit like the moon , which is sort of interesting . now , the way my microscopes work is , normally in a microscope you can see very little at one time , so what you have to do is you have to refocus the microscope , keep taking pictures , and then i have a computer program that puts all those pictures together into one picture so you can see actually what it looks like ,
you really want to protect them . of course , if you do that , you could also protect your backyard . and farmers could protect their crops that they want to sell to whole foods because our photons are 100 percent organic . they 're completely natural . now , it actually gets better than this . you could , if you 're really smart , you could shine a nonlethal laser on the bug before you zap it , and you could listen to the wing beat frequency and you could measure the size . and then you could decide :  is this an insect i want to kill , or an insect i do n't want to kill ? 
reputation will be the currency that says that you can trust me . now the interesting thing is , reputation is the socioeconomic lubricant that makes collaborative consumption work and scale , but the sources it will be generated from , and its applications , are far bigger than this space alone . let me give you one example from the world of recruiting , where reputation data will make the résumé seem like an archaic relic of the past . four years ago , tech bloggers and entrepreneurs joel spolsky and jeff atwood , decided to start something called stack overflow . now , stack overflow is basically a platform where experienced programmers can ask
rockett : who 'd want to show up at that party anyway ? i could get invited to that party any day if i wanted to . gee , i doubt i 'll make max 's best people list .
thinking of these wall-high objects , some of them 10 meters wide , depicting lavish court scenes with courtiers and dandies who would look quite at home in the pages of the fashion press today , thick woods with hunters crashing through the undergrowth in pursuit of wild boars and deer , violent battles with scenes of fear and heroism . i remember taking my son 's school class . he was eight at the time , and all the little boys , they kind of -- you know , they were little boys , and then the thing that caught their attention was in one of the hunting scenes there was a dog
but then , i was exposed to the most extraordinary knowledge and skills that very poor people have , which are never brought into the mainstream -- which is never identified , respected , applied on a large scale .
he lifted me , put me back on my feet , and taught me that leaders can let you fail and yet not let you be a failure . when 9/11 came , 46-year-old brig . gen. mcchrystal sees a whole new world . first , the things that are obvious , that you 're familiar with : the environment changed -- the sensitivity of everything now is so fast , sometimes it evolves faster than people have time to really reflect on it . but everything we do is in a different context . more importantly , the force that i led was spread over more than 20 countries . and instead of being able to get all the key leaders
so the outer part of that brain is the neocortex . it 's one continuous processing unit , if you will . but you can also see things underneath there as well . and all of these blank areas are the areas in which the wires are running through . they 're probably less cell dense . so there 's about 86 billion neurons in our brain . and as you can see , they 're very non-uniformly distributed . and how they 're distributed really contributes to their underlying function . and of course , as i mentioned before , since we can now start to map brain function , we can start to tie these into the individual cells .
canada was just pipped to the post in terms of the number one fundraising campaign in the world .
representing the constant change from day to night . voice : marco , i did not know you could do that . mt : and is it a coincidence that there are 52 cards in a deck of cards , just as there are 52 weeks in a year ? voice : if you total all the spots on a deck of cards , the result is 365. mt : oh , 365 , the number of days in a year , the number of days between each birthday . make a wish . voice : do n't tell , or it wo n't come true . mt : well , as a matter of fact , it was on my sixth birthday
and they all have the same kind of features : highly collaborative , very personalized , often pervasive technology , learning that starts from questions and problems and projects , not from knowledge and curriculum .
and the wine wicks all over everything . put it on your shirt , it ruins the shirt . that 's what a hydrophilic surface does . so , in this device the idea is that you drip the bottom end of it in a drop of , in this case , urine . the fluid wicks its way into those chambers at the top . the brown color indicates the amount of glucose in the urine , the blue color indicates the amount of protein in the urine . and the combination of those two is a first order shot at a number of useful things that you want . so , this is an example of a device made from a simple piece of paper .
some teams , we give people on the team some money for themselves and say ,  spend it however you want on yourself ,  just like we did with the undergrads in canada .
so , they ’ re great examples , i think , of exploration and experimentation in design . now , while the eameses were exploring those possibilities , they were also exploring physical objects . and they were doing that through building prototypes . and building is the next of the behaviors that i thought i ’ d talk about . so the average western first-grader spends as much as 50 percent of their play time taking part in what ’ s called  construction play .  construction play -- it ’ s playful , obviously , but also a powerful way to learn . when play is about building a tower out of blocks , the kid begins to learn a lot about towers .
there we go . so watch that . you see them both drop out of the middle class . watch what happens to the women . watch what happens to the men . the men sort of stagnate there , while the women zoom up in those high-skill jobs . so what 's that about ? it looks like women got some power boost on a video game , or like they snuck in some secret serum into their birth-control pills that lets them shoot up high . but of course , it 's not about that . what it 's about is that the economy has changed a lot . we used to have a manufacturing economy ,
and we went to ladakh , and we asked this woman -- this , at minus 40 , you have to come out of the roof , because there 's no place , it was all snowed up on both sides -- and we asked this woman ,  what was the benefit you had from solar electricity ?  and she thought for a minute and said ,  it 's the first time i can see my husband 's face in winter . 
at learning about laws of different environments . and of course , we human beings are way out on the end of the distribution like the crows . we have bigger brains relative to our bodies by far than any other animal . we 're smarter , we 're more flexible , we can learn more , we survive in more different environments , we migrated to cover the world and even go to outer space . and our babies and children are dependent on us for much longer than the babies of any other species . my son is 23. and at least until they 're 23 , we 're still popping those worms
he said ,  love is not selfish ,  he said ,  love does not mean counting how many times i say , ' i love you . ' it does n't mean you had sex this many times this month , and it 's two times less than last month , so that means you do n't love me as much . love is not selfish .  and i thought about this , and i thought ,  you know , i 'm not showing love here . i 'm seriously not showing love . i 'm in the air , i 'm in the air without trust . this can not be . this can not be that i 'm expecting a certain number of sketches ,
he went ,  dad , this has been the best day of my life , ever .  i had n't done anything , had n't taken him to disney world or bought him a playstation . now my point is the small things matter . being more balanced does n't mean dramatic upheaval in your life . with the smallest investment in the right places , you can radically transform the quality of your relationships and the quality of your life . moreover , i think , it can transform society . because if enough people do it , we can change society 's definition of success away from the moronically simplistic notion that the person with the most money when he dies wins ,
it 's got to be serious if the new york times puts a cover story of their february 17th sunday magazine about play . at the bottom of this , it says ,  it 's deeper than gender . seriously , but dangerously fun . and a sandbox for new ideas about evolution .  not bad , except if you look at that cover , what 's missing ? you see any adults ? well , lets go back to the 15th century . this is a courtyard in europe , and a mixture of 124 different kinds of play . all ages , solo play , body play , games , taunting . and there it is . and i think this is a typical picture
but it paid the bills . so i sold lots and lots of sunglasses . then when the school shut me down -- the school actually called me into the office and told me i could n't do it --
for people in poor countries , it 's less than one ton . it 's an average of about five tons for everyone on the planet . and , somehow , we have to make changes that will bring that down to zero . it 's been constantly going up . it 's only various economic changes that have even flattened it at all , so we have to go from rapidly rising to falling , and falling all the way to zero .
the limits of what they can do , sometimes pushing into what they ca n't do , helps them focus on finding their own voice . the sculptor richard serra talks about how , as a young artist , he thought he was a painter , and he lived in florence after graduate school . while he was there , he traveled to madrid , where he went to the prado to see this picture by the spanish painter diego velázquez . it 's from 1656 , and it 's called  las meninas ,  and it 's the picture of a little princess and her ladies-in-waiting , and if you look over that little blonde princess 's shoulder , you 'll see a mirror ,
is n't nearly as important as the fact that you spend on other people in order to make yourself happy , which is really quite important . so you do n't have to do amazing things with your money to make yourself happy .
because actually radical innovation does sometimes come from the very best , but it often comes from places where you have huge need -- unmet , latent demand -- and not enough resources for traditional solutions to work -- traditional , high-cost solutions , which depend on professionals , which is what schools and hospitals are . so i ended up in places like this . this is a place called monkey hill . it 's one of the hundreds of favelas in rio . most of the population growth of the next 50 years will be in cities . we 'll grow by six cities of 12 million people a year for the next 30 years .
and 99-cent double burgers ? it 's because of the way the government commodifies food , and the cheap corn and cheap soy that are pushed into our food supply that makes these non-nutrient foods really , really cheap . which is why i say it 's a social justice issue . now , i said i 'm doing this in berkeley , and you might think ,  oh , berkeley . of course you can do it in berkeley .  well , this is the food i found 24 months ago . this is not even food . this is the stuff we were feeding our kids : extremo burritos , corn dogs , pizza pockets , grilled cheese sandwiches . everything came in plastic , in cardboard .
i was groomed as an entrepreneur . when i was growing up as a young kid , i had no choice , because i was taught at a very early , young age -- when my dad realized i was n't going to fit into everything else that was being taught to me in school -- that he could teach me to figure out business at an early age . he groomed us , the three of us , to hate the thought of having a job and to love the fact of creating companies that we could employ other people . my first little business venture : i was seven years old , i was in winnipeg ,
they basically went out on a date ,
this is her mother in the background there . this is natasha 's wedding day . gene is looking a little older . this is sydney , who 's going to be three years old in a couple of days . and there 's evan . natasha , would you just come up , for a second , just maybe to say hello to everybody ? natasha 's actually never heard me tell the story . i mean , she -- you know , we 've looked at the pictures together . natasha : i 've seen pictures millions of times , but today was the first time i 'm actually seeing him give the whole presentation . i started crying . rick smolan : i 'm sure there 's about 40 things she 's going to tell me ,
with creatures and gargoyles and nudity -- pretty scary stuff , when you 're a little kid . what i remember today from this is that objects tell stories , so storytelling has been a really strong influence in my work . and then there was another influence . i was a teenager , and at 15 or 16 , i guess like all teenagers , we want to just do what we love and what we believe in . and so , i fused together the two things i loved the most , which was skiing and windsurfing . those are pretty good escapes from the drab weather in switzerland . so , i created this compilation of the two :
when you see a diagram like this , i do n't want you to be afraid . i want you to be excited . i want you to be relieved .
so this is going to be a crash where they 're going to slam this thing forward into a wall at 30 miles an hour , and see what happens . ok ?
of course , the women were much more intelligent than the men .
secondly , our new mantra : small is sexy . we want space efficiency . we want things that are designed for how they 're used the vast majority of the time , not that rare event . why have a six burner stove when you rarely use three ? so we want things that nest , we want things that stack , and we want it digitized . you can take paperwork , books , movies , and you can make it disappear -- it 's magic . finally , we want multifunctional spaces and housewares -- a sink combined with a toilet , a dining table becomes a bed -- same space , a little side table stretches out to seat 10 .
which is food . they 're being introduced to the characteristic flavors and spices of their culture 's cuisine even before birth . now it turns out that fetuses are learning even bigger lessons . but before i get to that , i want to address something that you may be wondering about . the notion of fetal learning may conjure up for you attempts to enrich the fetus -- like playing mozart through headphones placed on a pregnant belly . but actually , the nine-month-long process of molding and shaping that goes on in the womb is a lot more visceral and consequential than that . much of what a pregnant woman encounters in her daily life --
when that mother and infant lock eyes , and the infant 's old enough to have a social smile , what happens -- spontaneously -- is the eruption of joy on the part of the mother . and she begins to babble and coo and smile , and so does the baby . if we 've got them wired up with an electroencephalogram , the right brain of each of them becomes attuned , so that the joyful emergence of this earliest of play scenes and the physiology of that is something we 're beginning to get a handle on . and i 'd like you to think that every bit of more complex play
and what can we learn from all of that ? well , we can learn a lot because our education systems are failing desperately in many ways .
where i think i was doing most of the work . but we like to joke , in the first few months of all of our children 's lives , this is uncle rufus . rg : i 'm a very affectionate uncle , very affectionate uncle . av : yes , and i often joke with rufus when he comes home that i 'm not sure he would actually be able to find our child in a line-up amongst other babies . so i actually threw a pop quiz here onto rufus . rg : uh oh . av : i do n't want to embarrass him too much . but i am going to give him three seconds .
most are non-violent and they fall into two broad categories : active engagement with ethnic rivalries and religious beliefs and fair , transparent economic development and provisioning of services . i do n't know about this , but this is what i can decipher from this diagram in 24 seconds .
thank you . in 1975 , i met in florence a professor , carlo pedretti , my former professor of art history , and today a world-renowned scholar of leonardo da vinci . well , he asked me if i could find some technological way to unfold a five-centuries-old mystery related to a lost masterpiece by leonardo da vinci , the  battle of anghiari ,  which is supposed to be located in the hall of the 500 in palazzo vecchio , in florence . well , in the mid-'70s , there were not great opportunities for a bioengineer like me , especially in italy , and so i decided , with some researchers from the united states
having a flat back makes it much easier to install them . and so this is a test that 's very much rigged in favor of the car seat , ok ? so , that kid in this crash fared very well . the federal standards are that you have to score below a 1,000 to be an approved car seat on this crash , in some metric of units which are not important . and this crash would have been about a 450. so this car seat was actually an above-average car seat from consumer reports , and did quite well . so the next one . now , this is the kid , same crash ,
about the challenges , my moments , some of my regrets . 1998 : a single mother of four , three months after the birth of my fourth child , i went to do a job as a research assistant . i went to northern liberia . and as part of the work , the village would give you lodgings . and they gave me lodging with a single mother and her daughter . this girl happened to be the only girl in the entire village who had made it to the ninth grade . she was the laughing stock of the community . her mother was often told by other women ,  you and your child
when votes do n't count in canada ? you add all this up together and of course people are apathetic .
another example : have you ever been to venice ? how beautiful it is to lose ourselves in these little streets on the island . but our multitasking reality is pretty different , and full of tons of information . so what about something like that to rediscover our sense of adventure ? i know that it could sound pretty weird to speak about mono when the number of possibilities is so huge , but i push you to consider the option of focusing on just one task , or maybe turning your digital senses totally off . so nowadays , everyone could produce his mono product . why not ? so find your monotask spot
now they 're not married , and they want to go on to study further , to have a career . they 've been brought up by mothers who are illiterate , who have never ever done homework . all across the developing world there are millions of parents -- tens , hundreds of millions -- who for the first time are with children doing homework and exams . and the reason they carry on studying is not because they went to a school like this . this is a private school . this is a fee-pay school . this is a good school .
i started to look at teamwork and determination , and basically all those platitudes they call  successories  that hang with that schmaltzy art in boardrooms around the world right now . that stuff -- it 's suddenly all been turned on its head . safety -- safety first ? going back to , you know , osha and peta and the humane society : what if osha got it wrong ? i mean -- this is heresy , what i 'm about to say -- but what if it 's really safety third ? right ? no , i mean really . what i mean to say is i value my safety on these crazy jobs
but somewhere in the world people said , we do n't have this problem , because we have perfect teachers and perfect schools . there are such areas , but -- anyway , i 'd never heard that anywhere else . i 'm going to talk about children and self-organization , and a set of experiments which sort of led to this idea of what might an alternative education be like . they 're called the hole-in-the-wall experiments . i 'll have to really rush through this . they 're a set of experiments . the first one was done in new delhi in 1999. and what we did over there was pretty much simple . i had an office in those days which bordered a slum , an urban slum ,
he ca n't feel even that he 's hungry or tired .
some resorted to eating tulip bulbs . by the beginning of may , the nation 's carefully rationed food reserve was completely exhausted . the specter of mass starvation loomed . and then on may 5th , 1945 , the siege came to a sudden end when holland was liberated by the allies . the  hunger winter ,  as it came to be known , killed some 10,000 people and weakened thousands more . but there was another population that was affected -- the 40,000 fetuses in utero during the siege . some of the effects of malnutrition during pregnancy were immediately apparent in higher rates of stillbirths , birth defects , low birth weights
so let 's do it . so here we go for the first time ever , a world premiere view of this spaghetti diagram as an ordered network . the circled node is the one we 're trying to influence -- popular support for the government .
within a couple of months . so childhood is the reason why the crows end up on the cover of science and the chickens end up in the soup pot . there 's something about that long childhood that seems to be connected to knowledge and learning . well what kind of explanation could we have for this ? well some animals , like the chicken , seem to be beautifully suited to doing just one thing very well . so they seem to be beautifully suited to pecking grain in one environment . other creatures , like the crows , are n't very good at doing anything in particular , but they 're extremely good
and so , anyway , here i am . it 's not a fairy tale . it 's a true story about the united states today , and the disease i 'm referring to is actually motor vehicle accidents for children .
and i saw that the computer was coming into our homes , that it had to change in order to be with us in our homes . and so i got myself a job and i was working for a consultancy , and we would get in to these meetings , and these managers would come in , and they would say ,  well , what we 're going to do here is really important , you know .  and they would give the projects code names , you know , mostly from  star wars ,  actually : things like c3po , yoda , luke . so , in anticipation , i would be this young designer in the back of the room , and i would raise my hand ,
his thoughts and his concerns , a little boy who , when he gets upset , will start rocking , and eventually , when he 's disturbed enough , will bang his head to the point that he can actually cut it open and require stitches . that same diagnosis of autism , though , also applies to gabriel , another 13-year-old boy who has quite a different set of challenges . he 's actually quite remarkably gifted in mathematics . he can multiple three numbers by three numbers in his head with ease , yet when it comes to trying to have a conversation , he has great difficulty . he does n't make eye contact . he has difficulty starting a conversation ,
in our midst ? it 's not our pity that they need . it 's our respect . i know famous musicians , i know actors and film stars and millionaires and novelists and top lawyers and television executives and magazine editors and national journalists and dustbinmen and hairdressers , all who were looked after children , fostered , adopted or orphaned , and many of them grow into their adult lives in fear of speaking of their background , as if it may somehow weaken their standing in the foreground , as if it were somehow kryptonite , as if it were a time bomb strapped on the inside . children in care , who 've had a life in care , deserve the right
relative to the other child . the funny thing is , the cam work is terrible because they 've only set it up to do the car seats , and so , they actually do n't even have a way to move the camera so you can see the kid that 's on the rebound . anyway , it turns out that those two crashes , that actually the three-year-old did slightly worse . so , he gets about a 500 out of -- you know , on this range -- relative to a 400 and something . but still , if you just took that data from that crash to the federal government , and said ,  i have invented a new car seat .
that 's been involved in polio eradication is ready to do way more for these children . it 's ready to reach them with bed nets , with other things . but capitalizing on their enthusiasm , capitalizing on their energy means finishing the job that they started 20 years ago . finishing polio is a smart thing to do , and it 's the right thing to do . now we 're in tough times economically . but as david cameron of the united kingdom said about a month ago when he was talking about polio ,  there 's never a wrong time to do the right thing .  finishing polio eradication is the right thing to do .
coke 's global campaign slogan is  open happiness .  but they localize it . and they do n't just guess what makes people happy ; they go to places like latin america and they realize that happiness there is associated with family life . and in south africa , they associate happiness with seriti or community respect . now , that played itself out in the world cup campaign . let 's listen to this song that coke created for it ,  wavin ' flag  by a somali hip hop artist . k'naan : ♫ oh oh oh oh oh o-oh ♫ ♫ oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh ♫ ♫ oh oh oh oh oh o-oh ♫
but we 're starting to have something called polio fatigue and that is that the donor nations are n't willing to fund polio any longer . so by next summer , we 're sighted to run out of money on polio . so we are 99 percent of the way there on this goal and we 're about to run short of money . and i think that if the marketing were more aspirational , if we could focus as a community on how far we 've come and how amazing it would be to eradicate this disease , we could put polio fatigue and polio behind us . and if we could do that ,
and he says ,  hey mike . look , i do n't know if your brain is interested in this sort of thing or not , but do you realize you 've shot in every state ? you 've worked in mining , you 've worked in fishing , you 've worked in steel , you 've worked in every major industry . you 've had your back shoulder to shoulder with these guys that our politicians are desperate to relate to every four years , right ?  i can still see hillary doing the shots of rye , dribbling down her chin , with the steel workers . i mean , these are the people that i work with every single day .
the question is even if -- are there enough serious injuries to make these cost-effective ? it 's kind of tricky . even if they 're right , it 's not so clear that they 're so cost-effective . what i want to talk about is , as background , is the idea that cars are art . this is actually quite meaningful to me , because car designers tend to be a little bit low on the totem pole -- we do n't do coffee table books with just one lamp inside of it --
he 's out of office today . ca : leymah , thank you . thank you so much for coming to ted . lg : you 're welcome . this is a guy named bob mckim . he was a creativity researcher in the '60s and '70s , and also led the stanford design program . and in fact , my friend and ideo founder , david kelley , who ’ s out there somewhere , studied under him at stanford . and he liked to do an exercise with his students where he got them to take a piece of paper and draw the person who sat next to them , their neighbor , very quickly , just as quickly as they could .
you have bits of a volcano . there 's a little bit of a volcano there . you have tube worms . an amazing array of incredible things exist in sand . and the reason that is , is because in a place like this island , a lot of the sand is made of biological material because the reefs provide a place where all these microscopic animals or macroscopic animals grow , and when they die , their shells and their teeth and their bones break up and they make grains of sand , things like coral and so forth . so here 's , for example , a picture of sand from maui .
of a mosquito . and , in a moment , we 're going to see a view of the airflow . here , we 're trying to visualize the airflow around the wings of the mosquito with little particles we 're illuminating with a laser . by understanding how mosquitoes fly , we hope to understand how to make them not fly . now , one of the ways you can make them not fly is with ddt . this is a real ad . this is one of those things you just ca n't make up . once upon a time , this was the primary technique , and , in fact , many countries got rid of malaria through ddt .
i mean , can you have rules about creativity ? well , it sort of turns out that we need rules to help us break the old rules and norms that otherwise we might bring to the creative process . and we ’ ve certainly learnt that over time , you get much better brainstorming , much more creative outcomes when everybody does play by the rules . now , of course , many designers , many individual designers , achieve this is in a much more organic way . i think the eameses are wonderful examples of experimentation . and they experimented with plywood for many years without necessarily having one single goal in mind .
and so we started to think if this really is about communication in bacteria , and it 's about counting your neighbors , it 's not enough to be able to only talk within your species . there has to be a way to take a census of the rest of the bacteria in the population . so we went back to molecular biology and started studying different bacteria , and what we 've found now is that in fact , bacteria are multilingual . they all have a species-specific system -- they have a molecule that says  me .  but then , running in parallel to that is a second system that we 've discovered , that 's generic .
they get their inspiration , their hope , their practical know-how , from successful emerging economies in the south .
the animals accidentally scooped up while fishing for a specific species . but here , brian captured a unique view by positioning himself underneath the boat when they threw the waste overboard . and brian then went on to even greater risk to get this never-before-made photograph of a trawl net scraping the ocean bottom . back on land , randy olson photographed a makeshift fish market in africa , where the remains of filleted fish were sold to the locals , the main parts having already been sent to europe . and here in china , randy shot a jellyfish market . as prime food sources are depleted , the harvest goes deeper into the oceans
then another thing . there 's an effect on you and on your leaders . there 's an impact , it 's cumulative . you do n't reset , or recharge your battery every time . i stood in front of a screen one night in iraq with one of my senior officers and we watched a firefight from one of our forces . and i remembered his son was in our force . and i said ,  john , where 's your son ? and how is he ?  and he said ,  sir , he 's fine . thanks for asking .  i said ,  where is he now ?  and he pointed at the screen , he said ,  he 's in that firefight .  think about watching your brother , father ,
now , after thinking about this a little bit we thought , you know , it probably would be simpler to do this with a nonlethal laser . so , eric johanson , who built the device , actually , with parts from ebay ; and pablos holman over here , he 's got mosquitoes in the tank . we have the device over here . and we 're going to show you , instead of the kill laser , which will be a very brief , instantaneous pulse , we 're going to have a green laser pointer that 's going to stay on the mosquito for , actually , quite a long period of time ; otherwise , you ca n't see it very well .
the next project is the library in gando . and see now , we tried to introduce different ideas in our buildings , but we often do n't have so much material . something we have in gando are clay pots . we wanted to use them to create openings . so we just bring them like you can see to the building site . we start cutting them , and then we place them on top of the roof before we pour the concrete , and you have this result . the openings are letting the hot air out and light in . very simple . my most recent project in gando
two years ago , after having served four years in the united states marine corps and deployments to both iraq and afghanistan , i found myself in port-au-prince , leading a team of veterans and medical professionals in some of the hardest-hit areas of that city , three days after the earthquake . we were going to the places that nobody else wanted to go , the places nobody else could go , and after three weeks , we realized something . military veterans are very , very good at disaster response . and coming home , my cofounder and i , we looked at it , and we said , there are two problems . the first problem is there 's inadequate disaster response .
when does he get up ?  he 's like ,  a day .  i said ,  a day ! how long does it take them to fall off ?   a week .  meanwhile , the lamb that he had just did his little procedure on is , you know , he 's just prancing around , bleeding stopped . he 's , you know , nibbling on some grass , frolicking . and i was just so blown away at how wrong i was , in that second . and i was reminded how utterly wrong i am , so much of the time . and i was especially reminded of what an ridiculously short straw i had that day because now i had to do what albert had just done ,
and it is even bigger among women . there 's a lot of things that we thought , that now , good research , done by african institutions and researchers together with the international researchers , show that that 's not the case . so , this is the difference within tanzania . and , i ca n't avoid showing kenya . look here at kenya . i 've split kenya in its provinces . here it goes . see the difference within one african country -- it goes from very low level to very high level , and most of the provinces in kenya is quite modest . so , what is it then ? why do we see this extremely high levels in some countries ?
the texas tower murderer opened my eyes , in retrospect , when we studied his tragic mass murder , to the importance of play , in that that individual , by deep study , was found to have severe play deprivation . charles whitman was his name . and our committee , which consisted of a lot of hard scientists , did feel at the end of that study that the absence of play and a progressive suppression of developmentally normal play led him to be more vulnerable to the tragedy that he perpetrated . and that finding has stood the test of time -- unfortunately even into more recent times , at virginia tech .
moves in with her mother and goes through a series of rituals and ceremonies , give birth and returns home to her nuclear family several months after the child is born . and this is one of many ways that we think other cultures offset this kind of lonely period . av : so taboo number three : you ca n't talk about your miscarriage -- but today i 'll talk about mine . so after we had declan , we kind of recalibrated our expectations . we thought we actually could go through this again and thought we knew what we would be up against . and we were grateful that i was able to get pregnant ,
in this place i sat in a class like that with more than 150 other kids , and for six years . in this time , it just happened to me to come to school to realize that my classmate died . today , not so much has changed . there is still no electricity in my village . people still are dying in burkina faso , and access to clean drinking water is still a big problem .
in which kids will grow up to be healthy , and which really tries to mitigate all the negative impacts we 're seeing . it really is just a new idea . i mean , people toss around sustainability , but we have to figure out what sustainability is . in less than 200 years , you know , just in a few generations , we 've gone from being 200 -- being 100 percent , 95 percent farmers to less than 2 percent of farmers . we now live in a country that has more prisoners than farmers -- 2.1 million prisoners , 1.9 million farmers . and we spend 35,000 dollars on average a year keeping a prisoner in prison ,
you probably are n't going to order the steak for dinner . so if you take a deeper look at the brain , one of the things , if you look at it in cross-section , what you can see is that you ca n't really see a whole lot of structure there . but there 's actually a lot of structure there . it 's cells and it 's wires all wired together . so about a hundred years ago , some scientists invented a stain that would stain cells . and that 's shown here in the the very light blue . you can see areas where neuronal cell bodies are being stained . and what you can see is it 's very non-uniform . you see a lot more structure there .
and i want to suggest today that , in fact , that 's wrong .
i 'm not kidding . women are refusing to marry men without toilets . no loo , no  i do .  now , it 's not just a funny headline -- it 's innovative . it 's an innovative marketing campaign . but more importantly , it saves lives . take a look at this -- this is a room full of young men and my husband , bill . and can you guess what the young men are waiting for ? they 're waiting to be circumcised . can you you believe that ? we know that circumcision reduces hiv infection by 60 percent in men . and when we first heard this result inside the foundation , i have to admit , bill and i were scratching our heads a little bit
more nuanced version view of play , i think , is required . because it ’ s very easy to fall into the trap that these states are absolute . you ’ re either playful or you ’ re serious , and you can ’ t be both . but that ’ s not really true : you can be a serious professional adult and , at times , be playful . it ’ s not an either/or ; it ’ s an  and .  you can be serious and play . so to sum it up , we need trust to play , and we need trust to be creative . so , there ’ s a connection . and there are a series of behaviors that we ’ ve learnt as kids , and that turn out to be quite useful to us as designers .
thanks to david kelley and a lot of others who have been visionary about its establishment , has allowed a group of us to get together and create a course called  from play to innovation .  and you 'll see this course is to investigate the human state of play , which is kind of like the polar bear-husky state and its importance to creative thinking :  to explore play behavior , its development and its biological basis ; to apply those principles , through design thinking , to promote innovation in the corporate world ; and the students will work with real-world partners on design projects with widespread application .  this is our maiden voyage in this .
so , what i know about my movember journey is that , with a really creative idea , with passion , with persistence , and a lot of patience , four mates , four mustaches , can inspire a room full of people , and that room full of people can go on and inspire a city , and that city is melbourne , my home .
two years ago , on april 8th , 2010 , i called my father . it was very late at night , and at age 80 , he was typing a 70-page public interest litigation against corruption in a road project .
to the great gift that this unique day is , if you learn to respond as if it were the first day in your life and the very last day , then you will have spent this day very well . begin by opening your eyes and be surprised that you have eyes you can open , that incredible array of colors that is constantly offered to us for pure enjoyment . look at the sky . we so rarely look at the sky . we so rarely note how different it is from moment to moment , with clouds coming and going . we just think of the weather ,
that , you know , we 're finding a lot of different pesticides in the hive , and surprisingly , sometimes the healthiest hives have the most pesticides . and so we discover all these very strange things that we ca n't begin to understand . and so this opens up the whole idea of looking at colony health . now of course , if you lose a lot of colonies , beekeepers can replace them very quickly . and that 's why we 've been able to recover from a lot of loss . if we lost one in every three cows in the winter , you know , the national guard would be out . but what beekeepers can do is , if they have one surviving colony ,
lift has always been a pioneer in the use of venues . they understand that theater and performance can happen anywhere . you can do a show in a schoolroom , in an airport , — — in a department store window . artists are explorers . who better to show us the city anew ? artists can take us to a far-flung part of the city that we have n't explored , or they can take us into that building that we pass every day but we never went into . an artist , i think , can really show us people that we might overlook in our lives . back to back is an australian company of people
but because we all understood the rules and we agreed on them together . but there aren ’ t just rules about how to play ; there are rules about when to play . kids don ’ t play all the time , obviously . they transition in and out of it , and good teachers spend a lot of time thinking about how to move kids through these experiences . as designers , we need to be able to transition in and out of play also . and if we ’ re running design studios we need to be able to figure out , how can we transition designers through these different experiences ? i think this is particularly true if we think about the sort of --
now , when you talk global you have to talk english . and so all our schools are english medium schools . but they know there is this myth that children from the slums can not speak english well . no one in their family has spoken english . no one in their generation has spoken english . but how wrong it is . girl : i like adventurous books , and some of my favorites are alfred hitchcock and [ unclear ] and hardy boys . although they are like in different contexts , one is magical , the other two are like investigation , i like those books because they have something special in them .
so i went back to doing the projects i loved . i had fun again , i worked harder and , to cut a long story short , did all the things that took me back up to success . but it was n't a quick trip . it took seven years . but in the end , business grew bigger than ever . and when i went back to following these eight principles , the black cloud over my head disappeared altogether . and i woke up one day and i said ,  i do n't need prozac anymore .  and i threw it away and have n't needed it since . i learned that success is n't a one-way street .
but it 's not true . umar is an exceptional kid in exceptional circumstances . the reality of polio today is something very different . polio strikes the poorest communities in the world . it leaves their children paralyzed , and it drags their families deeper into poverty , because they 're desperately searching and they 're desperately spending the little bit of savings that they have , trying in vain to find a cure for their children . we think children deserve better . and so when the going got really tough in the polio eradication program about two years ago , when people were saying ,  we should call it off ,  the polio partnership
so we went , in fact , to uganda and ran a very similar experiment . so imagine , instead of just people in canada , we said ,  name the last time you spent money on yourself or other people . describe it . how happy did it make you ?  or in uganda ,  name the last time you spent money on yourself or other people and describe that . 
it captures all that vital information . the future of this though , is being able to move this to a band-aid type phenomenon , and that 's not so far away . so , let me just give you , very quickly , 10 top targets for wireless medicine . all these things are possible -- some of them are very close , or already , as you heard , are available today , in some way or form . alzheimer 's disease : there 's five million people affected , and you can check vital signs , activity , balance . asthma : large number , we could detect things like pollen count , air quality , respiratory rate . breast cancer , i 'll show you an example of that real quickly .
 that was n't what happened , that was n't what you said .  natasha : later , i 'll do that later . rs : anyway , thank you , mike and richard , so much for letting us tell the story . thank you all of you . five years ago , i experienced a bit of what it must have been like to be alice in wonderland . penn state asked me , a communications teacher , to teach a communications class for engineering students . and i was scared . really scared . scared of these students with their big brains and their big books and their big , unfamiliar words . but as these conversations unfolded , i experienced what alice must have when she went down
now there are problems associated with aging -- diseases , poverty , loss of social status .
now we do this over and over again , this process for any given brain . we 're taking over a thousand samples for each brain . this area shown here is an area called the hippocampus . it 's involved in learning and memory . and it contributes to about 70 samples of those thousand samples . so each sample gets us about 50,000 data points with repeat measurements , a thousand samples . so roughly , we have 50 million data points for a given human brain . we 've done right now two human brains-worth of data . we 've put all of that together into one thing , and i 'll show you what that synthesis looks like .
first is the simple power of good visualization tools to help untangle complexity and just encourage you to ask questions you did n't think of before . for example , you could plot the flow of carbon through corporate supply chains in a corporate ecosystem , or the interconnections of habitat patches for endangered species in yosemite national park .
that we had a question in common , that we really wanted the answer to , and that was ,  why has n't anybody built any computer games for little girls ?  why is that ? it ca n't just be a giant sexist conspiracy . these people are n't that smart . there 's six billion dollars on the table . they would go for it if they could figure out how . so , what is the deal here ? and as we thought about our goals -- i should say that interval is really a humanistic institution , in the classical sense that humanism , at its best , finds a way to combine clear-eyed empirical research
at your home , tagged to a very nice alarm clock , by the way ? this is the headband that goes with this alarm clock . it monitors your brainwaves continuously , when you 're sleeping . so , i did this thing for seven days getting ready for tedmed . this is an important part of our life , one-third you 're supposed to be sleeping . of course how many here have any problems with sleeping ? it 's usually 90 percent . so , you tell me you sleep better than expected . okay , well this was a week of my life in sleeping , and you get a z.q . score . instead of an i.q . score ,
all of us would be huddled under the tin roof , waiting for the rain to stop . my god ! what a bonding exercise that was . and all of us that were under that roof are still here together today . then came the second school , the third school , the fourth school and a junior college . in six years now , we have four schools , one junior college , 1,100 children coming from 28 slums and four orphanages . our dream is very simple : to send each of these kids , get them prepared to be educated but also to live peacefully , contented in this conflict-ridden chaotic globalized world .
i was out with a team . it was the end of movember .
and other physiological processes in anticipation of the environment that awaits it . and the basis of the fetus ' prediction is what its mother eats . the meals a pregnant woman consumes constitute a kind of story , a fairy tale of abundance or a grim chronicle of deprivation . this story imparts information that the fetus uses to organize its body and its systems -- an adaptation to prevailing circumstances that facilitates its future survival . faced with severely limited resources , a smaller-sized child with reduced energy requirements will , in fact , have a better chance of living to adulthood . the real trouble comes when pregnant women are , in a sense , unreliable narrators ,
in fact , you can find that the lack of basic resources , material resources , contributes to unhappiness , but the increase in material resources does not increase happiness . so my research has been focused more on -- after finding out these things that actually corresponded to my own experience , i tried to understand : where -- in everyday life , in our normal experience -- do we feel really happy ? and to start those studies about 40 years ago , i began to look at creative people -- first artists and scientists , and so forth -- trying to understand what made them feel that it was worth essentially spending their life
we need to radically open up development so knowledge flows in multiple directions , inspiring practitioners , so aid becomes transparent , accountable and effective , so governments open up and citizens are engaged and empowered with reformers in government .
for the big society , fast-tracking adoption . so anyway , she comes here , 1967 , she 's pregnant , and she comes from ethiopia that was celebrating its own jubilee at the time under the emperor haile selassie , and she lands months before the enoch powell speech , the  rivers of blood  speech . she lands months before the beatles release  the white album ,  months before martin luther king was killed . it was a summer of love if you were white . if you were black , it was a summer of hate . so she goes from oxford , she 's sent to the north of england to a mother and baby home , and appointed a social worker .
they look nothing like school . what do they look like ? well , education is a global religion . and education , plus technology , is a great source of hope . you can go to places like this . this is a school three hours outside of sao paulo . most of the children there have parents who are illiterate . many of them do n't have electricity at home . but they find it completely obvious to use computers , websites , make videos , so on and so forth .
it was bihar all over again .
so this is a wish . it 's a very concrete wish that we invent this technology . if you gave me only one wish for the next 50 years -- i could pick who 's president , i could pick a vaccine , which is something i love , or i could pick that this thing that 's half the cost with no co2 gets invented -- this is the wish i would pick . this is the one with the greatest impact . if we do n't get this wish , the division between the people who think short term and long term will be terrible , between the u.s. and china , between poor countries and rich ,
into some indian language ? that 's not possible . so , it has to be the other way about . but let 's see , how do the children tackle the english language ? i took the experiment out to northeastern india , to a village called madantusi , where , for some reason , there was no english teacher , so the children had not learned english at all . and i built a similar hole-in-the-wall . one big difference in the villages , as opposed to the urban slums : there were more girls than boys who came to the kiosk . in the urban slums , the girls tend to stay away . i left the computer there with lots of cds -- i did n't have any internet --
which shows a little airplane for surveillance and moving to a giant airplane . narrator : a tiny airplane , the av pointer serves for surveillance -- in effect , a pair of roving eyeglasses . a cutting-edge example of where miniaturization can lead if the operator is remote from the vehicle . it is convenient to carry , assemble and launch by hand . battery-powered , it is silent and rarely noticed . it sends high-resolution video pictures back to the operator . with onboard gps , it can navigate autonomously , and it is rugged enough to self-land without damage .
gets bigger and bigger until it fills your whole visual field . and what we tried was this ; here is a device called the cadwell model mes10 . weighs about 70 pounds , has a wire about an inch in diameter . and here 's one of the patients who has an aura and always has a headache , bad one , after the aura . what do we do ? this is what an aura looks like . it 's sort of funny dancing lights , shown there on the left and right side . and that 's a fully developed visual aura , as we see on top . in the middle , our experimentalist , the neurologist , who said ,
the cdc recently conducted a survey where they asked respondents simply to tell them whether they experienced significant psychological distress in the previous week .
and the way the evolutions seems to have solved that problem is with a kind of division of labor . so the idea is that we have this early period when we 're completely protected . we do n't have to do anything . all we have to do is learn . and then as adults , we can take all those things that we learned when we were babies and children and actually put them to work to do things out there in the world . so one way of thinking about it is that babies and young children are like the research and development division of the human species .
they 're happier than middle-aged people , and younger people certainly .
of 14 of them , only two of them are in schools . most of them are in other buildings not designed as schools . there is an amazing school in northen queensland called jaringan .
and another person wrote ,  i would fill a big bathtub with money and get in the tub while smoking a big fat cigar and sipping a glass of champagne . 
when the bolsheviks arrived . maybe amongst themselves they had a few good laughs , but stalin was a paranoid man , even more than my father .  you do n't even know .  and decided his top people had to be extinctified .  which i think i made up , which is a good thing . and so , this is a chart of , you know , just a small chart , because the chart would go on forever of all the people that he killed . so , shot dead , smacked over the head , you know , thrown away .  nabokov 's family fled russia . how could the young nabokov , sitting innocently and elegantly in a red chair ,
just a little more than a week ago in the new york times , and it is n't looking good . that is , for men , 29 percent in the country over 60 have type ii diabetes , and women , although it 's less , it 's terribly high . but of course we have a way to measure that now on a continuous basis , with a sensor that detects blood glucose , and it 's important because we could detect hyperglycemia that otherwise would n't be known , and also hypoglycemia . and you can see the red dots , in this particular patient 's case , were finger sticks , which would have missed both ends . but by continuous monitoring ,
voice : why not ? that 's a very good hand . the odds of getting it are 4,165 to one . mt : yeah , but i guess my hand is better . we beat the odds . voice : i think you got your birthday wish.mt : and that actually leaves me with the last , and most important card of all : the one with this very significant mark on it . and unlike anything else we 've just seen , virtual or not.voice : signed card detected . digital mt : this is without a question the real thing . mt : bye bye . thank you . thank you very much . does anybody know when the stethoscope was invented ?
these are just like the receptors on the surfaces of your cells . when the molecule increases to a certain amount -- which says something about the number of cells -- it locks down into that receptor and information comes into the cells that tells the cells to turn on this collective behavior of making light . why this is interesting is because in the past decade we have found that this is not just some anomaly of this ridiculous , glow-in-the-dark bacterium that lives in the ocean -- all bacteria have systems like this . so now what we understand is that all bacteria can talk to each other .
the highs being the first steps , the first smile , your child reading to you for the first time --
but i had time and a sense of wonder . so i started shooting time-lapse photography . it would take me a month to shoot a four-minute roll of film , because that 's all i could afford . i 've been shooting time-lapse flowers continuously , non-stop , 24 hours a day , seven days a week , for over 30 years , and to see them move is a dance i 'll never get tired of . their beauty immerses us with color , taste , touch . it also provides a third of the food we eat . beauty and seduction is nature 's tools for survival , because we protect what we fall in love with .
for us now at movember , we really focus on three program areas , and having a true impact : awareness and education , survivor support programs , and research .
came with benefits . the sense of co-ownership , the free publicity , the added value , all helped drive sales . the ultimate empowerment of customers is to ask them not to buy . outdoor clothier patagonia encouraged prospective buyers to check out ebay for its used products and to resole their shoes before purchasing new ones . in an even more radical stance against consumerism , the company placed a  do n't buy this jacket  advertisement during the peak of shopping season . it may have jeopardized short-term sales , but it builds lasting , long-term loyalty based on shared values . research has shown that giving employees more control over their work makes them happier and more productive .
but it was certainly better than what they had before .
but this one is outfitted in a special way to not just take pictures of your brain , but to also take pictures of active areas of the brain . now the way that 's done is by the following . there 's something called bold imaging , which is blood oxygen level dependent imaging . now when you 're in an fmri scanner , you 're in a big magnet that 's aligning your molecules in certain areas . when an area of the brain is active , meaning a neural area is active , it gets blood flow shunted to that area . that blood flow causes an increase in local blood to that area
that indicate how things work . so , my view of the health care worker of the future is not a doctor , but is an 18-year-old , otherwise unemployed , who has two things : he has a backpack full of these tests , and a lancet to occasionally take a blood sample , and an ak-47 . and these are the things that get him through his day . there 's another very interesting connection here , and that is that what one wants to do is to pass through useful information over what is generally a pretty awful telephone system . it turns out there 's an enormous amount of information already available on that subject , which is the mars rover problem .
feels awkward , and when he gets nervous , he actually shuts down . yet both of these boys have the same diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder .
political parties could and should be one of the basic entry points for people to get engaged in politics . instead , they 've become , sadly , uninspiring and uncreative organizations that rely so heavily on market research and polling and focus groups that they end up all saying the same thing , pretty much regurgitating back to us what we already want to hear at the expense of putting forward bold and creative ideas .
and with him , i was able to do a project that was really fantastic . i work for the new yorker , and i do covers , and 9/11 happened and it was , you know , a complete and utter end of the world as we knew it . and rick and i were on our way to a party in the bronx , and somebody said bronxistan , and somebody said ferreristan , and we came up with this new yorker cover , which we were able to -- we did n't know what we were doing . we were n't trying to be funny , we were n't trying to be -- well , we were trying to be funny actually , that 's not true .
i was literally pushed to school . when you get to school , things are pushed at you : knowledge , exams , systems , timetables .
again , another plug for the animals in the ocean , vibrio fischeri lives in this squid . what you are looking at is the hawaiian bobtail squid , and it 's been turned on its back , and what i hope you can see are these two glowing lobes and these house the vibrio fischeri cells , they live in there , at high cell number that molecule is there , and they 're making light . the reason the squid is willing to put up with these shenanigans is because it wants that light . the way that this symbiosis works is that this little squid lives just off the coast of hawaii ,
and i hope that you experience it and i hope you tell me about it one day . so thank you very much for being here . thank you very much . i 'm a designer and an educator . i 'm a multitasking person , and i push my students to fly through a very creative , multitasking design process . but how efficient is , really , this multitasking ? let 's consider for a while the option of monotasking . a couple of examples . look at that . this is my multitasking activity result . so trying to cook , answering the phone , writing sms , and maybe uploading some pictures about this awesome barbecue .
on food for kids in schools -- most schools , 80 to 90 cents . in l.a. , it 's 56 cents . so we 're spending less than a dollar , ok , on lunch . now i do n't know about you , but i go to starbucks and pete 's and places like that , and venti latte in san francisco is five dollars . one gourmet coffee , one , is more -- we spend more on than we are spending to feed kids for an entire week in our schools . you know what ? we should be ashamed . we , as a country , should be ashamed at that . the richest country . in our country ,
also inside the envelope was money . and we manipulated how much money we gave them . so some people got this slip of paper and five dollars . some people got this slip of paper and 20 dollars . we let them go about their day . they did whatever they wanted to do . we found out that they did in fact spend it in the way that we asked them to . we called them up at night and asked them ,  what 'd you spend it on , and how happy do you feel now ?  what did they spend it on ? well these are college undergrads , so a lot of what they spent it on for themselves
not just the event , but my emotional connection to it . and this is what a photograph taps into when it makes its own powerful connection to a viewer . now i have to tell you , i was talking to kyle last week about this , that i was going to tell this story . and he said ,  oh , yeah , i remember that too ! i remember my image of you was that you were up on the shore yelling at me .  i thought i was a hero . so , this represents -- this is a cross-sample of some remarkable images taken by some of the world 's greatest photojournalists ,
so , you see two examples here . one is a lab that is actually a fairly high-end laboratory in africa . the second is basically an entrepreneur who is set up and doing who-knows-what in a table in a market . i do n't know what kind of healthcare is delivered there . but it 's not really what is probably most efficient . what is our approach ? and the way in which one typically approaches a problem of lowering cost , starting from the perspective of the united states , is to take our solution , and then to try to cut cost out of it . no matter how you do that ,
it turns out people think when they win the lottery their lives are going to be amazing . this article 's about how their lives get ruined .
or the generation after , to be able to think like this if they 're not nourished . if they 're eating chemicals all the time , they 're not going to be able to think . they 're not going to be smart . you know what ? they 're just going to be sick . now one of the things that -- what happened when i went into berkeley is i realized that , you know , this was all pretty amazing to people , very , very different , and i needed to market it . i came up with these calendars that i sent home to every parent . and these calendars really started to lay out my program .
and decided to see what else could children do with a computer . we started off with an experiment in hyderabad , india , where i gave a group of children -- they spoke english with a very strong telugu accent . i gave them a computer with a speech-to-text interface , which you now get free with windows , and asked them to speak into it . so when they spoke into it , the computer typed out gibberish , so they said ,  well , it does n't understand anything of what we are saying .  so i said ,  yeah , i 'll leave it here for two months . make yourself understood to the computer . 
fetal origins research is not about blaming women for what happens during pregnancy . it 's about discovering how best to promote the health and well-being of the next generation . that important effort must include a focus on what fetuses learn during the nine months they spend in the womb . learning is one of life 's most essential activities , and it begins much earlier than we ever imagined . thank you . so i 'm here to tell you that we have a problem with boys , and it 's a serious problem with boys . their culture is n't working in schools , and i 'm going to share with you
the question is , why is it that the letter x represents the unknown ? now i know we learned that in math class , but now it 's everywhere in the culture -- the x prize , the x-files , project x , tedx .
and this was very disheartening for them . and what he did was he wrote down on the board  $ 85,000 ,  and he said ,  that 's her salary ,  and then he wrote down  $ 12,000 .   that 's your salary . so who 's the man now ?  he asked them .  who 's the damn man ? she 's the man now .  and that really sent a shudder through the room . and that 's part of the reason i like to talk about this , because i think it can be pretty painful , and we really have to work through it . and the other reason it 's kind of urgent is because it 's not just happening in the u.s .
[ make a difference . ] [ take your business to new heights . ] [ but most importantly , ] [ remember when you were a kid ... ] [ when everything was within you reach , ] [ and then say to yourself quietly , but with determination : ] [  it still is .  ] thank you very much for having me .
we are quite similar even at the brain level . now what do those differences look like ? this is an example of a study that we did to follow up and see what exactly those differences were -- and they 're quite subtle . these are things where genes are turned on in an individual cell type . these are two genes that we found as good examples . one is called reln -- it 's involved in early developmental cues . disc1 is a gene that 's deleted in schizophrenia . these are n't schizophrenic individuals , but they do show some population variation . and so what you 're looking at here
these days , one in 88 children will be diagnosed with autism , and the question is , why does this graph look this way ? has that number been increasing dramatically over time ? or is it because we have now started labeling individuals with autism , simply giving them a diagnosis when they were still present there before yet simply did n't have that label ? and in fact , in the late 1980s , the early 1990s , legislation was passed that actually provided individuals with autism with resources , with access to educational materials that would help them .
an immune response that was already there , where it was not going to take five or six days to develop it -- it was going to immediately attack whatever this thing was on . it was kind of like the same thing that happens when you , like when you 're getting stopped for a traffic ticket in l.a. , and the cop drops a bag of marijuana in the back of your car , and then charges you for possession of marijuana . it 's like this very fast , very efficient way to get people off the street . so you can take a bacteria that really does n't make these things at all ,
for the first time in history , more people live in urban , rather than rural , environments . and most of that growth is not in the cities , but in the slums that surround them . jonas bendiksen , a very energetic photographer , came to me and said ,  we need to document this , and here 's my proposal . let 's go all over the world and photograph every single slum around the world .  and i said ,  well , you know , that might be a bit ambitious for our budget .  so instead , what we did was we decided to , instead of going out and doing what would result in what we 'd consider sort of a survey story --
and when they arrived there was tremendous interest in translating this wisdom into a european language .
all these traits you can find in young kids , and you can help nurture them . look for that kind of stuff .
this is what control is all about ; this is how you show you 're a master of your craft . and that tension , that discovery , that push for something new -- and at the same time , that sense of obligation to the regards of craftsmanship -- that 's as strong in cars as it is in anything . we work in clay , which has n't changed much since michelangelo started screwing around with it , and there 's a very interesting analogy to that too . real quickly -- michelangelo once said he 's there to  discover the figure within ,  ok ?
to me , the sky is always gray ,
in front of them on a screen is information about the wine . everybody , of course , drinks exactly the same wine . but if you believe you 're drinking expensive stuff , parts of the brain associated with pleasure and reward light up like a christmas tree . it 's not just that you say it 's more pleasurable , you say you like it more , you really experience it in a different way . or take sex . these are stimuli i 've used in some of my studies . and if you simply show people these pictures , they 'll say these are fairly attractive people . but how attractive you find them , how sexually or romantically moved you are by them ,
you take a drop of blood , you put it in there and it automatically tells you . today , you need to do a complicated laboratory procedure , create a bunch of microscope slides and have a trained person examine it . the other thing is , you know , it would be even better if you did n't have to draw the blood . and if you look through the eye , or you look at the vessels on the white of the eye , in fact , you may be able to do this directly , without drawing any blood at all , or through your nail beds . because if you actually look through your fingernails , you can see blood vessels ,
in day-to-day life , this translates into greater enjoyment and satisfaction .
i wish to go with you . i wish to go to school .  dirt poor , no money , living with my parents , i again said ,  no .  two months later , both of those villages fell into another war . till today , i have no idea where those two girls are .
and that 's where all the beekeepers come after a night of moving bees into the almond groves . they all have their breakfast and complain about everyone right there . and it 's a great experience , and i really encourage you to drop in at that diner during that time , because that 's quite essential american experience . and we see these families , these nomadic families , you know , father to son , father to son , and these guys are hurting . and they 're not people who like to ask for help , although they are the most helpful people ever . if there 's one guy who loses all his bees because of a truck overhaul ,
they fail to reach the people they most need to serve .
we will find that textbooks and teachers we will find that these children , too , have a real chance of breaking their way out of poverty . thank you .
and that 's to take all the co2 , after you 've burned it , going out the flue , pressurize it , create a liquid , put it somewhere , and hope it stays there . now we have some pilot things that do this at the 60 to 80 percent level , but getting up to that full percentage , that will be very tricky , and agreeing on where these co2 quantities should be put will be hard , but the toughest one here is this long-term issue . who 's going to be sure ? who 's going to guarantee something that is literally billions of times larger than any type of waste you think of in terms of nuclear or other things ?
and other research has shown that older people seem to engage with sadness more comfortably .
a little cranberry juice , some fruits , some granola , i should have had whole wheat bread , i realized , but you know , jam on my wonderbread , and some coffee -- and had we taken out all those ingredients , -- except for the almonds i was n't going to pick out from the granola -- if we had taken out all those ingredients the bees had indirectly or directly pollinated , we would n't have much on our plate . so if we did not have bees , it 's not like we would starve , but clearly our diet would be diminished . it 's said that for bees , the flower is the fountain of life ,
moore 's law made computing cheap ; so cheap we can weigh the life of an individual insect and decide thumbs up or thumbs down . now , it turns out we only kill the female mosquitoes . they 're the only ones that are dangerous . mosquitoes only drink blood to lay eggs . mosquitoes actually live ... their day-to-day nutrition comes from nectar , from flowers -- in fact , in the lab , we feed ours raisins -- but the female needs the blood meal . so , this sounds really crazy , right ? would you like to see it ? audience : yeah ! nathan myhrvold : okay , so our legal department prepared a disclaimer ,
hers is more into boys .
more than cars or the internet or even that little mobile device we keep talking about , the technology you 're using the most almost every day is this , your tush .
but it really wants you to enter all your activity . and so i went to this , and of course i was gratified that it picked up the 42 minutes of exercise , elliptical exercise i did , but then it wants more information . so , it says ,  you want to log sexual activity . how long did you do it for ?  and it says ,  how hard was it ?  furthermore it says ,  start time .  now , this does n't appear -- this just does n't work , i mean , this just does n't work . so , now i want to move to sleep . who would ever have thought you could have your own eeg
and i know what you 're all thinking about are dodgeball teams . this was a huge criticism that we got to say , if you ca n't show it with dodgeball teams , this is all stupid .
complex jazz improvisation , and study it rigorously . and so it gets down to the brain . and so all of us have this remarkable brain , which is poorly understood to say the least . i think that neuroscientists have many more questions than answers , and i myself , i 'm not going to give you many answers today , just ask a lot of questions . and fundamentally that 's what i do in my lab . i ask questions about what is this brain doing to enable us to do this . this is the main method that i use . this is called functional mri . if you 've been in an mri scanner , it 's very much the same ,
that would be your mean level of challenge and skill , which will be different from that of anybody else . but you have a kind of a set point there , which would be in the middle . if we know what that set point is , we can predict fairly accurately when you will be in flow , and it will be when your challenges are higher than average and skills are higher than average . and you may be doing things very differently from other people , but for everyone that flow channel , that area there , will be when you are doing what you really like to do --
and accountability and testing and all of this . so she has to figure out a way to get all these boys through this curriculum -- and girls . this compressed curriculum is bad for all active kids . and what happens is , she says ,  please , sit down , be quiet , do what you 're told , follow the rules , manage your time , focus , be a girl .  that 's what she tells them . indirectly , that 's what she tells them . and so this is a very serious problem . where is it coming from ? we want our babies to read when they are six months old . have you seen the ads ?
we 've gone from 26 billion to , at best , maybe 13 billion tons , and that just wo n't cut it .
your life would be better if you could work a little less , if you did n't have to work so hard , if you could get home a little earlier , if you could retire a little faster , if you could punch out a little sooner -- it 's all in there , over and over , again and again . washington ? i ca n't even begin to talk about the deals and policies in place that affect the bottom line reality of the available jobs because i do n't really know . i just know that that 's a front in this war . and right here guys , silicon valley , i mean -- how many people have an iphone on them right now ?
that may not be shared as commonly with siblings alone .
that all projects go awry -- and become at ease with the idea that every step in a project is a step closer to sweet success , or gleeful calamity . we start from doodles and sketches . and sometimes we make real plans . and sometimes we just start building . building is at the heart of the experience : hands on , deeply immersed and fully committed to the problem at hand .
desirable , sustainable when your kids reach your age -- i think we actually can reach it . now , i said this was a warning , not a forecast . that was before -- i painted this before we started in on making robotic versions of hawk moths and cockroaches , and now i 'm beginning to wonder seriously -- was this more of a forecast than i wanted ? i personally think the surviving intelligent life form on earth is not going to be carbon-based ; it 's going to be silicon-based . and so where it all goes , i do n't know . the one final bit of sparkle we 'll put in at the very end here
choosing such a tough curriculum for these students .
which , you know , which did not cross any big cities or any big metropolitan centers . drove out about 300 kilometers , and wherever we found a school , administered a set of standard tests , and then took those test results and plotted them on a graph . the graph was interesting , although you need to consider it carefully . i mean , this is a very small sample ; you should not generalize from it . but it was quite obvious , quite clear , that for this particular route that i had taken , the remoter the school was , the worse its results seemed to be . that seemed a little damning ,
from the late arthur c. clarke , who said ,  i want to see what 's going on .  and he could n't travel , so i went over there . he said two interesting things ,  a teacher that can be replaced by a machine should be .  the second thing he said was that ,  if children have interest , then education happens .  and i was doing that in the field , so every time i would watch it and think of him . arthur c. clarke : and they can definitely help people , because children quickly learn to navigate the web and find things which interest them . and when you 've got interest , then you have education .
with the earth looks like a pretty bad industry to be involved with . so , that 's the stage out of all this . i find , for reasons i do n't understand , i really do have a goal . and the goal is that the world be desirable and sustainable when my kids reach my age -- and i think that 's -- in other words , the next generation . i think that 's a goal that we probably all share . i think it 's a hopeless goal . technologically , it 's achievable ; economically , it 's achievable ; politically , it means sort of the habits , institutions of people -- it 's impossible . the institutions of the past with all their inertia
and this what you get when you try playing god , is you hurt people . i remember just being so frightened and terrified . and gene , who 's lying on the floor , says ,  man , we 've got to soak towels .  i said ,  what ?  he says ,  we 've got to soak towels . we 're going to die from the smoke .  so , we ran to the bathroom , and got towels , and put them over our faces , and the kids faces . then he said ,  do you have gaffer 's tape ?  i said ,  what ?  he said ,  do you have gaffer 's tape ?  i said ,  yeah , somewhere in my halliburton .  he says ,  we 've got to stop the smoke . 
for girls in these situations , and we ought to be thinking about how we can make that happen for boys too in their younger years . even in their older years , what we find is that there 's still a problem . when we look at the universities , 60 percent of baccalaureate degrees are going to women now , which is a significant shift . and in fact , university administrators are a little uncomfortable about the idea that we may be getting close to 70 percent female population in universities . this makes university administrators very nervous , because girls do n't want to go to schools that do n't have boys .
is you start to learn to hedge your happiness . you start to realize that  hey , i could go to this live music event and have an utterly transforming experience that will cover my entire body with goosebumps , but it 's more likely that i 'll feel claustrophobic and i wo n't be able to get a beer . so i 'm not going to go . i 've got a good stereo at home . so , i 'm not going to go .  so your average happiness goes up , but you lose those transcendent moments . av : yeah , and then you have your first child , and then you really resubmit yourself to these highs and lows --
nurse : nothing 's in your pockets , right mike ? mp : nope . nothing 's in my pockets . nurse : okay . cl : you have to have the right attitude to agree to it . it 's kind of fun actually . and so now we 're playing back and forth . he 's in there . you can see his legs up there . and then i 'm in the control room here , playing back and forth . mike pope : this is a pretty good representation of what it 's like . and it 's good that it 's not too quick . the fact that we do it over and over again lets you acclimate to your surroundings .
he 's growing all his own fruit , and that 's fantastic . there 's no accident in names of these restaurants . acorn house is the element of wood ; waterhouse is the element of water ; and i 'm thinking , well , i 'm going to be making five restaurants based on the five chinese medicine acupuncture specialities . i 've got water and wood . i 'm just about to do fire . i 've got metal and earth to come . so you 've got to watch your space for that . okay . so this is my next project . five weeks old , it 's my baby , and it 's hurting real bad . the people 's supermarket . so basically , the restaurants only really hit
let me give you just one example of this . one thing that this baby could be thinking about , that could be going on in his mind , is trying to figure out what 's going on in the mind of that other baby . after all , one of the things that 's hardest for all of us to do is to figure out what other people are thinking and feeling . and maybe the hardest thing of all is to figure out that what other people think and feel is n't actually exactly like what we think and feel . anyone who 's followed politics can testify to how hard that is for some people to get .
more to design , when it gets down to your neighbor , your other , it can be physical like this , and maybe in the future it will be . but right now it 's in dealing with our own people , our own teams who are doing the creating . so , to my story . the idea of people-work is what we work with here , and i have to make a bond with my designers when we 're creating bmws . we have to have a shared intimacy , a shared vision -- that means we have to work as one family ; we have to understand ourselves that way .
between survival and starvation for so many . i could n't leave the story , and i could n't leave the topic either , because everywhere i went i met more of these women who no one seemed to know about , or even wish to . i went on to bosnia , and early on in my interviews i met with an imf official who said ,  you know , gayle , i do n't think we actually have women in business in bosnia , but there is a lady selling cheese nearby on the side of the road . so maybe you could interview her .  so i went out reporting and within a day i met narcisa kavazovic
and this sends a signal and it creates a body area network to a gateway . gateway could be a smartphone or it could be a dedicated gateway , as today many of these things are dedicated gateways , because they are not so well integrated . that signal goes to the web , the cloud , and then it can be processed and sent anywhere : to a caregiver , to a physician , back to the patient , etc . so , that 's basically very simplistic technology of how this works . now , i have this device on . i did n't want to take my shirt off to show you , but i can tell you it 's on .
and even with the weather , we do n't think of all the many nuances of weather . we just think of good weather and bad weather . this day , right now , has unique weather , maybe a kind that will never exactly in that form come again . that formation of clouds in the sky will never be the same as it is right now . open your eyes . look at that . look at the faces of people whom you meet . each one has an incredible story behind their face , a story that you could never fully fathom , not only their own story , but the story of their ancestors .
and i remember when i was six years old , i remember coming home one day to find a cart full of the most delicious sweets at our doorstep .
and that may be of great , you know , interest to this group , because all of you are talking about groups . so here was the power of what a group of children can do , if you lift the adult intervention . just a quick idea of the measurements . we took standard statistical techniques , so i 'm going to not talk about that . but we got a clean learning curve , almost exactly the same as what you would get in a school . i 'll leave it at that , because , i mean , it sort of says it all , does n't it ? what could they learn to do ? basic windows functions , browsing , painting , chatting and email ,
as a result of that , more individuals were diagnosed and got access to the resources they needed . in addition , we 've changed our definition over time , so in fact we 've widened the definition of autism , and that accounts for some of the increased prevalence that we see .
and second , that the story was no longer just about the crisis of men , but it was also about what was happening to women . and now look at this second set of slides . these are headlines about what 's been going on with women in the next few years . these are things we never could have imagined a few years ago . women , a majority of the workplace . and labor statistics : women take up most managerial jobs . this second set of headlines -- you can see that families and marriages are starting to shift . and look at that last headline -- young women earning more than young men .
the one shown in green will go to the surface of the brain with electrodes , to the epileptic focus , the origin of the epilepsy , where we can sense the electrical signal and have computer analysis that tells us when to hit it with some electrical current to prevent the clinical manifestation of the seizure . in the blue wire , we see what 's called a deep brain electrode . if that 's the source of the epilepsy , we can attack that as well . the comprehensive solution : this is the device ; it 's about one inches by two inches and , oddly enough , just the thickness of most cranial bones .
and she spoke to the grandmother for a moment , and then she started getting tears in her eyes . and i said ,  ok , what did i do ? what 's going on ? why is everyone crying ?  and the translator said ,  the grandmother says that she thinks she 's dying , and she wants to know if you would take hyun-sook to america with you .  and i said ,  i 'm 28 years old , and i live in hotels , and i 'm not married .  i mean i had fallen in love with this girl , but i -- you know , it was , like , emotionally i was about 12 years old . if you know of photographers , the joke is
you know , we have to change it . i work with kids a lot . these are kids i work with in harlem . eatwise -- enlightened and aware teens who inspire smart eating . we have to teach kids that coke and pop tarts are n't breakfast . we have to teach kids that if they 're on a diet of refined sugar , they go up and down , just like if they 're on a diet of crack . and we have to pull it all together . we have composting in all of our schools . we have recycling in all of our schools . you know , the things that we maybe do at home
camping -- rig up basically nothing , maybe a boat . whatever it was for you , i bet that , among other things , this gave you a little more freedom , a little more time . so i 'm going to suggest that less stuff and less space are going to equal a smaller footprint . it 's actually a great way to save you some money . and it 's going to give you a little more ease in your life . so i started a project called life edited at lifeedited.org to further this conversation and to find some great solutions in this area . first up : crowd-sourcing my 420 sq . ft. apartment in manhattan
and this went on for quite some time . people were happy .
so little billy goes to school , and he sits down and the teacher says ,  what does your father do ?  and little billy says ,  my father plays the piano in an opium den .  so the teacher rings up the parents , and says ,  very shocking story from little billy today . just heard that he claimed that you play the piano in an opium den .  and the father says ,  i 'm very sorry . yes , it 's true , i lied . but how can i tell an eight-year-old boy that his father is a politician ?  now , as a politician myself , standing in front of you , or indeed , meeting any stranger anywhere in the world ,
men are restless , men are ambitious , men are compulsively mobile , and they all want a certificate . all across the globe , you have this tendency of men wanting a certificate . why ? because they want to leave the village and go to a city , looking for a job . so we came up with a great solution : train grandmothers .
so i cold-called the ceo of prostate cancer canada , and i said to him ,  i have this most amazing concept .   it 's going to transform your organization . i do n't want to tell you about it now , but will you meet with me if i fly all the way to toronto ?  so i flew here , met down on front street east , and we sat in the boardroom , and i said ,  right , here 's my vision of getting men growing mustaches all across canada raising awareness and funds for your organization .  and he looked at me and laughed and said ,  adam , sounds like a really novel idea , but we 're
it really is based on some impassioned pleas of parents whose children died after they turned two , which has led to the passage of all these laws -- not very much on data . so you can only get so far , i think , in telling your story by using these abstract statistics .
this is a computer installed in the entrance to their slum by a revolutionary social entrepreneur called sugata mitra who has conducted the most radical experiments , showing that children , in the right conditions , can learn on their own with the help of computers . those girls have never touched google . they know nothing about wikipedia . imagine what their lives would be like if you could get that to them . so if you look , as i did , through this tour , and by looking at about a hundred case studies of different social entrepreneurs working in these very extreme conditions , look at the recipes that they come up with for learning ,
because i wanted to understand about the consumer movement . i hope the , by the way , the phillips direct life works better -- i hope so . but this monitors food , it monitors activity and tracks weight . however you have to put in most of this stuff . the only thing it really tracks by itself is activity , and even then , it 's not complete . so , you exercise and it picks up the exercise . you put in your height and weight , it calculates bmi , and of course it tells you how many calories you 're expending from the exercise , and how many you took in , if you go in and enter all the foods .
about what they really are , what they came from , what they 're made of , what their hidden nature is . i want to suggest that this is true , not just for how we think about things , but how we react to things . so i want to suggest that pleasure is deep -- and that this is n't true just for higher level pleasures like art , but even the most seemingly simple pleasures are affected by our beliefs about hidden essences . so take food . would you eat this ? well , a good answer is ,  it depends . what is it ?  some of you would eat it if it 's pork , but not beef .
and actually one of the wormeries was a big wormery . i had a lot of worms in it . and i tried taking the dried food waste , putting it to the worms , going ,  there you go , dinner .  it was like vegetable jerky , and killed all of them . i do n't know how many worms [ were ] in there , but i 've got some heavy karma coming , i tell you . what you 're seeing here is a water filtration system . this takes the water out of the restaurant , runs it through these stone beds -- this is going to be mint in there -- and i sort of water the garden with it .
anything in their toy account they can spend on whatever they want . the 50 percent that goes in their house account , every six months , goes to the bank . they walk up with me . every year all the money in the bank goes to their broker . both my nine- and seven-year-olds have a stock broker already . but i 'm teaching them to force that savings habit . it drives me crazy that 30-year-olds are saying ,  maybe i 'll start contributing to my rsp now .  shit , you 've missed 25 years . you can teach those habits to young kids when they do n't even feel the pain yet .
but look what happened at 10:06 after we removed this pig 's medication that kept him from having a heart attack . any one of you now is an expert on st elevation . can you see it there ? can you see it in the picture after the big rise of the qrs -- you see st elevation ? this pig at 10:06 was having a heart attack . what happens after you have the heart attack , this blockage ? your rhythm becomes irregular , and that 's what happened 45 minutes later . then , ventricular fibrillation , the heart quivers instead of beats -- this is just before death of the pig -- and then the pig died ; it went flat-line .
the problem for the medieval spanish scholars who were tasked with translating this material is that the letter sheen and the word shalan ca n't be rendered into spanish because spanish does n't have that sh , that  sh  sound .
so if you ever feel like you do n't have this aging thing quite pegged , do n't kick yourself . it 's brand new .
our tools today do n't look like shovels and picks . they look like the stuff we walk around with . and so the collective effect of all of that has been this marginalization of lots and lots of jobs . and i realized , probably too late in this game -- i hope not , because i do n't know if i can do 200 more of these things -- but we 're going to do as many as we can . and to me the most important thing to know and to really come face to face with , is that fact that i got it wrong about a lot of things ,
to alter the settings inside someone else 's brain to suit your interests . languages are genes talking , getting things that they want . and just imagine the sense of wonder in a baby when it first discovers that , merely by uttering a sound , it can get objects to move across a room as if by magic , and maybe even into its mouth . now language 's subversive power has been recognized throughout the ages in censorship , in books you ca n't read , phrases you ca n't use and words you ca n't say . in fact , the tower of babel story in the bible is a fable and warning
mckinsey came along and looked at his model and said ,  you know what you should do with this , madhav ? you should turn it into mcdonald 's .
and how we feed our kids as a health initiative , and we started thinking about food as health , then i think we would n't have corn dogs as lunch . okay , finance 101 on this , and this -- i 'm sort of wrapping it up with this finance piece , because i think this is something we all have to understand . the national school lunch program spends 8 billion dollars feeding 30 million children a year . that number probably needs to double . people say ,  oh my god , where are we going to get 8 billion ?  in this country , we 're spending 110 billion dollars a year
so i would sit there with a lawn chair and just carry up all the people who did n't have caddies . i would carry their golf bags up to the top , and they 'd pay me a dollar . meanwhile , my friends were working for five hours to haul some guy 's bag around and get paid 10 bucks . i 'm like ,  that 's stupid because you have to work for five hours .
would be to put a block on top of the detector . but actually , this detector works in a bit of a strange way . because if you wave a block over the top of the detector , something you would n't ever think of to begin with , the detector will actually activate two out of three times . whereas , if you do the likely thing , put the block on the detector , it will only activate two out of six times . so the unlikely hypothesis actually has stronger evidence . it looks as if the waving is a more effective strategy than the other strategy . so we did just this ; we gave four year-olds this pattern of evidence ,
prince charles has some similarities with nicole kidman .
that has to do with video games -- these topics are banned . boy comes home from school , and he says ,  i hate writing .   why do you hate writing , son ? what 's wrong with writing ?   now i have to write what she tells me to write .   okay , what is she telling you to write ?   poems . i have to write poems . and little moments in my life . i do n't want to write that stuff .   all right . well , what do you want to write ? what do you want to write about ?   i want to write about video games . i want to write about leveling-up . i want to write about this really interesting world .
that live on the earth , we 've also made pro-quorum sensing molecules . so , we 've targeted those systems to make the molecules work better . remember you have these 10 times or more bacterial cells in you or on you , keeping you healthy . what we 're also trying to do is to beef up the conversation of the bacteria that live as mutualists with you , in the hopes of making you more healthy , making those conversations better , so bacteria can do things that we want them to do better than they would be on their own .
but you have 10 trillion bacterial cells in you or on you at any moment in your life . so , 10 times more bacterial cells than human cells on a human being . and of course it 's the dna that counts , so here 's all the a , t , gs and cs that make up your genetic code , and give you all your charming characteristics . you have about 30,000 genes . well it turns out you have 100 times more bacterial genes playing a role in you or on you all of your life . at the best , you 're 10 percent human , but more likely about one percent human ,
i witnessed how music was able to bring him back from his very darkest moments , from what seemed to me in my untrained eye to be the beginnings of a schizophrenic episode . playing for nathaniel , the music took on a deeper meaning , because now it was about communication , a communication where words failed , a communication of a message that went deeper than words , that registered at a fundamentally primal level in nathaniel 's psyche , yet came as a true musical offering from me . i found myself growing outraged that someone like nathaniel could have ever been homeless on skid row because of his mental illness , yet how many tens of thousands
i 'd like to play you some voices of little girls from the two-and-a-half years of research that we did -- actually , some of the voices are more recent .
be so passive about it , as we are when we walk through endless rooms of museums . another concept is the digital clinical chart , which sounds very obvious if we were to talk about real patients , but when we talk about works of art , unfortunately , it 's never been tapped as an idea . well , we believe , again , that this should be the beginning , the very first step , to do real conservation , and allowing us to really explore and to understand everything related to the state of our conservation , the technique , materials , and also if , when , and why we should restore , or , rather , to intervene on
and the reason is because in certain individuals , they can actually have genetic changes or mutations that are not passed down from the mother or from the father , but actually start brand new in them , mutations that are present in the egg or the sperm at the time of conception but have not been passed down generation through generation within the family . and we can actually use that strategy to now understand and to identify those genes causing autism in those individuals . so in fact , at the simons foundation , we took 2,600 individuals that had no family history of autism , and we took that child and their mother and father
the same problems i witnessed in uganda and in bihar .
and it 's run on hydroelectricity , so i 've gone from air to water . now it 's important to understand that this room is cooled by water , heated by water , filters its own water , and it 's powered by water . it literally is waterhouse . the air handling system inside it -- i got rid of air-conditioning because i thought there was too much consumption going on there . this is basically air-handling . i 'm taking the temperature of the canal outside , pumping it through the heat exchange mechanism , it 's turning through these amazing sails on the roof , and that , in turn , is falling softly onto the people in the restaurant ,
so how can you live little ? three main approaches . first of all , you have to edit ruthlessly . we 've got to clear the arteries of our lives . and that shirt that i had n't worn in years ? it 's time for me to let it go . we 've got to cut the extraneous out of our lives , and we 've got to learn to stem the inflow . we need to think before we buy . ask ourselves ,  is that really going to make me happier ? truly ?  by all means , we should buy and own some great stuff . but we want stuff that we 're going to love for years ,
in that way , sitting has become the smoking of our generation .
and it has become a kind of a truism in the study of creativity that you ca n't be creating anything with less than 10 years of technical-knowledge immersion in a particular field . whether it 's mathematics or music , it takes that long to be able to begin to change something in a way that it 's better than what was there before .
and what 's even more disturbing is what 's happening with younger boys . there 's been about a decade of research about what people are calling the  boy crisis .  now the boy crisis is this idea that very young boys , for whatever reason , are doing worse in school than very young girls , and people have theories about that . is it because we have an excessively verbal curriculum , and little girls are better at that than little boys ? or that we require kids to sit still too much , and so boys initially feel like failures ? and some people say it 's because , in 9th grade , boys start dropping out of school .
but , since the age of 21 , instead of seeing color , i can hear color .
my doctors told me that my lung capacity had gone down to 70 percent , and it was killing me . with the help of iit , teri , and learnings from nasa , we discovered that there are three basic green plants , common green plants , with which we can grow all the fresh air we need indoors to keep us healthy .
and do it in terms of its affordability , add skill volumes , its performance and its durability . so that 's what we 're driving to for 2010. we have n't seen anything yet in our development work that says that is n't possible . we actually think the future 's going to be event-driven . so since we ca n't predict the future , we want to spend a lot of our time trying to create that future . i 'm very , very intrigued by the fact that our cars and trucks sit idle 90 percent of the time : they 're parked , they 're parked all around us . they 're usually parked within 100 feet of the people that own them .
when others can be creative and do more with it . here 's another project , which i think really emulates that . this is the one laptop per child , the $ 100 laptop . this picture is incredible . in nigeria , people carry their most precious belongings on their heads . this girl is going to school with a laptop on her head . i mean , to me , it just means so much . but when nicholas negroponte -- and he has spoken about this project a lot , he 's the founder of olpc -- came to us about two and a half years ago , there were some clear ideas . he wanted to bring education and he wanted to bring technology ,
i basically created a menu that allowed people to choose the amount and volume of food that they wanted to consume . rather than me putting a dish down , they were allowed to help themselves to as much or as little as they wanted . okay , it 's a small kitchen . it 's about five square meters . it serves 220 people a day . we generate quite a lot of waste . this is the waste room . you ca n't get rid of waste . but this story 's not about eliminating it , it 's about minimizing it . in here , i have produce and boxes that are unavoidable .
and it was pretty apparent why . tapestries were portable . you could roll them up , send them ahead of you , and in the time it took to hang them up , you could transform a cold , dank interior into a richly colored setting . tapestries effectively provided a vast canvas on which the patrons of the day could depict the heroes with whom they wanted to be associated , or even themselves , and in addition to that , tapestries were hugely expensive . they required scores of highly skilled weavers working over extended periods of time with very expensive materials -- the wools , the silks , even gold and silver thread .
and all things being equal , older people direct their cognitive resources , like attention and memory , to positive information more than negative .
thank you . so , people want a lot of things out of life , but i think , more than anything else , they want happiness . aristotle called happiness  the chief good ,  the end towards which all other things aim . according to this view , the reason we want a big house or a nice car or a good job is n't that these things are intrinsically valuable . it 's that we expect them to bring us happiness . now in the last 50 years , we americans have gotten a lot of the things that we want . we 're richer . we live longer . we have access to technology
she actually went and spoke to an engineering department in afghanistan and told the head of the department the difference between ac and dc .
we know how to create it cost effectively , we know how to handle it safely . we did an analysis where you would have a station in each city with each of the 100 largest cities in the united states , and located the stations so you 'd be no more than two miles from a station at any time . we put one every 25 miles on the freeway , and it turns out that translates into about 12,000 stations . and at a million dollars each , that would be about 12 billion dollars . now that 's a lot of money . but if you built the alaskan pipeline today ,
 and if you have something to say about their thoughts , collectively , it might be time to think about it . because , dude , you know , four years .  you know , that 's in my head , testicles are on my chin , thoughts are bouncing around . and , after that shoot , dirty jobs really did n't change , in terms of what the show is , but it changed for me , personally . and now , when i talk about the show , i no longer just tell the story you heard and 190 like it . i do , but i also start to talk about some of the other things i got wrong , some of the other notions of work
you know , you could take the word  love  out of a lot of things in our society , put the word  design  in , and it still works , like this quote here , you know . it kind of works , you know ? you can understand that . it works in truisms .  all is fair in design and war .  certainly we live in a competitive society . i think this one here , there 's a pop song
that 's how you keep a huge outbreak from spreading , and it shows what can happen when local people have the data in their hands ; they can save lives . now one of the challenges in polio , still , is marketing , but it might not be what you think . it 's not the marketing on the ground . it 's not telling the parents ,  if you see paralysis , take your child to the doctor or get your child vaccinated .  we have a problem with marketing in the donor community . the g8 nations have been incredibly generous on polio over the last 20 years ,
very quickly , he noticed that when he moves his finger on the touchpad something moves on the screen -- and later on he told me ,  i have never seen a television where you can do something .  so he figured that out . it took him over two minutes to figure out that he was doing things to the television . and then , as he was doing that , he made an accidental click by hitting the touchpad -- you 'll see him do that . he did that , and the internet explorer changed page . eight minutes later , he looked from his hand to the screen , and he was browsing : he was going back and forth .
in hopes that we would find a silver lining . rg : and that 's when it 's great to be running a website for parents , because we got this incredible reporter to go and interview all the scientists who conducted these four studies . we said , something is wrong here . there 's something missing from these studies . it ca n't possibly be that bad . so liz mitchell did a wonderful job with this piece , and she interviewed four scientists , and she also interviewed daniel gilbert , and we did indeed find a silver lining . so this is our guess as to what this baseline of average happiness arguably looks like throughout life .
he did n't know .
about this event .  minto : live  brought sydneysiders into dialogue with international artists , and really celebrated the diversity of sydney on its own terms . the sydney festival which produced  minto : live  i think represents a new kind of 21st-century arts festival . these festivals are radically open . they can transform cities and communities . to understand this , i think it kind of makes sense to look where we 've come from . modern arts festivals were born in the rubble of world war ii . civic leaders created these annual events to celebrate culture as the highest expression of the human spirit . in 1947 , the edinburgh festival was born
that , to me , mostly is a waste . unless you 're very close and you 're just funding the learning curve and it 's going to get very cheap , i believe we should try more things that have a potential to be far less expensive . if the trade-off you get into is ,  let 's make energy super expensive ,  then the rich can afford that . i mean , all of us here could pay five times as much for our energy and not change our lifestyle . the disaster is for that two billion . and even lomborg has changed . his shtick now is ,  why is n't the r & amp ; d getting more discussed ? 
or are they negatively correlated ? on this map , green will mean they 're positively correlated and red means they 're negatively correlated . and you can see , the world is crazily green . so in almost every country in the world where we have this data , people who give money to charity are happier people that people who do n't give money to charity . i know you 're all looking at that red country in the middle . i would be a jerk and not tell you what it is , but in fact , it 's central african republic . you can make up stories . maybe it 's different there for some reason or another .
you might have yourself depression . oh , and that 's not even the tip of the iceberg . if you get a little baby , and you abuse it verbally , its little brain sends out chemicals that are so destructive that the little part of its brain that can tell good from bad just does n't grow , so you might have yourself a homegrown psychotic . if a soldier sees his friend blown up , his brain goes into such high alarm that he ca n't actually put the experience into words , so he just feels the horror over and over again . so here 's my question . my question is , how come
from a totally unique point of view , and this world i 'm going to talk about is the micro world . i 've found , after doing this for many , many years , that there 's a magical world behind reality . and that can be seen directly through a microscope , and i 'm going to show you some of this today . so let 's start off looking at something rather not-so-small , something that we can see with our naked eye , and that 's a bee . so when you look at this bee , it 's about this size here , it 's about a centimeter . but to really see the details of the bee , and really
challenged me and had lots of cups of chai with me . and i was struck by just how wonderful it felt , and how contagious that feeling was .
furthermore , one of the ingredients in vaccines , something called thimerosal , was thought to be what the cause of autism was .
it 's slow . it 's antiquated . it 's not using the best technology , and it 's not using the best people . the second problem that we became aware of was a very inadequate veteran reintegration , and this is a topic that is front page news right now as veterans are coming home from iraq and afghanistan , and they 're struggling to reintegrate into civilian life . and we sat here and we looked at these two problems , and finally we came to a realization . these are n't problems . these are actually solutions . and what do i mean by that ? well , we can use disaster response as an opportunity
then the work is n't done , and i believe it 's our responsibility as non-scientists to have these interactions . but these great conversations ca n't occur if our scientists and engineers do n't invite us in to see their wonderland . so scientists and engineers , please , talk nerdy to us . i want to share a few keys on how you can do that to make sure that we can see that your science is sexy and that your engineering is engaging . first question to answer for us : so what ? tell us why your science is relevant to us . do n't just tell me that you study trabeculae ,
i put my food waste into this dehydrating , desiccating macerator -- turns food into an inner material , which i can store and then compost later . i compost it in this garden . all of the soil you can see there is basically my food , which is generated by the restaurant , and it 's growing in these tubs , which i made out of storm-felled trees and wine casks and all kinds of things . three compost bins -- go through about 70 kilos of raw vegetable waste a week -- really good , makes fantastic compost . a couple of wormeries in there too .
if you sum up the co2 that gets emitted , that leads to a temperature increase , and that temperature increase leads to some very negative effects : the effects on the weather ; perhaps worse , the indirect effects , in that the natural ecosystems ca n't adjust to these rapid changes , and so you get ecosystem collapses . now , the exact amount of how you map from a certain increase of co2 to what temperature will be and where the positive feedbacks are , there 's some uncertainty there , but not very much . and there 's certainly uncertainty about how bad those effects will be , but they will be extremely bad .
but before it gets to you , it 's thoroughly washed .  that causes a huge drop in the value . as my wife put it ,  you 've washed away the clooney cooties .  so let 's go back to art . i would love a chagall . i love the work of chagall . if people want to get me something at the end of the conference , you could buy me a chagall . but i do n't want a duplicate , even if i ca n't tell the difference . that 's not because , or it 's not simply because , i 'm a snob and want to boast about having an original . rather , it 's because i want something that has a specific history .
and then at the working class , all the new jobs that are created are the kinds of jobs that wives used to do for free at home . so that 's childcare , elder care and food preparation . so those are all the jobs that are growing , and those are jobs that women tend to do . now one day it might be that mothers will hire an out-of-work , middle-aged , former steelworker guy to watch their children at home , and that would be good for the men , but that has n't quite happened yet . to see what 's going to happen , you ca n't just look at the workforce that is now ,
and if you could clamp these on it really well you have it taken off the street . and for certain bacteria we do n't have really efficient ways to do that anymore . our antibiotics are running out . and , i mean , the world apparently is running out too . so probably it does n't matter 50 years from now -- streptococcus and stuff like that will be rampant -- because we wo n't be here . but if we are -- we 're going to need something to do with the bacteria . so i started working with this thing , with a bunch of collaborators . and trying to attach this to things that were
and i did n't -- and i 'd never used it in school , because i was too busy writing poems , and flunking out , and i do n't know what , sitting in cafes . but i picked it up and i started reading it and i thought , this book is amazing . i said , people should know about this book . so i decided it needed a few -- it needed a lift , it needed a few illustrations . and basically , i called the , you know , i convinced the white estate , and what an intersection of like , you know , polish jew , you know , main wasp family . here i am , saying ,
i do n't think differently for children than i do for adults . i try to use the same kind of imagination , the same kind of whimsy , the same kind of love of language . so , you know , and i have lots of wonderful-looking friends . this is andrew gatz , and he walked in through the door and i said ,  you ! sit down there .  you know , i take lots of photos . and the bertoia chair in the background is my favorite chair . so , i get to put in all of the things that i love . hopefully , a dialog between adults and children will happen on many different levels ,
we 've heard some remarkable stories from some remarkable speakers . but for me , what was contagious about all of them was that they were infected by something i call the  i can  bug . so , the question is , why only them ? in a country of a billion people and some , why so few ? is it luck ? is it chance ? can we all not systematically and consciously get infected ? so , in the next eight minutes i would like to share with you my story . i got infected when i was 17 , when , as a student of the design college , i encountered adults who actually believed in my ideas ,
cooling them , or heating them , as the need may be . and this is an english willow air diffuser , and that 's softly moving that air current through the room . very advanced , no air-conditioning -- i love it . in the canal , which is just outside the restaurant , there is hundreds of meters of coil piping . this takes the temperature of the canal and turns it into this four-degrees of heat exchange . i have no idea how it works , but i paid a lot of money for it . and what 's great is one of the chefs who works in that restaurant lives on this boat -- it 's off-grid ; it generates all its own power .
leatherbacks and tuataras are echoes from that era . it took time for life to break away from water , and it still beckons all the time . life turned hard so it could venture inland . and the dragons that arose are still among us today . jurassic park still shimmers in part of madagascar , and the center of brazil , where plants called  cycads  remain rock hard . forests arose and nurtured things with wings . one early form left an imprint , like it died only yesterday . and others fly today like echoes of the past . in birds , life gained new mobility . flamingos covered continents . migrations got underway .
and people can smell that , and it feeds cynicism .
until an intelligent plug is detected . simple . now , besides saving lives , perhaps the greatest benefit of intelligent power is in its energy savings . this invention will reduce global energy consumption by allowing remote control and automation of every outlet in every home and business . now you can choose to reduce your home energy bill by automatically cycling heavy loads like air conditioners and heaters . hotels and businesses can shut down unused rooms from a central location , or even a cell phone . there are 10 billion electrical outlets
by 2015 , there will be more people in the united states over the age of 60 than under 15 .
or a canadian cure , we 're about finding the cure .
to the painting that we are interested to see , like this . okay ? and i will just click on it , we pause , and now let me turn to you so the moment the image , or , i should say , the camera , has locked in the painting , then the images you just saw up there in the drawing are being loaded . and so , see . we can , as we said , we can zoom in . then we can scroll . okay ? let 's go and find the elephant . so all we need is one finger . just wipe off and we see the elephant . okay ? and then if we want ,
and as they repeatedly knock it down and start again , learning is happening as a sort of by-product of play . it ’ s classically learning by doing . now , david kelley calls this behavior , when it ’ s carried out by designers ,  thinking with your hands .  and it typically involves making multiple , low-resolution prototypes very quickly , often by bringing lots of found elements together in order to get to a solution . on one of his earliest projects , the team was kind of stuck , and they came up with a mechanism by hacking together a prototype made from a roll-on deodorant . now , that became the first commercial computer mouse
and i experienced this most viscerally when i traveled to remote villages to study poverty .
with 350,000 home fires . and one of the main causes of all these fires is electricity . what if we could prevent electrical fires before they start ? well , a couple of friends and i figured out how to do this . so how does electricity ignite residential fires ? well it turns out that the main causes are faulty and misused appliances and electrical wiring . our invention had to address all of these issues . so what about circuit breakers ? well , thomas edison invented the circuit breaker in 1879. this is 130-year-old technology , and this is a problem , because over 80 percent of all home electrical fires
that , you know , a lot of scientific research is done using that method . the children enthusiastically got after me and said ,  now , what do you want us to do ?  i gave them six gcse questions . the first group -- the best one -- solved everything in 20 minutes . the worst , in 45. they used everything that they knew -- news groups , google , wikipedia , ask jeeves , etc . the teachers said ,  is this deep learning ?  i said ,  well , let 's try it . i 'll come back after two months . we 'll give them a paper test -- no computers , no talking to each other , etc . 
yet had profound effects in terms of how the brain functions and affects behavior . in doing this within these families , we were able to account for approximately 25 percent of the individuals and determine that there was a single powerful genetic factor that caused autism within those families . on the other hand , there 's 75 percent that we still have n't figured out . as we did this , though , it was really quite humbling , because we realized that there was not simply one gene for autism . in fact , the current estimates are that there are 200 to 400 different genes that can cause autism .
there are 335 boys who are expelled from school . for every 100 girls in special education , there are 217 boys . for every 100 girls with a learning disability , there are 276 boys . for every 100 girls with an emotional disturbance diagnosed , we have 324 boys . and by the way , all of these numbers are significantly higher if you happen to be black , if you happen to be poor , if you happen to exist in an overcrowded school . and if you are a boy , you 're four times as likely to be diagnosed with adhd -- attention deficit hyperactivity disorder . now there is another side to this .
now , i 'm going to sum up a year 's worth of work in two sentences to say that we have been trying to figure out what the cause of this is . and what we know is that it 's as if the bees have caught a flu . and this flu has wiped through the population of bees . in some cases , and in fact in most cases in one year , this flu was caused by a new virus to us , or newly identified by us , called israeli acute paralysis virus . it was called that because a guy in israel first found it , and he now regrets profoundly calling it that disease , because ,
the fda says , ok , test this final device after it 's built in some animal , which we said is a pig , so we had to get this pig to have a heart attack . and when you go to the farmyard , you ca n't easily get pigs to have heart attacks , so we said , well , we 're experts in stents . tonight you 'll see some of our invented stents . we said , so we 'll put in a stent , but we 're not going to put in a stent that we 'd put in people . we 're putting in a copper stent , and this copper stent erodes the artery and causes heart attacks .
and i thought that was worth sharing .
older people can view injustice with compassion , but not despair .
they include exploration , which is about going for quantity ; building , and thinking with your hands ; and role-play , where acting it out helps us both to have more empathy for the situations in which we ’ re designing , and to create services and experiences that are seamless and authentic . thank you very much . i 'd like to talk about my dad . my dad has alzheimer 's disease . he started showing the symptoms about 12 years ago , and he was officially diagnosed in 2005. now he 's really pretty sick . he needs help eating , he needs help getting dressed , he does n't really know where he is or when it is , and it 's been really , really hard .
 make love to your man in a chevy van ,  because that was my vehicle when i was in college . the fact is , when we do our market research around the world , we see that there 's nearly a universal aspiration on the part of people to own an automobile . and 750 million people in the world today own a car . and you say , boy , that 's a lot . but you know what ? that 's just 12 percent of the population . we really have to ask the question : can the world sustain that number of automobiles ? and if you look at projections over the next 10 to 15 to 20 years ,
these are quartz crystals and feldspar , so most sand in the world on the mainland is made of quartz crystal and feldspar . it 's the erosion of granite rock . so mountains are built up , and they erode away by water and rain and ice and so forth , and they become grains of sand . there 's some sand that 's really much more colorful . these are sand from near the great lakes , and you can see that it 's filled with minerals like pink garnet and green epidote , all kinds of amazing stuff , and if you look at different sands from different places , every single beach , every single place you look at sand ,
is our school district allocates .03 percent of the general fund towards nutrition services . and i think if every school district allocated a half to one percent , we could start to really fix this program . we really need to change it . it 's going to take more money . of course , it 's not all about food ; it 's also about kids getting exercise . and one of the simple things we can do is put recess before lunch . it 's sort of this  duh  thing . you know , if you have kids coming into lunch and all they 're going to do when they get out of lunch is go to have recess ,
 grandmothers ?  the minister could n't believe what was happening .
about losing this segment of our industry . and that 's important for many fronts , and one of them is because of that culture that 's in agriculture . and these migratory beekeepers are the last nomads of america . you know , they pick up their hives ; they move their families once or twice in a year . and if you look at florida , in dade city , florida , that 's where all the pennsylvania beekeepers go . and then 20 miles down the road is groveland , and that 's where all the wisconsin beekeepers go . and if you 're ever in central valley in february , you go to this café at 10 o'clock in the morning , kathy and kate 's .
 dig wells for five years ? you went to the most expensive school and college in india , and you want to dig wells for five years ?  she did n't speak to me for a very long time , because she thought i 'd let my family down .
they communicate with these molecules . of course , i 've also told you that one of the important things they do is to initiate pathogenicity using quorum sensing . we thought , what if we made these bacteria so they ca n't talk or they ca n't hear ? could n't these be new kinds of antibiotics ? of course , you 've just heard and you already know that we 're running out of antibiotics . bacteria are incredibly multi-drug-resistant right now , and that 's because all of the antibiotics that we use kill bacteria . they either pop the bacterial membrane , they make the bacterium so it ca n't replicate its dna . we kill bacteria with traditional antibiotics
♫ about the message of apocalyptical ♫ ♫ [ unclear ] instrumental ♫ ♫ detrimental playing super mario ♫ ♫ [ unclear ] boxes [ unclear ] hip hop ♫ cl : so again , it 's an incredible thing that 's taking place . it 's doing something that , neurologically , is remarkable . whether or not you like the music is irrelevant . creatively speaking , it 's just a phenomenal thing . this is a short video of how we actually do this in a scanner . cl : we 're here with emmanuel . cl : that was recorded in the scanner , by the way . cl : that 's emmanuel in the scanner . he 's just memorized a rhyme for us .
who is in the seatbelt . he hardly moves at all , actually ,
ladies and gentlemen , with a combination of smart people , smart technology and smart investments , polio can now be eradicated anywhere . we have major challenges , you can imagine , to finish this job , but as you 've also seen , it 's doable , it has great secondary benefits , and polio eradication is a great buy . and as long as any child anywhere is paralyzed by this virus , it 's a stark reminder that we are failing , as a society , to reach children with the most basic of services . and for that reason , polio eradication : it 's the ultimate in equity and it 's the ultimate in social justice . the huge social movement
so that instead of spending it the way you usually spend it , maybe if you spent it differently , that might work a little bit better .
and the other thing you might argue is ,  well , car seats have got a lot better over time . and so if we look at recent crashes -- the whole data set is almost 30 years ' worth of data -- you wo n't see it in the recent crashes . the new car seats are far , far better .  but indeed , in recent crashes the lap-and-shoulder seatbelts , actually , are doing even better than the car seats . they say ,  well , that 's impossible , that ca n't be .  and the line of argument , if you ask parents , is ,
but that one -- that one drilled something home in a way that i just was n't prepared for . and , as i stood there , looking at the happy lamb that i had just defiled -- but it looked ok. looking at that poor other little thing that i 'd done it the right way on , and i just was struck by if i 'm wrong about that and if i 'm wrong so often , in a literal way , what other peripatetic misconceptions might i be able to comment upon ? because , look , i 'm not a social anthropologist but i have a friend who is . and i talk to him .
and regardless of the culture , regardless of education or whatever , there are these seven conditions that seem to be there when a person is in flow .
and that is an amazing achievement when you think about us growing mustaches . and for us , we have redefined charity .
other good programmers highly detailed technical questions on things like tiny pixels and chrome extensions . this site receives five and a half thousand questions a day , and 80 percent of these receive accurate answers . now users earn reputation in a whole range of ways , but it 's basically by convincing their peers they know what they 're talking about . now a few months after this site launched , the founders heard about something interesting , and it actually did n't surprise them . what they heard was that users were putting their reputation scores on the top of their résumés , and that recruiters were searching the platform
now in arabic , we can make this definite by adding the definite article  al .  so this is al-shalan -- the unknown thing .
our school systems are very flawed and do not reward you for the things that are important in life or for the survival of civilization ; they reward you for a lot of learning and sopping up stuff . we ca n't go into that today because there is n't time -- it 's a broad subject . one thing for sure , in the future there is an essential feature -- necessary , but not sufficient -- which is doing more with less . we 've got to be doing things with more efficiency using less energy , less material . your great-great grandparents got by on muscle power , and yet we all think there 's this huge power that 's essential
bl : ok , so we 're going to emotionally navigate .
every man deserves the opportunity to grow a little bit of luxury . ladies and gentlemen , and more importantly , mo bros and mo sistas — — for the next 17 minutes , i 'm going to share with you my movember journey , and how , through that journey , we 've redefined charity , we 're redefining the way prostate cancer researchers are working together throughout the world , and i hope , through that process , that i inspire you to create something significant in your life , something significant that will go on and make this world a better place .
so i left them with it . i came back after two months , and the 26 children marched in looking very , very quiet . i said ,  well , did you look at any of the stuff ?  they said ,  yes , we did .   did you understand anything ?   no , nothing .  so i said ,  well , how long did you practice on it before you decided you understood nothing ?  they said ,  we look at it every day .  so i said ,  for two months , you were looking at stuff you did n't understand ?  so a 12 year-old girl raises her hand and says , literally ,  apart from the fact that improper replication of the dna molecule
so they 're the protected blue sky guys who just have to go out and learn and have good ideas , and we 're production and marketing . we have to take all those ideas that we learned when we were children and actually put them to use . another way of thinking about it is instead of thinking of babies and children as being like defective grownups , we should think about them as being a different developmental stage of the same species -- kind of like caterpillars and butterflies -- except that they 're actually the brilliant butterflies who are flitting around the garden and exploring ,
we 'd had a great campaign , and to be honest , we 'd had our fair share of beer that night , but i said ,  you know what , i think we 've got one more bar left in us .  so we piled into a taxi , and this is our taxi driver , and i was sitting in the back seat , and he turned around and said ,  where are you going ?  and i said ,  hang on , that is an amazing mustache .  and he said ,  i 'm doing it for movember .  and i said ,  so am i .  and i said ,  tell me your movember story .  and he goes ,  listen , i know it 's about men 's health ,
you have to have a microscope to see one . they live this sort of boring life where they grow and divide , and they 've always been considered to be these asocial reclusive organisms . and so it seemed to us that they are just too small to have an impact on the environment if they simply act as individuals . and so we wanted to think if there could n't be a different way that bacteria live . the clue to this came from another marine bacterium , and it 's a bacterium called vibrio fischeri . what you 're looking at on this slide is just a person from my lab
now sand is not only on earth , but sand is ubiquitous throughout the universe . in fact , outer space is filled with sand , and that sand comes together to make our planets and the moon . and you can see those in micrometeorites . this is some micrometeorites that the army gave me , and they get these out of the drinking wells in the south pole . and they 're quite amazing-looking , and these are the tiny constituents that make up the world that we live in -- the planets and the moon . so nasa wanted me to take some pictures of moon sand , so they sent me sand from all the different landings
we take this device that i 'm wearing , and we put it on 600 patients with heart failure , randomly assigned , versus 600 patients who do n't have active monitoring , and see whether we can reduce heart failure readmissions , and that 's exciting . and we 'll start that trial , and you 'll hear more about how we 're going to do that , but that 's a type of wireless device trial that could change medicine in the years ahead . why now ? why has this all of a sudden become a reality , an exciting direction in the future of medicine ? what we have is , in a way , a perfect positive storm .
and it makes the sound we think of as sh --  sh .  it 's also the very first letter of the word shalan , which means  something  just like the the english word  something  -- some undefined , unknown thing .
in asia , the first country to be heavily infected was thailand -- they reached one to two percent . then , uganda started to turn back , whereas zimbabwe skyrocketed , and some years later south africa had a terrible rise of hiv frequency . look , india got many infected , but had a low level . and almost the same happens here . see , uganda coming down , zimbabwe coming down , russia went to one percent . in the last two to three years , we have reached a steady state of hiv epidemic in the world . 25 years it took . but , steady state does n't mean that things are getting better ,
now , when that happens , he says the music just flows out . and because all of these people i started interviewing -- this was an interview which is over 30 years old -- so many of the people described this as a spontaneous flow that i called this type of experience the  flow experience .  and it happens in different realms . for instance , a poet describes it in this form . this is by a student of mine who interviewed some of the leading writers and poets in the united states .
i 'd like to do something to this book . and they said yes , and they left me completely alone , which was a gorgeous , wonderful thing . and i took the examples that they gave , and just did 56 paintings , basically . so , this is , i do n't know if you can read this .  well , susan , this is a fine mess you are in .  and when you 're dealing with grammar , which is , you know , incredibly dry , e.b . white wrote such wonderful , whimsical -- and actually , strunk -- and then you come to the rules and , you know , there are lots of grammar things .  do you mind me asking a question ?
in order to embark on this playful exploration that led him to the work that he 's known for today : huge curves of steel that require our time and motion to experience . in sculpture , richard serra is able to do what he could n't do in painting . he makes us the subject of his art . so experience and challenge and limitations are all things we need to embrace for creativity to flourish . there 's a fourth embrace , and it 's the hardest . it 's the embrace of loss , the oldest and most constant of human experiences . in order to create , we have to stand in that space
study after study is coming to the same conclusion .
really advanced civilization is based on advances in energy . the coal revolution fueled the industrial revolution , and , even in the 1900s we 've seen a very rapid decline in the price of electricity , and that 's why we have refrigerators , air-conditioning , we can make modern materials and do so many things . and so , we 're in a wonderful situation with electricity in the rich world . but , as we make it cheaper -- and let 's go for making it twice as cheap -- we need to meet a new constraint , and that constraint has to do with co2 . co2 is warming the planet , and the equation on co2 is actually a very straightforward one .
so many other organizations , a beginning of understanding that we need to work not just on primary prevention of global warming , but on the secondary prevention of the consequences of global warming on the poorest and the most vulnerable . but for me , i have another reason to be an incurable optimist . and you 've heard so many inspiring stories here , and i heard so many last night that i thought i would share a little bit of mine . my background is not exactly conventional medical training . and i lived in a himalayan monastery , and i studied with a very wise teacher , who kicked me out of the monastery one day and told me that it was my destiny --
amy , can you tell us what the game was , and the puzzle that you set the bees ? ao : the puzzle we came up with was an if-then rule . we asked the bees to learn not just to go to a certain color , but to a certain color flower only when it 's in a certain pattern . they were only rewarded if they went to the yellow flowers if the yellow flowers were surrounded by the blue , or if the blue flowers were surrounded by the yellow . now there 's a number of different rules the bees can learn to solve this puzzle . the interesting question is , which ?
and then nod to the person on your left . now , chances are that over the last winter , if you had been a beehive , either you or one of the two people you just nodded at would have died . now , that 's an awful lot of bees . and this is the second year in a row we have lost over 30 percent of the colonies , or we estimate we 've lost 30 percent of the colonies over the winter . now , that 's a lot , a lot of bees , and that 's really important . and most of those losses are because of things we know . we know that there are these varroa mites that have introduced
go through when they ’ re having dressings removed . and so sometimes these analogous experiences , analogous role-play , can also be quite valuable . so when a kid dresses up as a firefighter , you know , he ’ s beginning to try on that identity . he wants to know what it feels like to be a firefighter . we ’ re doing the same thing as designers . we ’ re trying on these experiences . and so the idea of role-play is both as an empathy tool , as well as a tool for prototyping experiences . and you know , we kind of admire people who do this at ideo anyway . not just because they lead to insights about the experience ,
so this was an opportunity . if they were asking me whether i loved them or not , then i must n't love them , which led me to the miracle of thought that i thought they wanted me to get to .  i will ask god for forgiveness and his light will shine through me to them . how fantastic .  this was an opportunity . the theology was perfect , the timing unquestionable , and the answer as honest as a sinner could get .  i must n't love you ,  i said to them .  but i will ask god for forgiveness .   because you do n't love us , norman , clearly you 've chosen your path . 
older people look toward the smiling faces and away from the frowning , angry faces .
it 's her plan . you know , i have to say this in the houses -- it 's her plan to have me fostered for a short period of time while she studies . but the social worker , he had a different agenda . he found the foster parents , and he said to them ,  treat this as an adoption . he 's yours forever . his name is norman .  norman ! norman ! so they took me . i was a message , they said . i was a sign from god , they said . i was norman mark greenwood . now , for the next 11 years , all i know is that this woman ,
trust your instinct . you know it 's an orgy . thank you . we invent . my company invents all kinds of new technology in lots of different areas . and we do that for a couple of reasons . we invent for fun -- invention is a lot of fun to do -- and we also invent for profit . the two are related because the profit actually takes long enough that if it is n't fun , you would n't have the time to do it . so we do this fun and profit-oriented inventing for most of what we do , but we also have a program where we invent for humanity --
and other studies of populations at risk sensitized me to the importance of play , but i did n't really understand what it was . and it was many years in taking play histories of individuals before i really began to recognize that i did n't really have a full understanding of it . and i do n't think any of us has a full understanding of it , by any means . but there are ways of looking at it that i think can give you -- give us all a taxonomy , a way of thinking about it . and this image is , for humans , the beginning point of play .
but make no mistake , longer lives can and , i believe , will improve quality of life at all ages .
and came back three months later . so when i came back there , i found these two kids , eight- and 12-year-olds , who were playing a game on the computer . and as soon as they saw me they said ,  we need a faster processor and a better mouse .  i was real surprised . you know , how on earth did they know all this ? and they said ,  well , we 've picked it up from the cds .  so i said ,  but how did you understand what 's going on over there ?  so they said ,  well , you 've left this machine which talks only in english , so we had to learn english . 
i asked the top scientists on this several times : do we really have to get down to near zero ? ca n't we just cut it in half or a quarter ? and the answer is that until we get near to zero , the temperature will continue to rise . and so that 's a big challenge . it 's very different than saying  we 're a twelve-foot-high truck trying to get under a ten-foot bridge , and we can just sort of squeeze under .  this is something that has to get to zero . now , we put out a lot of carbon dioxide every year , over 26 billion tons . for each american , it 's about 20 tons ;
we have to make kids understand that their food choices make a big difference . we have cooking classes -- we have cooking classrooms in our schools . and why this is so important is that we now have grown a generation , maybe two , of kids where one out of every four meals is eaten in fast food , one of every four meals is eaten in a car and one out of every last four meals is eaten in front of a tv or computer . what are kids learning ? where is the family time ? where is socialization ? where is discussion ? where is learning to talk ?
because they still could not tell me how much frustration they had built up inside of them , not being able to show me what i wanted , and merely having to ask me to trust them that it would come . and i think we felt much closer that day , we cut a lot of strings that did n't need to be there , and we forged the concept for what real team and creativity is all about .
is the little town of gateshead . in gateshead , i took 32 children and i started to fine-tune the method . i made them into groups of four . i said ,  you make your own groups of four . each group of four can use one computer and not four computers .  remember , from the hole in the wall .  you can exchange groups . you can walk across to another group , if you do n't like your group , etc . you can go to another group , peer over their shoulders , see what they 're doing , come back to you own group and claim it as your own work .  and i explained to them
i live cycles of light and darkness . rhythm is half silence . i see now , i never was one and not the other . sickness , health , tender violence . i think now i never was pure . before form i was storm , blind , ign'ant -- still am . human contracted itself blind , malignant . i never was pure . girl spoiled before ripened . language ca n't math me . i experience exponentially . everything is everything . one woman loses 15 , maybe 20 , members of her family . one woman loses six . one woman loses her head . one woman searches rubble . one woman feeds on trash .
so we gave some examples of what you could spend it on .
and this is what happens to that food web when it 's stocked with non-native fish that never lived there before . all the grayed-out species disappear . some are actually on the brink of extinction .
in the blink of an eye , we nearly doubled the length of time that we 're living .
you wake up in the morning and see used condoms like used chewing gum paper . girls as young as 12 being prostituted for less than a dollar a night . it 's disheartening , it 's sad . and then someone asked me , just before my tedtalk , a few days ago ,  so where is the hope ?  several years ago , a few friends of mine decided we needed to bridge the disconnect between our generation and the generation of young women . it 's not enough to say you have two nobel laureates from the republic of liberia when your girls ' kids are totally out there and no hope , or seemingly no hope .
and , at the university of california , san diego , and i proposed to open up a research center for engineering sciences for cultural heritage . and in 2007 , we created cisa3 as a research center for cultural heritage , specifically art , architecture and archaeology . so students started to flow in , and we started to build technologies , because that 's basically what we also needed in order to move forward and go and do fieldwork . we came back in the hall of the 500 in 2011 , and this time , with a great group of students , and my colleague , professor falko kuester , who is now the director at cisa3 , and we
this is an amazing guy , sebastiao rocha , in belo horizonte , in the third largest city in brazil .
and so it 's through the advent of modern supercomputers that now you can simulate and see that , yes , with the right material 's approach , this looks like it would work . and , because you 're burning that 99 percent , you have greatly improved cost profile . you actually burn up the waste , and you can actually use as fuel all the leftover waste from today 's reactors . so , instead of worrying about them , you just take that . it 's a great thing . it breathes this uranium as it goes along , so it 's kind of like a candle . you can see it 's a log there , often referred to as a traveling wave reactor .
so , it 's a solved problem , that particular problem is solved . and there is an example of the kind of thing that you see . that 's on a piece of 8 by 12 paper . that takes about two seconds to make . and so i regard that as done . there is a very important issue here , which is that because it 's a printer , a color printer , it prints colors . that 's what color printers do . i 'll show you in a moment , that 's actually quite useful . now , the next question that you would like to ask is : what would you like to measure ? what would you like to analyze ?
in north america alone . the potential energy savings is very , very significant . so far we 've applied for 414 patent claims . of those , 186 have been granted : 228 are in process . and i 'm pleased to announce that just three weeks ago we received our first international recognition , the 2009 ces innovation award . so , to conclude , intelligent power can , globally , save thousands of lives , prevent tens of thousands of injuries , and eliminate tens of billions of dollars in property damage every single year , while significantly reducing global energy consumption . in the spirit of this year 's ted conference ,
it 's hard to believe , when you look at this , that that kid in back is going to do very well when you get in a crash .
there 's good times ; there 's interesting times ; and there 's some stress times too . you want to do cars , you 've got to go outside . you 've got to do cars in the rain ; you 've got to do cars in the snow . that 's , by the way , is a presentation we made to our board of directors . we haul their butts out in the snow , too . you want to know cars outside ? well , you 've got to stand outside to do this . and because these are artists , they have very artistic temperaments .
♫ oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh o-oh ♫ ♫give you freedom , give you fire♫ ♫ give you reason , take you higher ♫ ♫ see the champions take the field now ♫ ♫ you define us , make us feel proud ♫ ♫ in the streets our heads are lifted ♫ ♫ as we lose our inhibition ♫ ♫ celebration , it 's around us ♫ ♫ every nation , all around us ♫ melinda french gates : it feels pretty good , right ? well , they did n't stop there -- they localized it into 18 different languages . and it went number one on the pop chart
if we show older , middle-aged , younger people images , like the ones you see on the screen , and we later ask them to recall all the images that they can , older people , but not younger people , remember more positive images than negative images .
well , they ’ re still coming in from the back there ; they ’ re still coming in . some of you haven ’ t fired them yet . can you not figure out how to do it , or something ? it ’ s not that hard . most of your kids figure out how to do this in the first 10 seconds , when they pick it up . all right . this is pretty good ; this is pretty good . okay , all right . let ’ s -- i suppose we 'd better ... i 'd better clear these up out of the way ; otherwise , i ’ m going to trip over them . all right . so the rest of you can save them for when i say something particularly boring ,
because in my dreams , it was my brain creating electronic sounds . it was n't the software ,
economic climb . the great news is we already know what works . theory and empirical evidence have already taught us . we do n't need to invent solutions because we have them -- cash flow loans based in income rather than assets , loans that use secure contracts rather than collateral , because women often do n't own land . and kiva.org , the microlender , is actually now experimenting with crowdsourcing small and medium sized loans . and that 's just to start . recently it has become very much in fashion to call women  the emerging market of the emerging market . 
with autism , and we really do n't understand what that cause is . one of the ways that we can understand that genetics is a factor is by looking at something called the concordance rate . in other words , if one sibling has autism , what 's the probability that another sibling in that family will have autism ? and we can look in particular at three types of siblings : identical twins , twins that actually share 100 percent of their genetic information and shared the same intrauterine environment , versus fraternal twins , twins that actually share 50 percent of their genetic information , versus regular siblings , brother-sister , sister-sister , also sharing 50 percent of their genetic information ,
to find people with unique talents . now thousands of programmers today are finding better jobs this way , because stack overflow and the reputation dashboards provide a priceless window into how someone really behaves , and what their peers think of them . but the bigger principle of what 's happening behind stack overflow , i think , is incredibly exciting . people are starting to realize that the reputation they generate in one place has value beyond the environments from which it was built . you know , it 's very interesting . when you talk to super-users , whether that 's superrabbits or super-people on stack overflow , or uberhosts ,
is i teach them to walk around the house and the yard , looking for stuff that needs to get done . come to me and tell me what it is . or i 'll come to them and say ,  here 's what i need done .  and then you know what we do ? we negotiate .
these skills are the skills we should be teaching in the classroom as well as everything else . i 'm not saying do n't get kids to want to be lawyers . but how about getting entrepreneurship to be ranked right up there with the rest of them as well ? because there 's huge opportunities in that . i want to close with a quick little video . it 's a video that was done by one of the companies that i mentor . these guys , grasshopper . it 's about kids . it 's about entrepreneurship . hopefully this inspires you to take what you 've heard from me and do something with it to change the world .
and she thought to herself ,  my child just turned two , and until the child turned two , i had always used this complicated , expensive cure , you know , this treatment .
for over 20 years . they 're right at the center of the whole thing . now it took years to build up the infrastructure for polio eradication -- more than 15 years , much longer than it should have -- but once it was built , the results were striking . within a couple of years , every country that started polio eradication rapidly eradicated all three of their polio viruses , with the exception of four countries that you see here . and in each of those , it was only part of the country . and then , by 1999 , one of the three polio viruses that we were trying to eradicate
there was just a big study done , and so many schools are starting lunch at nine and 10 in the morning . that is not lunchtime . you know , it 's crazy . it 's crazy what we 're doing . and just remember , at very least tacitly , this is what we 're teaching children as what they should be doing . i think if we 're going to fix this , one of the things we have to do is really change how we have oversight over the national school lunch program . instead of the national school lunch program being under the usda , i think it should be under cdc . if we started to think about food
that 's a science paper , basically . so the kids give me the words , right ? i put it into a narrative , which means that this paper is written in kidspeak . it 's not written by me . it 's written by amy and the other students in the class . as a consequence , this science paper begins ,  once upon a time ...  the results section , it says :  training phase , the puzzle ... duh duh duuuuuhhh .  right ? and the methods , it says ,  then we put the bees into the fridge ,  smiley face . right ? this is a science paper . we 're going to try to get it published .
it was a little 15-story korean hotel . so , the second night , we did n't keep the kids ' room , because we went down and slept on the floor with all the kids at the orphanage . and the third night , we came back , we 'd just gone out to dinner , where you saw the pictures , and we got to the front desk and the guy at the front desk said ,  there 's no other free rooms on your floor tonight , so if you want to put the kids five floors below you , there 's a room there .  and gene and i looked at each other and said ,
and address the issue . let 's contrast that for a minute to development . in development , the evaluation comes at the very end of the project . i 've sat in a lot of those meetings , and by then , it is way too late to use the data . i had somebody from an ngo once describe it to me as bowling in the dark . they said ,  you roll the ball , you hear some pins go down . it 's dark , you ca n't see which one goes down until the lights come on , and then you an see your impact .  real-time data turns on the lights . so what 's the second thing that coke 's good at ?
the lows being , our house , any time from six to seven every night . but you realize you resubmit yourself to losing control in a really wonderful way , which we think provides a lot of meaning to our lives and is quite gratifying . rg : and so in effect , we trade average happiness . we trade the sort of security and safety of a certain level of contentment for these transcendent moments . so where does that leave the two of us as a family with our three little boys in the thick of all this ? there 's another factor in our case . we have violated yet another taboo
that we do n't always want the same thing . and what 's more , they felt that they should actually do things to help other people get what they wanted . even more remarkably though , the fact that 15 month-olds did n't do this suggests that these 18 month-olds had learned this deep , profound fact about human nature in the three months from when they were 15 months old . so children both know more and learn more than we ever would have thought . and this is just one of hundreds and hundreds of studies over the last 20 years that 's actually demonstrated it . the question you might ask though is :
the second example from music is from john cage 's modernist composition ,  4'33  .  as many of you know , this is the composition where the pianist sits at a bench , opens up the piano and sits and does nothing for four minutes and 33 seconds -- that period of silence . and people have different views on this . but what i want to point out is you can buy this from itunes . for a dollar 99 , you can listen to that silence , which is different than other forms of silence . now i 've been talking so far about pleasure , but what i want to suggest
we could know , before they even have symptoms , that they 're having a heart attack , to save their life . well , the doctor can program a level of this st elevation voltage that will trigger an emergency alarm , vibration like your cell phone , but right by your clavicle bone . and when it goes beep , beep , beep , you better do something about it , because if you want to live you have to get to some medical treatment . so we have to try these devices out because the fda wo n't just let us use them on people unless we try it out first , and the best model for this happens to be pigs .
and so it 's incredible the amount of resources we 've spent keeping our lawns , which are these useless biosystems . and so we need to rethink this idea . in fact , you know , the white house used to have sheep in front in order to help fund the war effort in world war i , which probably is not a bad idea ; it would n't be a bad idea . i want to say this not because i 'm opposed completely to mowing lawns . i think that there is perhaps some advantage to keeping lawns at a limited scale , and i think we 're encouraged to do that . but i also want to reinforce some of the ideas we 've heard here ,
and i think this gives you a good idea of why parents think car seats are so great . look at the kid in the car seat . does he not look content , ready to go , like he could survive anything ? and then , if you look at the kid in back , it looks like he 's already choking before the crash even happens .
we put the car back at the center of our thoughts , and we put love , i think , truly back into the center of the process . by the way , that team went on to create six different concepts for the next model of what would be the proposal for the next generation after suvs in america . one of those was the idea of a crossover coupes -- you see it downstairs , the x coupe -- they had a lot of fun with that . it was the rendition of our motorcycle ,
called  any questions ,  and the thing you will have noticed about politicians on these kinds of radio programs is that they never , ever say that they do n't know the answer to a question . it does n't matter what it is . if you ask about child tax credits , the future of the penguins in the south antarctic , asked to hold forth on whether or not the developments in chongqing contribute to sustainable development in carbon capture , and we will have an answer for you . we need to stop that , to stop pretending to be omniscient beings . politicians also need to learn , occasionally , to say that
and less helpless . but this was all common sense . so , i 'd like to show you a little glimpse of what common practice looks like at riverside . a little background : when my grade five was learning about child rights , they were made to roll incense sticks , agarbattis , for eight hours to experience what it means to be a child laborer . it transformed them . what you will see is their journey , and then their utter conviction that they could go out and change the world . that 's them rolling . and in two hours , after their backs were broke , they were changed . and once that happened ,
girl 2 : uh , yeah . girl 1 : we have -- in the very beginning of the whole game , always we do this : we each have a piece of paper ; we write down our name , our age -- are we rich , very rich , not rich , poor , medium , wealthy , boyfriends , dogs , pets -- what else -- sisters , brothers , and all those .
scream , be chaotic , and develop through that a lot of emotional regulation and a lot of the other social byproducts -- cognitive , emotional and physical -- that come as a part of rough and tumble play . spectator play , ritual play -- we 're involved in some of that . those of you who are from boston know that this was the moment -- rare -- where the red sox won the world series . but take a look at the face and the body language of everybody in this fuzzy picture , and you can get a sense that they 're all at play . imaginative play .
and third , the engagement in developing countries was with a narrow set of government elites with little interaction with the citizens , who are the ultimate beneficiaries of development assistance .
for this to remain they way it is . and in a way , it is that will that makes projects like this one -- allows the process from not destroying the original idea . and i think this is something really important . so , now you get these pictures -- you get up in the morning , and you see the kids in nigeria and you see them in uruguay with their computers , and in mongolia . and we went away from obviously the beige . i mean it 's colorful , it 's fun . in fact , you can see each logo is a little bit different . it 's because we were able
and i 'm going to see some really great product . so we went to tiburon , after three months , and the team had gotten together the week before , many days ahead of time . the engineers flew over , and designers got together with them , and they put their presentation together . well , it turns out that the engineers had n't done anything .
do n't listen to the world bank , listen to the people on the ground . they have all the solutions in the world . i 'll end with a quotation by mahatma gandhi .  first they ignore you , then they laugh at you , then they fight you , and then you win . 
you do n't think ; it goes automatically ,
seventy percent of all antibiotics consumed in america is consumed in animal husbandry . we are feeding our kids antibiotics in beef and other animal protein every day . seventy percent -- it 's unbelievable . and the result of it is , we have diseases . we have things like e. coli that we ca n't fix , that we ca n't make kids better when they get sick . and , you know , certainly antibiotics have been over-prescribed , but it 's an issue in the food supply . one of my favorite facts is that u.s. agriculture uses 1.2 billion pounds of pesticides every year .
they can get away with . it 's in their nature ; it 's in their dna ; it 's what they do -- even the good , well-intentioned companies . on the one hand , putting childcare facilities in the workplace is wonderful and enlightened . on the other hand , it 's a nightmare -- it just means you spend more time at the bloody office . we have to be responsible for setting and enforcing the boundaries that we want in our life . the third observation is we have to be careful with the time frame that we choose upon which to judge our balance . before i went back to work
themselves to new situations using previously learned rules and conditions . so what if bees can think like us ? well , it 'd be amazing , since we 're talking about an insect with only one million brain cells . but it actually makes a lot of sense they should , because bees , like us , can recognize a good flower regardless of the time of day , the light , the weather , or from any angle they approach it from . bl : so the next step was to design an experiment , which is a game . so the kids went off and they designed this experiment , and so -- well , game -- and so ,
with intellectual disabilities . i saw their amazing show in new york at the staten island ferry terminal at rush hour . we , the audience , were given headsets and seated on one side of the terminal . the actors were right there in front of us , right there among the commuters , and we could hear them , but we might not have otherwise seen them . so back to back takes site-specific theater and uses it to gently remind us about who and what we choose to edit out of our daily lives . so , the dialogue with the local and the global , the audience as participant and player and protagonist ,
you see that these people define success as something that helps others and at the same time makes you feel happy as you are working at it .
cleared for return to play , applies to them ? the definition of concussion does n't actually require a loss of consciousness . it requires only a change in consciousness , and that can be any one of a number of symptoms , including feeling foggy , feeling dizzy , hearing a ringing in your ear , being more impulsive or hostile than usual . so given all of that and given how darn neurotic i am , because i know our brains are resilient . they 're designed to recover from an injury . if , god forbid , any of us left here tonight and sustained a concussion , most of us would go on to fully recover
and there 's this loud thumping on the door after about 45 minutes in all this , and people were shouting in korean . and i remember , natasha did n't want us opening the door -- sorry , i was trying not to open the door , because we 'd spent so much time barricading the room . i did n't know who it was , i did n't know what they wanted , and natasha could tell they were firemen trying to get us out . i remember a sort of a tussle at the door , trying to get the door open . in any case , 12 hours later , i mean , they put us in the lobby .
they have incredible insulation , so let 's put some incredible insulation here . the other idea is kind of interesting , which is , you ca n't reach inside anymore . because if you open it up and reach inside , you 'd let the heat in , the game would be over . so the inside of this thing actually looks like a coke machine . it vends out little individual vials . so a simple idea , which we hope is going to change the way vaccines are distributed in africa and around the world . we 'll move on to malaria . malaria is one of the great public health problems . esther duflo talked a little bit about this .
and secondly , it 's a fundamental business proposition . i 'll be honest with you : we 're into it because of business growth opportunities . we ca n't grow our business unless we solve these problems . the growth of the auto industry will be capped by sustainability issues if we do n't solve the problems . and there 's a simple principle of strategy that says : do unto yourself before others do unto you . if we can see this possible future , others can too . and we want to be the first one to create it , chris . what i 'd like you to do is , just really quickly , is just , sort of , nod to the person on your right ,
but you get the general idea of the product . i wanted to show you the ways , innocuous as they seem , in which we 're incorporating what we 've learned about girls -- their desires to experience greater emotional flexibility , and to play around with the social complexity of their lives . i want to make the point that what we 're giving girls , i think , through this effort , is a kind of validation , a sense of being seen . and a sense of the choices that are available in their lives . we love them . we see them . we 're not trying to tell them who they ought to be .
even in areas affected by conflict . one reporter who was watching our program in somalia about five years ago -- a place which has eradicated polio , not once , but twice , because they got reinfected . he was sitting outside of the road , watching one of these polio campaigns unfold , and a few months later he wrote :  this is foreign aid at its most heroic .  and these heroes , they come from every walk of life , all sorts of backgrounds . but one of the most extraordinary is rotary international . this is a group whose million-strong army of volunteers have been working to eradicate polio
and so it 's funny to me that these interesting , odd bedfellows have one thing in common : they do n't listen to little girls .
and my mom came into the room and she said ,  where are you going to get the coat hangers to sell to the dry cleaners ?  and i said ,  let 's go and look in the basement .  and we went down to the basement . and i opened up this cupboard . and there was about a thousand coat hangers that i 'd collected . because , when i told her i was going out to play with the kids , i was going door to door in the neighborhood to collect coat hangers to put in the basement to sell . because i saw her a few weeks before that --
the wax in the beehive . and they 're also collecting nectar , and that 's what makes the honey that we eat . here 's a close-up picture , or this is actually a regular picture of a water hyacinth , and if you had really , really good vision , with your naked eye , you 'd see it about that well . there 's the stamen and the pistil . but look what the stamen and the pistil look like in a microscope . that 's the stamen . so that 's thousands of little grains of pollen there , and there 's the pistil there , and these are the little things called trichomes . and that 's what makes the flower give
and you can probably think of many , many more in your own everyday lives . and so our modern world now is confronting us with a dilemma . and it 's the dilemma that this chinese man faces , who 's language is spoken by more people in the world than any other single language , and yet he is sitting at his blackboard , converting chinese phrases into english language phrases . and what this does is it raises the possibility to us that in a world in which we want to promote cooperation and exchange , and in a world that might be dependent more than ever before
so babies and young children are very bad at narrowing down to just one thing . but they 're very good at taking in lots of information from lots of different sources at once . and if you actually look in their brains , you see that they 're flooded with these neurotransmitters that are really good at inducing learning and plasticity , and the inhibitory parts have n't come on yet . so when we say that babies and young children are bad at paying attention , what we really mean is that they 're bad at not paying attention . so they 're bad at getting rid of all the interesting things that could tell them something
because this is the army . then you load the aircraft , and then you stand up and you get on , and you kind of lumber to the aircraft like this , in a line of people , and you sit down on canvas seats on either side of the aircraft . and you wait a little bit longer , because this is the air force teaching the army how to wait . then you take off . and it 's painful enough now -- and i think it 's designed this way -- it 's painful enough so you want to jump . you did n't really want to jump , but you want out .
twenty-four hours later , my social worker , this strange man who used to visit me every couple of months , he 's waiting for me in the car as i say goodbye to my parents . i did n't say goodbye to anybody , not my mother , my father , my sisters , my brothers , my aunts , my uncles , my cousins , my grandparents , nobody . on the way to the children 's home , i started to ask myself ,  what 's happened to me ?  it 's not that i 'd had the rug pulled from beneath me as much as the entire floor had been taken away . when i got to the — for the next four , five years ,
i think the beautiful malin [ akerman ] put it perfectly .
development institutions today are also opening for public scrutiny the projects they finance .
i was in a bit of a spot . and i said ,  okay , i 'll go to the old man in village and say , 'what should i grow in this spot ? '  he looked quietly at me and said ,  you build this , you build this , you put this , and it 'll work .  this is what it looks like today .
and it opens and closes the shutter so the amount of light coming out of the bottom -- which is made by the bacterium -- exactly matches how much light hits the squid 's back , so the squid does n't make a shadow . it actually uses the light from the bacteria to counter-illuminate itself in an anti-predation device so predators ca n't see its shadow , calculate its trajectory , and eat it . this is like the stealth bomber of the ocean . but then if you think about it , the squid has this terrible problem because it 's got this dying , thick culture of bacteria and it ca n't sustain that .
an average rating over 4.99 out of 5. there are over 20 pages of reviews of his work describing him as super-friendly and fast , and he 's reached level 25 , the highest level , making him a superrabbit . now — -- i love that word , superrabbit . and interestingly , what chris has noted is that as his reputation has gone up , so has his chances of winning a bid and how much he can charge . in other words , for superrabbits , reputation has a real world value . now , i know what you might be thinking . well , this is n't anything new . just think of power sellers
okay , so you ask what a sustainable restaurant looks like . basically a restaurant just like any other . this is the restaurant , acorn house . front and back . so let me run you through a few ideas . floor : sustainable , recyclable . chairs : recycled and recyclable . tables : forestry commission . this is norwegian forestry commission wood . this bench , although it was uncomfortable for my mom -- she did n't like sitting on it , so she went and bought these cushions for me from a local jumble sale -- reusing , a job that was pretty good . i hate waste , especially walls . if they 're not working , put a shelf on it , which i did ,
we needed beeswax for a project we were working on ; he was so capable , he was able to render the nicest block of beeswax i have ever seen from cow dung , tin cans and his veil , which he used as a screening , right in this meadow . and so that ingenuity is inspiring . we also have dave hackenberg , who is the poster child of ccd . he 's the one who first identified this condition and raised the alarm bells . and he has a history of these trucks , and he 's moved these bees up and down the coast . and a lot of people talk about trucks and moving bees ,
we need more of that completely new and radical thinking . you can go to places an hour away , less , from this room , just down the road , which need that , which need radicalism of a kind that we have n't imagined . and finally , you need transformational innovation that could imagine getting learning to people in completely new and different ways .
this helps me understand why a lot of people have trouble seeing themselves as leaders because it sends all the wrong messages about what leadership is about . a heroic effort is a collective effort , number one . number two , it 's imperfect ; it 's not very glamorous , and it does n't suddenly start and suddenly end . it 's an ongoing process your whole life . but most importantly , it 's voluntary .
thank you . the problem that i want to talk with you about is really the problem of : how does one supply healthcare in a world in which cost is everything ? how do you do that ? and the basic paradigm we want to suggest to you , i want to suggest to you , is one in which you say that in order to treat disease you have to first know what you 're treating -- that 's diagnostics -- and then you have to do something . so , the program that we 're involved in is something which we call diagnostics for all , or zero-cost diagnostics .
when i tell them that the one on the left is hitler and the one on the right is martin luther king . so i got to a point when i was able to perceive 360 colors , just like human vision . i was able to differentiate all the degrees of the color wheel . but then , i just thought that this human vision was n't good enough . there 's many , many more colors around us that we can not perceive , but that electronic eyes can perceive . so i decided to continue extending my color senses , and i added infrared and i added ultraviolet to the color-to-sound scale , so now i can hear colors
vodka , midsummer 's eve -- new partner for the fall . vodka -- and it goes on like this , you know ? and you collect a big number of exes . and we have a terrible chlamydia epidemic -- terrible chlamydia epidemic which sticks around for many years . hiv has a peak three to six weeks after infection and therefore , having more than one partner in the same month is much more dangerous for hiv than others . probably , it 's a combination of this . and what makes me so happy is that we are moving now towards fact when we look at this . you can get this chart , free .
we have identified over 400 species of bees in pennsylvania . thirty-two species have not been identified or found in the state since 1950. now , that could be because we have n't been sampling right , but it does , i think , suggest that something 's wrong with the pollinator force . and these bees are fascinating . we have bumblebees on the top . and bumblebees are what we call eusocial : they 're not truly social , because only the queen is , over winter . we also have the sweat bees , and these are little gems flying around . they 're like tiny little flies and they fly around . and then you have another type of bee , which we call kleptoparasites ,
and even animals , like these donkeys , love our buildings .
clearly a complex problem , but is it complicated ? well , when i saw this in the front page of the times , i thought ,  great . finally something i can relate to . i can sink my teeth into this . 
the very hard-to-serve places , their neighbors , and they know what motivates them to make change . i think a great example of this is ethiopia 's new health extension program . the government noticed in ethiopia that many of the people were so far away from a health clinic , they were over a day 's travel away from a health clinic . so if you 're in an emergency situation -- or if you 're a mom about to deliver a baby -- forget it , to get to the health care center . they decided that was n't good enough , so they went to india and studied the indian state of kerala
as long as we live a life of curiosity and passion , there is a bit of leonardo in all of us . thank you . i want to share with you over the next 18 minutes a pretty incredible idea . actually , it 's a really big idea . but to get us started , i want to ask if everyone could just close your eyes for two seconds and try and think of a technology or a bit of science that you think has changed the world . now i bet , in this audience , you 're thinking of some really incredible technology , some stuff that i have n't even heard of ,
 never import other people 's limitations .  and when i complained to my grandmother , a world war ii veteran who worked in film for 50 years and who supported me from the age of 13 , that i was terrified that if i turned down a plum assignment at abc for a fellowship overseas , i would never ever , ever find another job , she said ,  kiddo , i 'm going to tell you two things . first of all , no one turns down a fulbright , and secondly , mcdonald 's is always hiring . 
and she 's struggling to produce some of the most basic words , and you can see her growing more and more devastated , until she ultimately breaks down into sobbing tears , and she starts sobbing wordlessly into the arms of her therapist . and after a few moments , her therapist tries a new tack , and they start singing together , and gabby starts to sing through her tears , and you can hear her clearly able to enunciate the words to a song that describe the way she feels , and she sings , in one descending scale , she sings ,  let it shine , let it shine , let it shine . 
so that 's obvious , right . it 's like a recession . so , there 's a recession . there 's still 13 trillion dollars circulating in the u.s. economy . go get some of that . and i learned that at a young age . i also learned , do n't reveal your source , because i got beat up after about four weeks of doing this because one of the rich kids found out where i was buying my comics from , and he did n't like the fact that he was paying a lot more . i was forced to get a paper route at 10 years old . i did n't really want a paper route ,
sometimes i 'm concerned that we hear about it so much that we 've come to accept longer lives with a kind of a complacency , even ease .
each bacteria uses a particular molecule that 's its language that allows it to count its own siblings . once we got that far we thought we were starting to understand that bacteria have these social behaviors . but what we were really thinking about is that most of the time bacteria do n't live by themselves , they live in incredible mixtures , with hundreds or thousands of other species of bacteria . and that 's depicted on this slide . this is your skin . so this is just a picture -- a micrograph of your skin . anywhere on your body , it looks pretty much like this , and what i hope you can see is that there 's all kinds of bacteria there .
the friendly support , the quiet confidence , congenial hospitality shown by our hawaiian and military hosts -- this is starting -- made the experience enjoyable and unforgettable . pm : we have real-time ir scans going out through the internet while the plane is flying . and it 's exploring without polluting the stratosphere . that 's its goal : the stratosphere , the blanket that really controls the radiation of the earth and permits life on earth to be the success that it is -- probing that is very important . and also we consider it as a sort of poor man 's stationary satellite , because it can stay right overhead for months at a time ,
we 're about two and a half , three months into it , and it 's really been fun . there is our star pupil , this labrador , who taught a lot of us what a state of play is , and an extremely aged and decrepit professor in charge there . and brendan boyle , rich crandall -- and on the far right is , i think , a person who will be in cahoots with george smoot for a nobel prize -- stuart thompson , in neuroscience . so we 've had brendan , who 's from ideo , and the rest of us sitting aside and watching these students as they put play principles into practice in the classroom .
mortality : 300,000 people dying each year . about half of them , 600,000 , have permanent damage to their heart that will cause them to have very bad problems later on . thus 900,000 people either have died or have significant damage to their heart muscle . symptoms are often denied by the patient , particularly us men , because we are very brave . we are very brave , and we do n't want to admit that i 'm having a hell of a chest pain . then , approximately 25 percent of all patients never have any symptoms . what are we going to do about them ? how can we save their lives ?
that is where we want you to try crazy ideas . whatever idea you have , come and try it . it does n't matter if you fail . battered , bruised , you start again . it 's the only college where the teacher is the learner and the learner is the teacher . and it 's the only college where we do n't give a certificate . you are certified by the community you serve . you do n't need a paper to hang on the wall to show that you are an engineer . so when i said that , they said ,  well show us what is possible . what are you doing ? this is all mumbo-jumbo if you ca n't show it on the ground . 
when fetuses are led to expect a world of scarcity and are born instead into a world of plenty . this is what happened to the children of the dutch  hunger winter .  and their higher rates of obesity , diabetes and heart disease are the result . bodies that were built to hang onto every calorie found themselves swimming in the superfluous calories of the post-war western diet . the world they had learned about while in utero was not the same as the world into which they were born . at 8:46 a.m. on september 11th , 2001 ,
if you merge yourself with the music , and so forth .
and that is what nick did , up to a point . this is a serval cat . he 's actually taking his own picture , shot with what 's called a camera trap . there 's an infrared beam that 's going across , and he has stepped into the beam and taken his photograph . these are baboons at a watering hole . nick -- the camera , again , an automatic camera took thousands of pictures of this . and nick ended up with a lot of pictures of the rear ends of baboons . a lion having a late night snack -- notice he 's got a broken tooth . and a crocodile walks up a riverbank toward its den .
it was n't as successful as we thought it would be .
if you want to attract people like juanderson who could , for instance , buy guns , wear jewelry , ride motorbikes and get girls through the drugs trade , and you want to attract him into education , having a compulsory curriculum does n't really make sense . that is n't really going to attract him . you need to pull him . and so education needs to work by pull , not push . and so the idea of a curriculum is completely irrelevant in a setting like this . you need to start education from things that make a difference to them in their settings . what does that ? well , the key is motivation , and there are two aspects to it .
bihar represents the challenge of development : abject poverty surrounded by corruption .
it 's a little bit like designing a fire hydrant , and it has to be easily serviceable : you have to know where it is and what it does . and we also designed the condoms themselves . and i was just in new york at the launch , and i went to see all these places where they 're installed : this is at a puerto rican little mom-and-pop store ; at a bar in christopher street ; at a pool hall . i mean , they 're being installed in homeless clinics -- everywhere . of course , clubs and discos , too . and here 's the public service announcement for this project .
that also had a system like this , and they adapted it for ethiopia . and in 2003 , the government of ethiopia started this new system in their own country . they trained 35,000 health extension workers to deliver care directly to the people . in just five years , their ratio went from one worker for every 30,000 people to one worker for every 2,500 people . now , think about how this can change people 's lives . health extension workers can help with so many things , whether it 's family planning , prenatal care , immunizations for the children , or advising the woman to get to the facility on time
the bbc beeps , they sound turquoise , and listening to mozart became a yellow experience , so i started to paint music and paint people 's voices , because people 's voices have frequencies that i relate to color . and here 's some music translated into color . for example , mozart ,  queen of the night ,  looks like this . very yellow and very colorful , because there 's many different frequencies . and this is a completely different song . it 's justin bieber 's  baby .  it is very pink and very yellow . so , also voices , i can transform speeches into color ,
in fact , in the last few years , there 's been an explosion in research on happiness . for example , we 've learned a lot about its demographics , how things like income and education , gender and marriage relate to it . but one of the puzzles this has revealed is that factors like these do n't seem to have a particularly strong effect . yes , it 's better to make more money rather than less , or to graduate from college instead of dropping out , but the differences in happiness tend to be small . which leaves the question , what are the big causes of happiness ?
i 'm an ecologist , and i study complexity . i love complexity .
sb : this girl was working as a maid before she came to school . and today she wants to be a neurologist . our children are doing brilliantly in sports . they are really excelling . there is an inter-school athletic competition that is held every year in bangalore , where 5,000 children participate from 140 best schools in the city . we 've got the best school award for three years successively . and our children are coming back home with bags full of medals , with lots of admirers and friends . last year there were a couple of kids from elite schools that came to ask for admissions in our school .
since he was a great admirer of leonardo da vinci . and so we built some very sophisticated radio antennas just for probing both walls and searching for an air gap . and we did find many on the right panel of the east wall , an air gap , and that 's where we believe  the battle of anghiari ,  or at least the part that we know has been painted , which is called  the fight for the standard ,  should be located . well , from there , unfortunately , in 2004 , the project came to a halt . many political reasons . so i decided to go back to my alma mater ,
won the charlie chaplin look-alike contest in 1931. that 's actually hy . and i look at a beautiful bowl of fruit , and i look at a dress that i sewed for friends of mine . and it says ,  ich habe genug ,  which is a bach cantata , which i once thought meant  i 've had it , i ca n't take it anymore , give me a break ,  but i was wrong . it means  i have enough .  and that is utterly true . i happen to be alive , end of discussion . thank you .
through cultural changes , our ancestors largely eliminated early death so that people can now live out their full lives .
vaccinate over 500 million children every single year , multiple times at the peak of our operation . now giving the polio vaccine is simple . it 's just two drops , like that . but reaching 500 million people is much , much tougher . and these vaccinators , these volunteers , they have got to dive headlong into some of the toughest , densest urban slums in the world . they 've got to trek under sweltering suns to some of the most remote , difficult to reach places in the world . and they also have to dodge bullets , because we have got to operate during shaky cease-fires and truces to try and vaccinate children ,
by the fetus . babies seem to remember and prefer these tastes once they 're out in the world . in one experiment , a group of pregnant women was asked to drink a lot of carrot juice during their third trimester of pregnancy , while another group of pregnant women drank only water . six months later , the women 's infants were offered cereal mixed with carrot juice , and their facial expressions were observed while they ate it . the offspring of the carrot juice drinking women ate more carrot-flavored cereal , and from the looks of it , they seemed to enjoy it more . a sort of french version of this experiment
so let 's take a deeper look . let 's look at neurons . so as i mentioned , there are 86 billion neurons . there are also these smaller cells as you 'll see . these are support cells -- astrocytes glia . and the nerves themselves are the ones who are receiving input . they 're storing it , they 're processing it . each neuron is connected via synapses to up to 10,000 other neurons in your brain . and each neuron itself is largely unique . the unique character of both individual neurons and neurons within a collection of the brain are driven by fundamental properties of their underlying biochemistry . these are proteins .
because i come from a grayscale world .
and that city can go on and inspire a state , and that state can go on and inspire a nation , and beyond that , you can create a global movement that is changing the face of men 's health .
so in iraq in 2003 the decision was made , let 's not have elections for two years . let 's invest in voter education . let 's invest in democratization . the result was that i found stuck outside my office a huge crowd of people , this is actually a photograph taken in libya but i saw the same scene in iraq of people standing outside screaming for the elections , and when i went out and said ,  what is wrong with the interim provincial council ? what is wrong with the people that we have chosen ? there is a sunni sheikh , there 's a shiite sheikh , there 's the seven -- leaders of the seven major tribes ,
but then along came a lowly economist , who had children himself , and he used the expensive and complicated treatment .
now , incredible as this sounds , i once met a papuan man , and i asked him if this could possibly be true . and he said to me ,  oh no . they 're far closer together than that .  and it 's true ; there are places on that island where you can encounter a new language in under a mile . and this is also true of some remote oceanic islands . and so it seems that we use our language , not just to cooperate , but to draw rings around our cooperative groups and to establish identities , and perhaps to protect our knowledge and wisdom and skills from eavesdropping from outside .
this is the letter sheen ,
and yet , i 've taken that idea and made it my own . so instead of going to coffee meetings or fluorescent-lit conference room meetings , i ask people to go on a walking meeting , to the tune of 20 to 30 miles a week .
there are three reasons that i believe that boys are out of sync with the culture of schools today . the first is zero tolerance . a kindergarten teacher i know , her son donated all of his toys to her , and when he did , she had to go through and pull out all the little plastic guns . you ca n't have plastic knives and swords and axes and all that kind of thing in a kindergarten classroom . what is it that we 're afraid that this young man is going to do with this gun ? i mean , really . but here he stands as testament to the fact that you ca n't roughhouse on the playground today .
if we invest in science and technology and find solutions for the real problems that older people face and we capitalize on the very real strengths of older people , then added years of life can dramatically improve quality of life at all ages .
but it had a different origin , it was a different artwork . it was n't just him who was in for a shock . once van meegeren was on trial , he could n't stop talking . and he boasted about all the great masterpieces that he himself had painted that were attributed to other artists . in particular ,  the supper at emmaus  which was viewed as vermeer 's finest masterpiece , his best work --
humans have long held a fascination for the human brain . we chart it , we 've described it , we 've drawn it , we 've mapped it . now just like the physical maps of our world that have been highly influenced by technology -- think google maps , think gps -- the same thing is happening for brain mapping through transformation . so let 's take a look at the brain . most people , when they first look at a fresh human brain , they say ,  it does n't look what you 're typically looking at when someone shows you a brain .  typically , what you 're looking at is a fixed brain . it 's gray .