but before that , what actually happened was , i used to think about it as , you could take care of your health , or you could take care of obligations , and one always came at the cost of the other .
so you start to hear these abusive voices , but you do n't hear one abusive voice , you hear about a thousand -- 100,000 abusive voices , like if the devil had tourette 's , that 's what it would sound like . but we all know in here , you know , there is no devil , there are no voices in your head . you know that when you have those abusive voices , all those little neurons get together and in that little gap you get a real toxic  i want to kill myself  kind of chemical , and if you have that over and over again on a loop tape ,
came back just since we knew already where to look for to find out if there was still something left . well , we were confined though , limited , i should rather say , for several reasons that it 's not worth explaining , to endoscopy only , of the many other options we had , and with a 4mm camera attached to it , we were successful in documenting and taking some fragments of what it turns out to be a reddish color , black color , and there is some beige fragments that later on we ran a much more sophisticated exams , xrf , x-ray diffraction , and the results are very positive
now often , a result of capgras syndrome is tragic . people have murdered those that they loved , believing that they were murdering an imposter . but there 's at least one case where capgras syndrome had a happy ending . this was recorded in 1931 .  research described a woman with capgras syndrome who complained about her poorly endowed and sexually inadequate lover .  but that was before she got capgras syndrome . after she got it ,  she was happy to report that she has discovered that he possessed a double who was rich , virile , handsome and aristocratic .  of course , it was the same man ,
and then here 's a shocker : even america 's most sexiest man alive , the sexiest man alive gets romantically played these days in a movie . and then on the female side , you have the opposite , in which you have these crazy superhero women . you 've got lady gaga . you 've got our new james bond , who 's angelina jolie . and it 's not just for the young , right ? even helen mirren can hold a gun these days . and so it feels like we have to move from this place where we 've got these uber-exaggerated images into something that feels a little more normal . so for a long time in the economic sphere ,
and in particular , the people who made this expensive solution were very upset because they thought ,  how can we hope to compete with something that 's essentially free ? we would lose all of our market .  and people were very angry , and they called him horrible names .
well , since i 'm a scientist , i 'd like to try to resolve this debate with some data , and in particular i 'd like to present some data to you from three questions that i ask with track your happiness . remember , this is from sort of moment-to-moment experience in people 's real lives . there are three questions . the first one is a happiness question : how do you feel , on a scale ranging from very bad to very good ? second , an activity question : what are you doing , on a list of 22 different activities
there 's two traits that i want you to also look out for that we do n't kind of get out of their system . do n't medicate kids for attention deficit disorder unless it is really , really freaking bad . the same with the whole things on mania and stress and depression , unless it is so clinically brutal , man . bipolar disorder is nicknamed the ceo disease . when steve jurvetson and jim clark and jim barksdale have all got it , and they built netscape -- imagine if they were given ritalin . we would n't have have that stuff , right ? al gore really would have had to invented the internet .
the only kitchen tools my staff had was a box cutter . the only working piece of equipment in my kitchen was a can crusher , because if it did n't come in a can , it came frozen in a box . the usda allows this . the usda allows all of this stuff . in case you ca n't tell , that 's , like , pink danish and some kind of cupcakes . chicken nuggets , tater tots , chocolate milk with high fructose , canned fruit cocktail -- a reimbursable meal . that 's what the government says is okay to feed our kids . it ai n't okay . you know what ? it is not okay . and we , all of us ,
this is our thousand-core supercomputer . we 're kind of software guys , and so nearly any problem that you pose , we like to try to solve with some software . one of the problems that you have if you 're trying to eradicate malaria or reduce it is you do n't know what 's the most effective thing to do . okay , we heard about bed nets earlier . you spend a certain amount per bed net . or you could spray . you can give drug administration . there 's all these different interventions but they have different kinds of effectiveness . how can you tell ? so we 've created , using our supercomputer , the world 's best computer model of malaria ,
it 's a really lucky demographic to work with . i keep getting older and older and they 're always the same age , and it 's just a crazy delightful job . i want to thank you for inviting me here . it 's a big treat for me to get to come to this conference . thanks . so it was about four years ago , five years ago , i was sitting on a stage in philadelphia , i think it was , with a bag similar to this . and i was pulling a molecule out of this bag . and i was saying , you do n't know this molecule really well ,
who at that point was opening a new factory on the war 's former front lines in sarajevo . she had started her business squatting in an abandoned garage , sewing sheets and pillow cases she would take to markets all around the city so that she could support the 12 or 13 family members who were counting on her for survival . by the time we met , she had 20 employees , most of them women , who were sending their boys and their girls to school . and she was just the start . i met women running essential oils businesses , wineries and even the country 's largest advertising agency .
that the human eye can not perceive .
we say ,  name a time you spent money on somebody else . 
you do n't get any money from that . you actually lose money because it does n't motivate them to perform any better . but when you give them 15 euro to spend on their teammates , they do so much better on their teams that you actually get a huge win on investing this kind of money . and i realize that you 're probably thinking to yourselves , this is all fine , but there 's a context that 's incredibly important for public policy and i ca n't imagine it would work there .
yet not sharing the same intrauterine environment . and when you look at those concordance ratios , one of the striking things that you will see is that in identical twins , that concordance rate is 77 percent . remarkably , though , it 's not 100 percent . it is not that genes account for all of the risk for autism , but yet they account for a lot of that risk , because when you look at fraternal twins , that concordance rate is only 31 percent . on the other hand , there is a difference between those fraternal twins and the siblings , suggesting that there are common exposures for those fraternal twins
this is even worse now :  then i 'd have a picture taken and dozens of glossies made . anyone begging for money or trying to extort from me would receive a copy of the picture and nothing else . 
and i 'm trying to play possum . this thing is very , very impressive . ok. so , that 's the first night . and this one is now 67 , and that 's not a good score . and this tells you , of course , how much you had in rem sleep , in deep sleep , and all this sort of thing . this was really fascinating because this gave that quantitation about all the different phases of sleep . so , it also then tells you how you do compared to your age group . it 's like a managed competition of sleep . and really interesting stuff . look at this thing and say ,  well , i did n't think i was a very good sleeper ,
and being able to do this on a very large scale , screen infants , screen children for autism , through something very robust , very reliable , is going to be very helpful to us in terms of being able to intervene at an early stage when we can have the greatest impact . how are we going to intervene ? it 's probably going to be a combination of factors . in part , in some individuals , we 're going to try and use medications . and so in fact , identifying the genes for autism is important for us to identify drug targets , to identify things that we might be able to impact
and it was because of scenes like this . in this scene , people are living in an iron lung . these are people who were perfectly healthy two or three days before , and then two days later , they can no longer breathe , and this polio virus has paralyzed not only their arms and their legs , but also their breathing muscles . and they were going to spend the rest of their lives , usually , in this iron lung to breathe for them . this disease was terrifying . there was no cure , and there was no vaccine . the disease was so terrifying that the president of the united states
so in 1965 , i went to what was called the worst bihar famine in india , and i saw starvation , death , people dying of hunger , for the first time . it changed my life . i came back home , told my mother ,  i 'd like to live and work in a village .  mother went into a coma .  what is this ? the whole world is laid out for you , the best jobs are laid out for you , and you want to go and work in a village ? i mean , is there something wrong with you ?  i said ,  no , i 've got the best eduction . it made me think .
if i wanted to make a difference , i already had the perfect instrument to do it , that music was the bridge that connected my world and his . there 's a beautiful quote by the romantic german composer robert schumann , who said ,  to send light into the darkness of men 's hearts , such is the duty of the artist .  and this is a particularly poignant quote because schumann himself suffered from schizophrenia and died in asylum . and inspired by what i learned from nathaniel , i started an organization on skid row of musicians called street symphony , bringing the light of music into the very darkest places , performing
experts say the research has actually been around for more than a decade , and more long-term studies need to be done . christina now swears by it . cs : it 's been the most wonderful thing for my migraine . ss : researchers are hoping to present their studies to the fda this summer . robert fischell : and that is the invention to treat migraines . you see , the problem is , 30 million americans have migraine headaches , and we need a means to treat it , and i think that we now have it . and this is the first device that we did , and i 'm going to talk about my second wish ,
and i always felt that the grandmother had kind of demanded , and insisted , that the villagers treat hyun-sook with the same respect they treated her . hyun-sook stayed at father keene 's , and her uncle agreed to let her stay there until the adoption went through . he actually agreed to the adoption . and i went off on assignment and came back a week later , and father keene said ,  i 've got to talk to you about hyun-sook .  i kind of said ,  oh god , now what ?  and he takes me into this room , and he closes the door , and he says ,  i have 75 children here in the orphanage , and it 's total bedlam . 
do we find a flourishing civil society , a vigorous rule of law and good security ? no . what we find in afghanistan is a judiciary that is weak and corrupt , a very limited civil society which is largely ineffective , a media which is beginning to get onto its feet but a government that 's deeply unpopular , perceived as being deeply corrupt , and security that is shocking , security that 's terrible . in pakistan , in lots of sub-saharan africa , again you can see democracy and elections are compatible with corrupt governments , with states that are unstable and dangerous . and when i have conversations with people , i remember
with a pathogenic bacterium -- a multi-drug-resistant pathogenic bacterium -- in the same time we give our anti-quorum sensing molecule , in fact , the animal lives . we think that this is the next generation of antibiotics and it 's going to get us around , at least initially , this big problem of resistance . what i hope you think , is that bacteria can talk to each other , they use chemicals as their words , they have an incredibly complicated chemical lexicon that we 're just now starting to learn about . of course what that allows bacteria to do is to be multicellular . so in the spirit of ted they 're doing things together
and here i am going to share with you only three of them . the first one is the school extension , of course . how do you explain drawings and engineering to people who are neither able to read nor write ? i started to build a prototype like that . the innovation was to build a clay vault . so then , i jumped on the top like that , with my team , and it works . the community is looking . it still works . so we can build . and we kept building , and that is the result . the kids are happy , and they love it . the community is very proud . we made it .
when i left the children 's home i had two things that i wanted to do . one was to find my family , and the other was to write poetry . in creativity i saw light . in the imagination i saw the endless possibility of life , the endless truth , the permanent creation of reality , the place where anger was an expression in the search for love , a place where dysfunction is a true reaction to untruth . i 've just got to say it to you all : i found all of my family in my adult life . i spent all of my adult life finding them ,
you read about it in your newspapers . you hear about it on your television sets .
and so , she really just completely ignored me most of the time . i noticed that at recess , she was the girl who picked the other girls to be on her team . it was very obvious , from the very beginning , that she was a leader . this is on the way home . and that 's north korea up along the hill . this is up along the dmz . they would actually cover the windows every night , so that light could n't be seen , because the south korean government has said for years that the north koreans may invade at any time . so there 's always this -- the closer you were to north korea , the more terrifying it was .
will die poor .  after two weeks of working in that village , it was time to go back . the mother came to me , knelt down , and said ,  leymah , take my daughter . i wish for her to be a nurse .  dirt poor , living in the home with my parents , i could n't afford to . with tears in my eyes , i said ,  no .  two months later , i go to another village on the same assignment and they asked me to live with the village chief . the women 's chief of the village has this little girl , fair color like me , totally dirty . and all day she walked around
to the most clear , joyful , playful image that you have , whether it 's with a toy , on a birthday or on a vacation . and begin to build to build from the emotion of that into how that connects with your life now . and you 'll find , you may change jobs -- which has happened to a number people when i 've had them do this -- in order to be more empowered through their play . or you 'll be able to enrich your life by prioritizing it and paying attention to it . most of us work with groups , and i put this up because the d.school , the design school at stanford ,
that i received my first deck of cards , and ever since that day , i have traveled around the world performing magic for boys and girls , men and women , husbands and wives , even kings and queens . voice : and who are these ? mt : ah , mischief-makers . watch . wake up . joker : whoa.mt : are you ready for your party piece ? joker : ready ! mt : let me see what you 've got . joker : presenting my pogo stick.mt : ah . watch out . joker : whoa , whoa , whoa , oh ! mt : but today , i am performing for a different kind of audience . i 'm performing for you . voice : signed card detected.mt : well , sometimes people ask me
you can bring your friends , or your colleagues , or your babysitter to walk along with you . and husbands can drag their wives across , if their wives do n't feel ready . but the point about the high bridge is that you have to have the confidence to know that you deserve to be on that bridge , that you have all the skills and experience you need in order to walk across the high bridge , but you just have to make the decision to take the first step and do it . thanks very much . it 's a great pleasure to be here . it 's a great pleasure to speak after
they know what they 're looking for . others are very uneasy . it 's an intimidating place . they feel that the institution is elitist . i 'm working to try and break down that sense of that elitism . i want to put people in a contemplative frame of mind , where they 're prepared to be a little bit lost , to explore , to see the unfamiliar in the familiar , or to try the unknown . because for us , it 's all about bringing them face to face with great works of art , capturing them at that moment of discomfort , when the inclination is kind of to reach for your iphone ,
i grew up with hippie parents in a log cabin . i started a site called treehugger -- i care about this stuff . i knew that eating a mere hamburger a day can increase my risk of dying by a third . cruelty : i knew that the 10 billion animals we raise each year for meat are raised in factory farm conditions that we , hypocritically , would n't even consider for our own cats , dogs and other pets .
and in the process , they 've enjoyed themselves thoroughly . they did all of this in four hours after seeing the computer for the first time . in another south indian village , these boys here had assembled a video camera and were trying to take the photograph of a bumble bee . they downloaded it from disney.com , or one of these websites , 14 days after putting the computer in their village . so at the end of it , we concluded that groups of children can learn to use computers and the internet on their own , irrespective of who or where they were . at that point , i became a little more ambitious
this is a guy called juanderson . at the age of 14 , in common with many 14-year-olds in the brazilian education system , he dropped out of school . it was boring . and juanderson , instead , went into what provided kind of opportunity and hope in the place that he lived , which was the drugs trade . and by the age of 16 , with rapid promotion , he was running the drugs trade in 10 favelas . he was turning over 200,000 dollars a week . he employed 200 people . he was going to be dead by the age of 25. and luckily , he met this guy , who is rodrigo baggio ,
and so we 're starting to see the establishment of men centers and men studies to think about how do we engage men in their experiences in the university . if you talk to faculty , they may say ,  ugh . yeah , well , they 're playing video games , and they 're gambling online all night long , and they 're playing world of warcraft , and that 's affecting their academic achievement .  guess what ? video games are not the cause . video games are a symptom . they were turned off a long time before they got here . so let 's talk about why they got turned off when they were between the ages of three and 13 .
we 've asked , well maybe older people are just trying to put a positive spin on an otherwise depressing existence .
apart from my work . so i 've decided to get a grip and sort it out . so i joined a gym .  now i do n't mean to mock , but being a fit 10-hour-a-day office rat is n't more balanced ; it 's more fit . lovely though physical exercise may be , there are other parts to life -- there 's the intellectual side ; there 's the emotional side ; there 's the spiritual side . and to be balanced , i believe we have to attend to all of those areas -- not just do 50 stomach crunches . now that can be daunting . because people say ,  bloody hell mate , i have n't got time to get fit .
because of the way that we collect , and because we require consent , we actually have a lot more male brains than female brains . males are much more likely to die an accidental death in the prime of their life . and men are much more likely to have their significant other , spouse , give consent than the other way around . so the first thing that we do at the site of collection is we collect what 's called an mr. this is magnetic resonance imaging -- mri . it 's a standard template by which we 're going to hang the rest of this data . so we collect this mr .
this is hermann goering . goering was hitler 's second in command in world war ii , his designated successor . and like hitler , goering fancied himself a collector of art . he went through europe , through world war ii , stealing , extorting and occasionally buying various paintings for his collection . and what he really wanted was something by vermeer . hitler had two of them , and he did n't have any . so he finally found an art dealer , a dutch art dealer named han van meegeren , who sold him a wonderful vermeer for the cost of what would now be 10 million dollars . and it was his favorite artwork ever .
you see them just throw away their lunch so they can run outside . and then , at one in the afternoon , they 're totally crashing . these are your children and grandchildren that are totally melting down when you pick them up , because they have n't had lunch . so if the only thing they 'd have to do after lunch is go to class , believe me , they 're going to sit there and eat their lunch . we need to --
this is the word that it talks with . so then we started to look at other bacteria , and these are just a smattering of the molecules that we 've discovered . what i hope you can see is that the molecules are related . the left-hand part of the molecule is identical in every single species of bacteria . but the right-hand part of the molecule is a little bit different in every single species . what that does is to confer exquisite species specificities to these languages . each molecule fits into its partner receptor and no other . so these are private , secret conversations . these conversations are for intraspecies communication .
that they wanted to start training the local entrepreneurs , giving them small loans . they set them up as what they called micro-distribution centers , and those local entrepreneurs then hire sales people , who go out with bicycles and pushcarts and wheelbarrows to sell the product . there are now some 3,000 of these centers employing about 15,000 people in africa . in tanzania and uganda , they represent 90 percent of coke 's sales . let 's look at the development side . what is it that governments and ngos can learn from coke ? governments and ngos need to tap into that local entrepreneurial talent as well , because the locals know how to reach
come together , and they would produce together a monumental set of diverse opinions that did n't pollute each other 's ideas -- but at the same time came together and resolved the problems . hopefully , really understand the customer at its heart , where the customer is , live with them in america . so -- sent the team off , and actually something different happened . they went other places .
and i photographed them , and told them how famous they were going to be when this book was done . and four months later , the adoption papers came through . this is saying goodbye to everybody at the orphanage . this is father keene with natasha at the bus stop . her great aunt at the airport . i had a wonderful deal with cathay pacific airlines for many years , where they gave me free passes on all their airlines in return for photography . it was like the ultimate perk . and the pilot , i actually knew -- because they used to let me sit in the jump seat , to tell you how long ago this was .
take it away eric . eric johanson : what we have here is a tank on the other side of the stage . and we have ... this computer screen can actually see the mosquitoes as they fly around . and pablos , if he stirs up our mosquitoes a little bit we can see them flying around . now , that 's a fairly straightforward image processing routine , and let me show you how it works . here you can see that the insects are being tracked as they 're flying around , which is kind of fun . next we can actually light them up with a laser . now , this is a low powered laser ,
so if you look at that data -- it 's right up on the national highway transportation safety administration 's website -- you can just look at the raw data , and begin to get a sense of the limited amount of evidence that 's in favor of car seats for children aged two and up .
it 's brilliant . now , we may laugh , but chris here is actually making up to 5,000 dollars a month running errands around his life . and 70 percent of this new labor force were previously unemployed or underemployed . i think taskrabbit and other examples of collaborative consumption are like lemonade stands on steroids . they 're just brilliant . now , when you think about it , it 's amazing , right , that over the past 20 years , we 've evolved from trusting people online to share information to trusting to handing over our credit card information , and now we 're entering the third trust wave : connecting trustworthy strangers to create all kinds
i went and got golf balls from golf courses . but everybody else was looking in the bush and looking in the ditches for golf balls . i 'm like , screw that . they 're all in the pond and nobody 's going into the pond . so i would go into the ponds and crawl around and pick them up with my toes . you just pick them up with both feet . you ca n't do it on stage . you get the golf balls , and you just throw them in your bathing suit trunks and when you 're done you 've got a couple hundred of them . but the problem is that people all did n't want all the golf balls .
and no one can get more than $ 100 a month .
as you 're going through this process . ca : i mean , you 're talking to different people around the world about the possibilities here . where is there most interest in actually doing something with this ? bg : well , we have n't picked a particular place , and there 's all these interesting disclosure rules about anything that 's called  nuclear ,  so we 've got a lot of interest , that people from the company have been in russia , india , china -- i 've been back seeing the secretary of energy here , talking about how this fits into the energy agenda . so i 'm optimistic . you know , the french and japanese have done some work .
it 's not to do with electricity or water . it 's the mobile phone . if you want to design from scratch virtually any service in africa , you would start now with the mobile phone . or you could go to places like this . this is a place called the madangiri settlement colony , which is a very developed slum about 25 minutes outside new delhi , where i met these characters who showed me around for the day . the remarkable thing about these girls , and the sign of the kind of social revolution sweeping through the developing world is that these girls are not married . ten years ago , they certainly would have been married .
of chucking a tapestry in the back of a car . they have to be wound on huge rollers , shipped in oversized freighters . some of them are so big we had , to get them into the museum , we had to take them up the great steps at the front . we thought very hard about how to present this unknown subject to a modern audience : the dark colors to set off the colors that remained in objects that were often faded ; the placing of lights to bring out the silk and the gold thread ; the labeling . you know , we live in an age where we are so used
those sweets were a bribe from a contractor who was trying to get my father to award him a government contract .
launched an extraordinary national effort to find a way to stop it . twenty years later , they succeeded and developed the polio vaccine . it was hailed as a scientific miracle in the late 1950s . finally , a vaccine that could stop this awful disease , and here in the united states it had an incredible impact . as you can see , the virus stopped , and it stopped very , very fast . but this was n't the case everywhere in the world . and it happened so fast in the united states , however , that even just last month jon stewart said this : jon stewart : where is polio still active ?
this is the second shift : open aid .
and all of this because of cumulative cultural adaptation . the chairs you 're sitting in , the lights in this auditorium , my microphone , the ipads and ipods that you carry around with you -- all are a result of cumulative cultural adaptation . now to many commentators , cumulative cultural adaptation , or social learning , is job done , end of story . our species can make stuff , therefore we prospered in a way that no other species has . in fact , we can even make the  stuff of life  -- as i just said , all the stuff around us . but in fact , it turns out that some time around 200,000 years ago ,
so we 've asked all sorts of questions to see if we could undo this finding .
girl 6 : like , if you were a girl and you were really adventurous and a real big tomboy , you would think that girls ' games were kinda sissy . girl 7 : i run track , i played soccer , i play basketball , and i love a lot of things to do .
but let me be very clear : vaccines do not cause autism .
so you can control for the basic things , like how hard the crash was , what seat the child was sitting in , etc. , the age of the child . and that 's that middle set of bars .
and so we said , right , we 'd redefined charity . we need to redefine the way these guys operate . how do we do that ? so what we did was , we created a global action plan , and we 're taking 10 percent of what 's raised in each country now and putting it into a global fund , and we 've got the best prostate cancer scientific minds in the world that look after that fund , and they come together each year and identify the number one priority , and that , last year , was getting a better screening test .
we literally fund hundreds if not thousands of institutions and researchers around the world , and when we looked at this more recently , we realized there 's a real lack of collaboration going on even within institutions , let alone nationally , let alone globally , and this is not unique to prostate cancer . this is cancer research the world over .
there are fewer male teachers . anybody who 's over 15 does n't know what this means , because in the last 10 years , the number of elementary school classroom teachers has been cut in half . we went from 14 percent to seven percent . that means that 93 percent of the teachers that our young men get in elementary classrooms are women . now what 's the problem with this ? women are great . yep , absolutely . but male role models for boys that say it 's all right to be smart -- they 've got dads , they 've got pastors , they 've got cub scout leaders , but ultimately , six hours a day , five days a week
on a scale that has been held constant to accommodate for inflation , has more than doubled , almost tripled , in that period . but you find essentially the same results , namely , that after a certain basic point -- which corresponds more or less to just a few 1,000 dollars above the minimum poverty level -- increases in material well-being do n't seem to affect how happy people are .
so now i do that tuesday morning jump , but it 's not any jump -- that was september 11th , 2001. and when we took off from the airfield , america was at peace . when we landed on the drop-zone , everything had changed . and what we thought about the possibility of those young soldiers going into combat as being theoretical was now very , very real -- and leadership seemed important . but things had changed ; i was a 46-year-old brigadier general . i 'd been successful , but things changed so much that i was going to have to make some significant changes , and on that morning , i did n't know it .
and then you can fire at me . all right . i think i ’ m going to take these off now , because i can ’ t see a damn thing when i ’ ve -- all right , ok. so , ah , that was fun . all right , good . so , ok , so why ? so we have the finger blasters . other people have dinosaurs , you know . why do we have them ? well , as i said , we have them because we think maybe playfulness is important . but why is it important ? we use it in a pretty pragmatic way , to be honest . we think playfulness helps us get to better creative solutions .
as much as the people that i 'm working with , but the ones who really get it done , they 're not out there talking about safety first . they know that other things come first -- the business of doing the work comes first , the business of getting it done . and i 'll never forget , up in the bering sea , i was on a crab boat with the  deadliest catch  guys -- which i also work on -- in the first season . we 're about 100 miles off the coast of russia : 50-foot seas , big waves , green water coming over the wheelhouse , right ? most hazardous environment i 'd ever seen ,
a variable that i think turns out to be fairly important in the equation for happiness . my hope is that over time , by tracking people 's moment-to-moment happiness and their experiences in daily life , we 'll be able to uncover a lot of important causes of happiness , and then in the end , a scientific understanding of happiness will help us create a future that 's not only richer and healthier , but happier as well . thank you . i would like to show you how architecture has helped to change the life of my community and has opened opportunities to hope . i am a native of burkina faso .
about 150,000 years ago , when language came online , we started to put words to this constant emergency , so it was n't just ,  oh my god , there 's a saber-toothed tiger ,  which could be , it was suddenly ,  oh my god , i did n't send the email . oh my god , my thighs are too fat . oh my god , everybody can see i 'm stupid . i did n't get invited to the christmas party !  so you 've got this nagging loop tape that goes over and over again that drives you insane , so , you see what the problem is ? what once made you safe now drives you insane . i 'm sorry to be the bearer of bad news , but somebody has to be .
so here 's a food web , or a map of feeding links between species that live in alpine lakes in the mountains of california .
the message seems to be that the readers are most likely to want to eat , maybe read a book , maybe see a movie , but not be engaged in their community . and you might think this is a small thing , but i think it 's important because it sets a tone and it reinforces the dangerous idea that politics is a spectator sport .
you may not know this word , but it should be your biological first name and last name . because neoteny means the retention of immature qualities into adulthood . and we are , by physical anthropologists , by many , many studies , the most neotenous , the most youthful , the most flexible , the most plastic of all creatures . and therefore , the most playful . and this gives us a leg up on adaptability . now , there is a way of looking at play that i also want to emphasize here , which is the play history . your own personal play history is unique , and often is not something we think about particularly .
and i felt that my english has improved a lot going there and chatting with friends . there they met children who are with a different standard and a different mindset , a totally different society . i mingled with almost everyone . they were very friendly . i had very good friends there , who are from delhi , who are from mumbai . even now we are in touch through facebook . after this ahmedabad trip i 've been like a totally different mingling with people and all of those . before that i feel like i was n't like this . i do n't even mingle , or start speaking with someone so quickly .
how do we stop people who 've behaved badly in one community doing so under a different guise ? in a similar way that companies often use some kind of credit rating to decide whether to give you a mobile plan , or the rate of a mortgage , marketplaces that depend on transactions between relative strangers need some kind of device to let you know that sebastian and chris are good eggs , and that device is reputation . reputation is the measurement of how much a community trusts you . let 's just take a look at chris . you can see that over 200 people have given him
after this , we noticed a couple of interesting things , which you 'll see . but i repeated this all over india and then through a large part of the world and noticed that children will learn to do what they want to learn to do . this is the first experiment that we did -- eight year-old boy on your right teaching his student , a six year-old girl , and he was teaching her how to browse . this boy here in the middle of central india -- this is in a rajasthan village , where the children recorded their own music and then played it back to each other
is i had to reach out to try to rebuild the trust of that force , rebuild their confidence -- me and them , and them and me , and our seniors and us as a force -- all without the ability to put a hand on a shoulder . entirely new requirement . also , the people had changed . you probably think that the force that i led was all steely-eyed commandos with big knuckle fists carrying exotic weapons . in reality , much of the force i led looked exactly like you . it was men , women , young , old -- not just from military ; from different organizations , many of them detailed to us just from a handshake .
whether it 's nature or the exercise itself , it certainly works .
20 years ago , there were three and a half million . and we 've seen a new disease , not like the 30 novel emerging communicable diseases . this disease is called sudden wealth syndrome . it 's an amazing phenomenon . all throughout the technology world , we 're seeing young people bitten by this disease of sudden wealth syndrome . but they 're using their wealth in a way that their forefathers never did . they 're not waiting until they die to create foundations . they 're actively guiding their money , their resources , their hearts , their commitments , to make the world a better place . certainly , nothing can give you more optimism than that .
we could tell you you 're having a heart attack so early it could save your life and prevent congestive heart failure . and then he did it again . we filled the balloon again a few minutes later and here you see , even after 10 seconds , a great rise in this piece , which we can have computers inside , under your chest like a pacemaker , with a wire into your heart like a pacemaker . and computers do n't go to sleep . we have a little battery and on this little battery that computer will run for five years without needing replacement . what does the system look like ?
but the important idea is that everything ’ s at hand , everything ’ s around . so when designers are working on ideas , they can start building stuff whenever they want . they don ’ t necessarily even have to go into some kind of formal workshop to do it . and we think that ’ s pretty important . and then the sad thing is , although preschools are full of this kind of stuff , as kids go through the school system it all gets taken away . they lose this stuff that facilitates this sort of playful and building mode of thinking . and of course , by the time you get to the average workplace ,
speaking of cool technology -- these little devices , little gis trackers like this , which they put into the vaccine carriers of their vaccinators . and then they can track them , and at the end of the day , they look and see , did these guys get every single street , every single house . this is the kind of commitment now we 're seeing to try and reach all of the children we 've been missing . and in afghanistan , we 're trying new approaches -- access negotiators . we 're working closely with the international committee of the red cross to ensure that we can reach every child . but as we tried these extraordinary things ,
we stop ourselves from doing things . we self-edit as we ’ re having ideas . and in some cases , our desire to be original is actually a form of editing . and that actually isn ’ t necessarily really playful . so that ability just to go for it and explore lots of things , even if they don ’ t seem that different from each other , is actually something that kids do well , and it is a form of play . so now , bob mckim did another version of this test in a rather famous experiment that was done in the 1960s . anybody know what this is ? it ’ s the peyote cactus .
which we 'll show you now . we picked madagascar . we have every road , every village , every , almost , square inch of madagascar . we have all of the precipitation data and the temperature data . that 's very important because the humidity and precipitation tell you whether you 've got standing pools of water for the mosquitoes to breed . so that sets the stage on which you do this . you then have to introduce the mosquitoes , and you have to model that and how they come and go . ultimately , it gives you this . this is malaria spreading across madagascar . and this is this latter part of the rainy season .
i mean , think about it : the care we take in selecting sunglasses , or jewelry , or accessories is really important , so if it is n't beautiful , it really does n't belong on your face . and this is what we 're pursuing here . but how we work on jawbone is really unique . i want to point at something here , on the left . this is the board , this is one of the things that goes inside that makes this technology work . but this is the design process : there 's somebody changing the board , putting tracers on the board , changing the location of the ics , as the designers on the other side are doing the work .
after all , aging is not a piece of cake .
according to the world bank , burkina faso is one of the poorest countries in the world , but what does it look like to grow up in a place like that ? i am an example of that . i was born in a little village called gando . in gando , there was no electricity , no access to clean drinking water , and no school . but my father wanted me to learn how to read and write . for this reason , i had to leave my family when i was seven and to stay in a city far away from my village with no contact with my family .
start below the safety threshold of circuit breakers . hmmm ... so we considered all of this . and we realized that electrical appliances must be able to communicate directly with the power receptacle itself . any electrical device -- an appliance , an extension cord , whatever -- must be able to tell the power outlet ,  hey , power outlet , i 'm drawing too much current . shut me off now , before i start a fire .  and the power outlet needs to be smart enough to do it . so here is what we did . we put a 10-cent digital transponder , a data tag , in the appliance plug . and we put an inexpensive , wireless data reader inside the receptacle
now , i was thinking about that and i said , you know , we 've got this immune response to this ridiculous molecule that we do n't make , and we see it a lot in other animals and stuff . but i said we ca n't get rid of it , because all the people who tried to transplant heart valves found out you ca n't get rid of that immunity . and i said , why do n't you use that ? what if i could stick this molecule , slap it onto a bacteria that was pathogenic to me , that had just invaded my lungs ? i mean i could immediately tap into
and that makes movember now the biggest funder of prostate cancer research and support programs in the world .
so now , my friends , if that is true , and it is true , what is the point ?  a complicated question . and so , you know , i talk to my friends and i go to plays where they 're singing russian songs . oh my god , you know what ? could we have -- no , we do n't have time . i taped my aunt . i taped my aunt singing a song in russian from the --
just as autism is a spectrum , there 's a spectrum of etiologies , a spectrum of causes . based on epidemiological data , we know that one of the causes , or one of the associations , i should say , is advanced paternal age , that is , increasing age of the father at the time of conception . in addition , another vulnerable and critical period in terms of development is when the mother is pregnant . during that period , while the fetal brain is developing , we know that exposure to certain agents can actually increase the risk of autism . in particular , there 's a medication , valproic acid , which mothers with epilepsy sometimes take ,
yet , everyone knows what is a chinese restaurant .
and the university of florence , to start probing the murals decorated by vasari on the long walls of the hall of the 500 searching for the lost leonardo . unfortunately , at that time we did not know that that was not exactly where we should be looking , because we had to go much deeper in , and so the research came to a halt , and it was only taken up in 2000 thanks to the interest and the enthusiasm of the guinness family . well , this time , we focused on trying to reconstruct the way the hall of the 500 was before the remodeling ,
they went to those who were running for seats to ask them ,  what is it that you will give the girls of this community when you win ?  and one of the guys who already had a seat was very -- because liberia has one of the strongest rape laws , and he was one of those really fighting in parliament to overturn that law because he called it barbaric . rape is not barbaric , but the law , he said , was barbaric . and when the girls started engaging him , he was very hostile towards them . these little girls turned to him and said ,  we will vote you out of office . 
tied to her knees . my mother was completely absorbent . and she would crawl around behind me going ,  who brings footprints into a building ? !  so that was kind of a clue that things were n't right . so before i start , i would like to thank the makers of lamotrigine , sertraline , and reboxetine , because without those few simple chemicals , i would not be vertical today . so how did it start ? my mental illness -- well , i 'm not even going to talk about my mental illness . what am i going to talk about ? okay . i always dreamt that , when i had my final breakdown ,
and i got these postcards of niagara falls , and pretty soon they 're in new york , and i do n't know where else . and i 'm telling myself ,  this is going to be a great car , they 're doing research that i 've never even thought about before .  right ? and they decided that instead of , like , having a studio , and six or seven apartments , it was cheaper to rent elizabeth taylor 's ex-house in malibu .
almost all of that growth will be in the developed world . almost all of that growth will be in places like monkey hill . this is where you 'll find the fastest growing young populations of the world . so if you want recipes to work -- for virtually anything -- health , education , government politics and education -- you have to go to these places . and if you go to these places , you meet people like this .
of secondary education . that name should tell you that the kenyan education system borrows almost everything from britain , circa 1950 , but has managed to make it even worse . so there are schools in slums like this . they 're places like this . that 's where maureen went to school . they 're private schools . there are no state schools in slums .
this is a woman from canada .
and caused a lot of losses , and we also have this new phenomenon , which i talked about last year , colony collapse disorder . and here we see a picture on top of a hill in central valley last december . and below , you can see all these out yards , or temporary yards , where the colonies are brought in until february , and then they 're shipped out to the almonds . and one documentary writer , who was here and looked at this two months after i was here , described this not as beehives but as a graveyard , with these empty white boxes with no bees left in them .
the first key shift is open knowledge .
and a few more beers , i said ,  there has to be some stuff that has n't come back .  then one more beer and it was , whatever happened to the mustache ? why has n't that made a comeback ? so then there was a lot more beers , and then the day ended with a challenge to bring the mustache back . so in australia ,  mo  is slang for mustache , so we renamed the month of november  movember  and created some pretty basic rules , which still stand today . and they are : start the month clean-shaven , rock a mustache -- not a beard , not a goatee , a mustache --
this is my passport from 2004. you 're not allowed to appear on u.k. passports with electronic equipment , but i insisted to the passport office that what they were seeing was actually a new part of my body , an extension of my brain , and they finally accepted me to appear with the passport photo .
he suffered a series of psychotic episodes in his early 20s , was treated with thorazine at bellevue , and ended up living homeless on the streets of skid row in downtown los angeles 30 years later . nathaniel 's story has become a beacon for homelessness and mental health advocacy throughout the united states , as told through the book and the movie  the soloist ,  but i became his friend , and i became his violin teacher , and i told him that wherever he had his violin , and wherever i had mine , i would play a lesson with him . and on the many times i saw nathaniel on skid row ,
ag : okay , there 's his fifth hypothesis . now that is a particularly -- that is a particularly adorable and articulate little boy , but what cristine discovered is this is actually quite typical . if you look at the way children play , when you ask them to explain something , what they really do is do a series of experiments . this is actually pretty typical of four year-olds . well , what 's it like to be this kind of creature ? what 's it like to be one of these brilliant butterflies who can test five hypotheses in two minutes ? well , if you go back to those psychologists and philosophers ,
because it was when that happened with this walk-and-talk idea that things became doable and sustainable and viable .
[ ... innovators ... ] [ ... until they came up with the name ... ] [ ... entrepreneurs ! ] [ they change the way we think about what is possible . ] [ they have a clear vision of how life can be better ] [ for all of us , even when times are tough . ] [ right now , it 's hard to see ... ] [ ... when our view is cluttered with obstacles . ] [ but turbulence creates opportunities ] [ for success , achievement , and pushes us ... ] [ to discover new ways of doing things ] [ so what opportunities will you go after and why ? ] [ if you 're an entrepreneur ] [ you know that risk is n't the reward . ] [ no . the rewards are driving innovation ... ]
if we were playing the game , that 's what we 'd do . if at any time during the game we want to learn more about the characters , we can go into this hidden hallway , and i 'll quickly just show you the interface . we can , for example , go find miko 's locker and get some more information about her . oops , i turned the wrong way .
so this simple mashup reveals that donors have not financed any schools in the areas
this seemingly natural tendency we have , towards isolation , towards keeping to ourselves , crashes head first into our modern world . this remarkable image is not a map of the world . in fact , it 's a map of facebook friendship links . and when you plot those friendship links by their latitude and longitude , it literally draws a map of the world . our modern world is communicating with itself and with each other more than it has at any time in its past . and that communication , that connectivity around the world , that globalization now raises a burden . because these different languages impose a barrier , as we 've just seen ,
in six months , how do we train these women ? sign language . you do n't choose the written word . you do n't choose the spoken word . you use sign language . and in six months they can become solar engineers . they go back and solar-electrify their own village . this woman went back and solar-electrified the first village , set up a workshop -- the first village ever to be solar-electrified in afghanistan [ was ] by the three women .
epilepsy can best be treated by responsive electrical stimulation . now , why do we use -- add on , nearly , an epileptic focus ? now , unfortunately , us technical people , unlike mr. bono , have to get into all these technical words . well ,  responsive electrical stimulation  means that we sense , at a place in your brain which is called an  epileptic focus ,  which is where the epileptic seizure begins -- we sense there , that it 's going to happen , and then we respond by applying an electrical energy at that spot , which erases the errant signal so that you do n't get the clinical manifestations of the migraine headache .
any guesses ? 1816. and what i can say is , in 2016 , doctors are n't going to be walking around with stethoscopes . there 's a whole lot better technology coming , and that 's part of the change in medicine . what has changed our society has been wireless devices . but the future are digital medical wireless devices , ok ? so , let me give you some examples of this to kind of make this much more concrete . this is the first one . this is an electrocardiogram . and , as a cardiologist , to think that you could see in real time a patient , an individual , anywhere in the world on your smartphone ,
fast-forward , 2004 : in the peak of our activism , the minister of gender liberia called me and said ,  leymah , i have a nine-year-old for you . i want you to bring her home because we do n't have safe homes .  the story of this little girl : she had been raped by her paternal grandfather every day for six months . she came to me bloated , very pale . every night i 'd come from work and lie on the cold floor . she 'd lie beside me and say ,  auntie , i wish to be well . i wish to go to school .  2010 : a young woman stands before president sirleaf
and just looking at the thing that 's important . that 's the kind of attention , the kind of consciousness , that we might expect from those butterflies who are designed to learn . well if we want to think about a way of getting a taste of that kind of baby consciousness as adults , i think the best thing is think about cases where we 're put in a new situation that we 've never been in before -- when we fall in love with someone new , or when we 're in a new city for the first time . and what happens then is not that our consciousness contracts ,
of  rockett 's tricky decision ,  which went gold two days ago . let 's hope it 's really stable . this is the second day in rockett 's life . the reason i 'm showing you this is i 'm hoping that the scene that i 'm going to show you will look familiar and sound familiar , now that you 've listened to some girls ' voices . and you can see how we 've tried to incorporate the issues that matter to them in the game that we 've created .
so we went to afghanistan for the first time , and we picked three women and said ,  we want to take them to india .  they said ,  impossible . they do n't even go out of their rooms , and you want to take them to india . 
he made 32 dollars . not bad . it 's also not good . apparently to really enjoy the music of joshua bell , you have to know you 're listening to joshua bell . he actually made 20 dollars more than that , but he did n't count it . because this woman comes up -- you see at the end of the video -- she comes up . she had heard him at the library of congress a few weeks before at this extravagant black-tie affair . so she 's stunned that he 's standing in a subway station . so she 's struck with pity . she reaches into her purse and hands him a 20 .
not just stuff .
so from that day forward , my life has become about a mustache .
on how well we behave or misbehave . now , capturing and correlating the trails of information that we leave in different places is a massive challenge , but one we 're being asked to figure out . what the likes of sebastian are starting to rightfully ask is , should n't they own their reputation data ? should n't the reputation that he 's personally invested on building on airbnb mean that it should travel with him from one community to another ? what i mean by this is , say he started selling second-hand books on amazon . why should he have to start from scratch ? it 's a bit like when i moved from new york to sydney .
so now we 're funding them to the tune of about five or six million dollars to collaborate and bringing them together , and that 's a unique thing in the cancer world , and we know , through that collaboration , it will accelerate outcomes . and that 's how we 're redefining the research world .
he 's probably the most remarkable social entrepreneur in education in the world . his name is madhav chavan , and he created something called pratham . and pratham runs preschool play groups for , now , 21 million children in india . it 's the largest ngo in education in the world . and it also supports working-class kids going into indian schools . he 's a complete revolutionary . he 's actually a trade union organizer by background , and that 's how he learned the skills to build his organization .
a little break . a little break . the first secret of shame for a woman for being a woman ,  a little break .  the adoption process took , like , a matter of months , so it was a closed shop , you know , sealed deal , an industrious , utilitarian solution : the government , the farmer , the adopting parents , the consumer , the mother , the earth , and the child , the crop . it 's kind of easy to patronize the past , to forego our responsibilities in the present . what happened then is a direct reflection of what is happening now . everybody believed themselves to be doing the right thing by god and by the state
it 'll generate electric currents , and the electric current in the brain can erase a migraine headache . that 's what we have discovered . so here 's a picture of what we 're doing . the patients who have a migraine preceded by an aura have a band of excited neurons -- that 's shown in red -- that moves at three to five millimeters a minute towards the mid-brain . and when it hits the mid-brain , that 's when the headache begins . there 's this migraine that is preceded by a visual aura , and this visual aura , by the way -- and i 'll show you a picture -- but it sort of begins with little dancing lights ,
so , for example , if i have , like —
things like breast cancer and colon cancer are directly tied to our lack of physical [ activity ] , ten percent in fact , on both of those .
but he did n't let go of art . he moved to new york city , and he put together a list of verbs — to roll , to crease , to fold — more than a hundred of them , and as he said , he just started playing around . he did these things to all kinds of material . he would take a huge sheet of lead and roll it up and unroll it . he would do the same thing to rubber , and when he got to the direction  to lift ,  he created this , which is in the museum of modern art . richard serra had to let go of painting
of course they will . but they ’ ll also ask ,  what can i do with it ?  might get to a really interesting example . and this openness is the beginning of exploratory play . any parents of young kids in the audience ? there must be some . yeah , thought so . so we ’ ve all seen it , haven ’ t we ? we ’ ve all told stories about how , on christmas morning , our kids end up playing with the boxes far more than they play with the toys that are inside them . and you know , from an exploration perspective , this behavior makes complete sense . because you can do a lot more with boxes than you can do with a toy .
but curiosity , exploration , are part of the play scene . if you want to belong , you need social play . and social play is part of what we 're about here today , and is a byproduct of the play scene . rough and tumble play . these lionesses , seen from a distance , looked like they were fighting . but if you look closely , they 're kind of like the polar bear and husky : no claws , flat fur , soft eyes , open mouth with no fangs , balletic movements , curvilinear movements -- all specific to play . and rough-and-tumble play is a great learning medium for all of us . preschool kids , for example , should be allowed to dive , hit , whistle ,
for everything , called eudaemonia . and then he breathed his last , with loved ones around him , and i know that he had chicken soup also , as his last meal .  i happen to know it for a fact . and then he died , and there was no more spinoza . extinct . and then , we do n't have a stuffed spinoza , but we do have a stuffed pavlov 's dog , and i visited him in the museum of hygiene in st. petersburg , in russia . and there he is , with this horrible electrical box on his rump in this fantastic , decrepit palace .  and i think it must have been a very , very dark day
because it worked . but every once in a while , there was still a patient convinced that he was sick , and he 'd come back . and my dad had a third jar of pills . and the jar of pills he had , he said , were the tiniest little pills he could find , so small you could barely see them . and he would say , listen , i know i gave you that huge pill , that complicated , hard-to-swallow pill before , but now i 've got one that 's so potent , that is really tiny and small and almost invisible . it 's almost like this thing here , which you ca n't even see . 
and that explains , in part , why we see such a broad spectrum in terms of its effects . although there are that many genes , there is some method to the madness . it 's not simply random 200 , 400 different genes , but in fact they fit together . they fit together in a pathway . they fit together in a network that 's starting to make sense now in terms of how the brain functions . we 're starting to have a bottom-up approach where we 're identifying those genes , those proteins , those molecules , understanding how they interact together to make that neuron work , understanding how those neurons interact together
now , what i 've talked about are physiologic metrics . but what i want to get to , the next frontier , very quickly , and why the stethoscope is on its way out , is because we can transcend listening to the valve sounds , and the breath sounds , because now , introduced by g.e . is a handheld ultra-sound . why is this important ? because this is so much more sensitive . here is an example of an abdominal ultrasound , and also a cardiac echo , which can be sent wireless , and then there 's an example of fetal monitoring on your smartphone .
who are really willing to work to go into schools . schools are underfunded . most schools in america spend less than 7,500 dollars a year teaching a child . that comes down to under five dollars an hour . most of you spend 10 , 15 dollars an hour for babysitters when you have them . so we 're spending less than 5 dollars an hour on the educational system . and if we 're going to change it , and change how we feed kids , we really have to rethink that . so , public and private partnerships , advocacy groups , working with foundations . in our school district , the way we afford this
now jpl , nasa and boeing , before they will hire a research and development problem solver -- even if they 're summa cum laude from harvard or cal tech -- if they have n't fixed cars , have n't done stuff with their hands early in life , played with their hands , they ca n't problem-solve as well . so play is practical , and it 's very important . now one of the things about play is that it is born by curiosity and exploration . but it has to be safe exploration . this happens to be ok -- he 's an anatomically interested little boy and that 's his mom . other situations would n't be quite so good .
restaurants and the food industry in general are pretty much the most wasteful industry in the world . for every calorie of food that we consume here in britain today , 10 calories are taken to produce it . that 's a lot . i want to take something rather humble to discuss . i found this in the farmers ' market today , and if anybody wants to take it home and mash it later , you 're very welcome to . the humble potato -- and i 've spent a long time , 25 years , preparing these . and it pretty much goes through eight different forms in its lifetime . first of all , it 's planted , and that takes energy .
and he gives play as a transformative force over his entire life . now there 's another play history that i think is a work in progress . those of you who remember al gore , during the first term and then during his successful but unelected run for the presidency , may remember him as being kind of wooden and not entirely his own person , at least in public . and looking at his history , which is common in the press , it seems to me , at least -- looking at it from a shrink 's point of view -- that a lot of his life was programmed .
who graduates from high school in kansas city , missouri . he joins the army . the army gives him a rifle . they send him to iraq . every day he leaves the wire with a mission . that mission is to defend the freedom of the family that he left at home . it 's to keep the men around him alive . it 's to pacify the village that he works in . he 's got a purpose . but he comes home [ to ] kansas city , missouri , maybe he goes to college , maybe he 's got a job , but he does n't have that same sense of purpose . you give him a chainsaw . you send him to joplin , missouri
 it 's just not something you want to say to a mother that 's having a baby for the first time .  rg : and of course , we think it 's precisely what you really should be saying to mothers who have kids for the first time . and that this , of course , one of the themes for us is that we think that candor and brutal honesty is critical to us collectively being great parents . and it 's hard not to think that part of what leads to this sense of isolation is our modern world . so alisa 's experience is not isolated . so your 58 percent of mothers surveyed
despite the fact that when i was in iraq , we did an opinion poll in 2003 and asked people what political systems they preferred , and the answer came back that seven percent wanted the united states , five percent wanted france , three percent wanted britain , and nearly 40 percent wanted dubai , which is , after all , not a democratic state at all but a relatively prosperous minor monarchy , democracy is a thing of value for which we should be fighting . but in order to do so we need to get away from instrumental arguments . we need to get away from saying democracy matters
i hope now that i was able to make my community proud through this work , and i hope i was able to prove you the power of community , and to show you that architecture can be inspiring for communities to shape their own future . merci beaucoup . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . thank you . on my desk in my office , i keep a small clay pot that i made in college . it 's raku , which is a kind of pottery that began in japan centuries ago as a way of making bowls for the japanese tea ceremony .
and we 're the caterpillars who are inching along our narrow , grownup , adult path . if this is true , if these babies are designed to learn -- and this evolutionary story would say children are for learning , that 's what they 're for -- we might expect that they would have really powerful learning mechanisms . and in fact , the baby 's brain seems to be the most powerful learning computer on the planet . but real computers are actually getting to be a lot better . and there 's been a revolution in our understanding of machine learning recently . and it all depends on the ideas of this guy ,
just below that to the right is rwanda though , which is amazingly green .
that knew me for longer than a year . see , that 's what family does . it gives you reference points . i 'm not defining a good family from a bad family . i 'm just saying that you know when your birthday is by virtue of the fact that somebody tells you when your birthday is , a mother , a father , a sister , a brother , an aunt , an uncle , a cousin , a grandparent . it matters to someone , and therefore it matters to you . understand , i was 14 years old , tucked away in myself , into myself , and i was n't touched either , physically touched . i 'm reporting back . i 'm reporting back simply to say that
one thing that 's interesting : if you look at frontal-impact crashes -- when the car crashes , the front hits into something -- indeed , what you see is that the car seats look a little bit better .
but i kept writing bad poetry , and he did n't blow up the math building , but he went to cuba . but i gave him the money , because i was from riverdale so i had more money than he did . and that was a good thing to help , you know , the cause . but , then he came back , and things happened , and i decided i really hated my writing , that it was awful , awful , purple prose . and i decided that i wanted to tell --
great people have made commitments -- we will protect our children from want and from fear . the u.n. has the convention on the rights of the child . countries like america , we 've heard things like no child left behind . other countries come with different things . there is a millennium development called three that focuses on girls . all of these great works by great people aimed at getting young people to where we want to get them globally , i think , has failed . in liberia , for example , the teenage pregnancy rate is three to every 10 girls . teen prostitution is at its peak . in one community , we 're told ,
but what 's interesting is the government telling us to use them is not actually based on very much .
what will happen to societies that are top-heavy with older people ? the outcome .
i said ,  i 'll make a concession . i 'll take the husbands along as well .  so i took the husbands along .
and just as these north-to-south transfers are opening up , so too are the development institutions that channeled these transfers .
it was a landscape with figures , semi-dressed , drinking wine . there was a nude woman in the lower foreground , and on the hillside in the back , there was a figure of the mythological god bacchus , and he said ,  what is this ?  and i -- no one else did , so i put up my hand , and i said ,  it 's a bacchanal by titian .  he said ,  it 's a what ?  i thought maybe i 'd pronounced it wrong .  it 's a bacchanal by titian .  he said ,  it 's a what ?  i said ,  it 's a bacchanal by titian .  he said ,  you boneless bookworm ! it 's a fucking orgy ! 
when you go into a football game you can get booze in for free , everybody bought them . supply , demand , big opportunity . i also branded it , so i sold them for five times the normal cost . it had our university logo on it . you know we teach our kids and we buy them games , but why do n't we get them games , if they 're entrepreneurial kids , that kind of nurture the traits that you need to be entrepreneurs ? why do n't you teach them not to waste money ? i remember being told to walk out in the middle of a street in banff , alberta
perhaps none of us do . so i leave you with this third question . can technology alter the acquisition of values ? finally , self-organizing systems , about which , again , i wo n't say too much because you 've been hearing all about it . natural systems are all self-organizing : galaxies , molecules , cells , organisms , societies -- except for the debate about an intelligent designer . but at this point in time , as far as science goes , it 's self-organization . but other examples are traffic jams , stock market , society and disaster recovery , terrorism and insurgency . and you know about the internet-based self-organizing systems . so here are my four sentences then . remoteness affects the quality of education .
i also knew that i 'm not alone . we as a society are eating twice as much meat as we did in the 50s . so what was once the special little side treat now is the main , much more regular . so really , any of these angles should have been enough to convince me to go vegetarian . yet , there i was -- chk , chk , chk -- tucking into a big old steak . so why was i stalling ? i realized that what i was being pitched was a binary solution .
these are the lonely warriors like my father and many , many others , and a key frontier of development work is to help these lonely warriors join hands so they can together overcome the odds .
i would like you to approve it for selling ,  then they would say ,  this is a fantastic new car seat , it works great . it only got a 500 , it could have gotten as high up as a 1,000 .  and this seatbelt would have passed with flying colors into being approved as a car seat . so , in some sense , what this is suggesting is that it 's not just that people are setting up their car seats wrong , the car seats are n't doing much . so here 's the crash . so these are timed at the same time , so you can see that it takes much longer with the car seat --
i want to introduce you to some of those entrepreneurs i 've met and share with you some of what they 've taught me over the years . i went to afghanistan in 2005 to work on a financial times piece , and there i met kamila , a young women who told me she had just turned down a job with the international community that would have paid her nearly $ 2,000 a month -- an astronomical sum in that context . and she had turned it down , she said , because she was going to start her next business , an entrepreneurship consultancy that would teach business skills
so , we 're not just talking about physiologic metrics -- the key measurements of vital signs , and all those things in physiology -- but also all the imaging that one could look at in your smartphone . now , this is an example of another obsolete technology , soon to be buried : the holter monitor . twenty-four hour recording , lots of wires . this is now a little tiny patch . you can put it on for two weeks and send it in the mail . now , how does this work ? well , there is these smart band-aids or these sensors that one would put on , on a shoe or on the wrist .
but let 's take a look . first , we 've got population . the world today has 6.8 billion people . that 's headed up to about nine billion . now , if we do a really great job on new vaccines , health care , reproductive health services , we could lower that by , perhaps , 10 or 15 percent , but there we see an increase of about 1.3. the second factor is the services we use . this encompasses everything : the food we eat , clothing , tv , heating . these are very good things : getting rid of poverty means providing these services to almost everyone on the planet . and it 's a great thing for this number to go up .
and with wonderful results like that flight . and we 're working on a bigger plane -- 220-foot span -- and an intermediate-size , one with a regenerative fuel cell that can store excess energy during the day , feed it back at night , and stay up 65,000 feet for months at a time . ray morgan 's voice will come in here . there he 's the project manager . anything they do is certainly a team effort . he ran this program . here 's ... some things he showed as a celebration at the very end . ray morgan : we 'd just ended a seven-month deployment of hawaii . for those who live on the mainland , it was tough being away from home .
harvest palms , smoke . harvest witness , smoke . resolutions , smoke . salvation , smoke . redemption , smoke . breathe . do not fear what has blown up . if you must , fear the unexploded . thank you . i 'm going to talk today about energy and climate . and that might seem a bit surprising because my full-time work at the foundation is mostly about vaccines and seeds , about the things that we need to invent and deliver to help the poorest two billion live better lives . but energy and climate are extremely important to these people --
on a specific area of one of the two walls . well , we also learned that vasari , who was commissioned to remodel the hall of the 500 between 1560 and 1574 by the grand duke cosimo i of the medici family , we have at least two instances when he saved masterpieces specifically by placing a brick wall in front of it and leaving a small air gap . one that we [ see ] here , masaccio , the church of santa maria novella in florence , so we just said , well maybe , visari has done something like that in the case of this great work of art by leonardo ,
while we 're still in the womb . now i 'm a science reporter . i write books and magazine articles . and i 'm also a mother . and those two roles came together for me in a book that i wrote called  origins .   origins  is a report from the front lines of an exciting new field called fetal origins . fetal origins is a scientific discipline that emerged just about two decades ago , and it 's based on the theory that our health and well-being throughout our lives is crucially affected by the nine months we spend in the womb . now this theory was of more than just intellectual interest to me .
and i was back with a guy , lashing the pots down . so , i 'm 40 feet off the deck , which is like looking down at the top of your shoe , you know , and it 's doing this in the ocean . unspeakably dangerous . i scamper down , i go into the wheelhouse and i say , with some level of incredulity ,  captain , osha .  and he says ,  osha ? ocean .  and he points out there . but in that moment , what he said next ca n't be repeated in the lower 48. it ca n't be repeated on any factory floor or any construction site . but he looked at me , and he said ,  son  --
the united states did . in 1935 , there were 150,000 cases a year of malaria in the united states , but ddt and a massive public health effort managed to squelch it . so we thought ,  well , we 've done all these things that are focused on the plasmodium , the parasite involved . what can we do to the mosquito ? well , let 's try to kill it with consumer electronics .  now , that sounds silly , but each of these devices has something interesting in it that maybe you could use . your blu-ray player has a very cheap blue laser . your laser printer has a mirror galvanometer that 's used to steer a laser beam very accurately ;
a section of the tissue and transfer it to a microscope slide . we 're going to then apply one of those stains to it , and we scan it . and then what we get is our first mapping . so this is where experts come in and they make basic anatomic assignments . you could consider this state boundaries , if you will , those pretty broad outlines . from this , we 're able to then fragment that brain into further pieces , which then we can put on a smaller cryostat . and this is just showing this here -- this frozen tissue , and it 's being cut . this is 20 microns thin , so this is about a baby hair 's width .
and almost universally , amongst all the kids , they were really psychologically damaged by having been made fun of , ridiculed , picked on and been rejected . and korea was probably the place i found to be the worst for these kids . and what struck me immediately in meeting hyun-sook was how confident she appeared to be , how happy she seemed to be in her own skin . and remember this picture , because i 'm going to show you another picture later , but you can see how much she looks like her grandmother , although she looks so western . i decided to follow her to school . this is the first morning i stayed with her .
it 's not ancient history . when you read the biblical plague of boils , that was smallpox . pharaoh ramses the fifth , whose picture is here , died of smallpox . to eradicate smallpox , we had to gather the largest united nations army in history . we visited every house in india , searching for smallpox -- 120 million houses , once every month , for nearly two years . in a cruel reversal , after we had almost conquered smallpox -- and this is what you must learn as a social entrepreneur , the realm of the final inch . when we had almost eradicated smallpox , it came back again , because the company town of tatanagar drew laborers ,
to people we think of as our peers , to those around us . and this fear is what causes us to be conservative in our thinking . so we might have a wild idea , but we ’ re afraid to share it with anybody else . ok , so if you try the same exercise with kids , they have no embarrassment at all . they just quite happily show their masterpiece to whoever wants to look at it . but as they learn to become adults , they become much more sensitive to the opinions of others , and they lose that freedom and they do start to become embarrassed . and in studies of kids playing , it ’ s been shown
 difficult husband ; not possible .  called the husband , the husband came , swaggering , politician , mobile in his hand .  not possible .   why not ?   the woman , look how beautiful she is .  i said ,  yeah , she is very beautiful .   what happens if she runs off with an indian man ?  that was his biggest fear . i said ,  she 'll be happy . she 'll ring you up on the mobile .  she went like a grandmother and came back like a tiger .
the new vaccine had twice the impact on these last couple of viruses as the old vaccine had , and we immediately started using this . well , in a couple of months we had to get it out of production . and it started rolling off the production lines and into the mouths of children around the world . and we did n't start with the easy places . the first place this vaccine was used was in southern afghanistan , because it 's in places like that where kids are going to benefit the most from technologies like this . now here at ted , over the last couple of days ,
and they never get any press for that . but they get a lot of press because they do a lot of terrible things as well . so , there 's all kinds of bacteria on the earth that have no business being in you or on you at any time , and if they are , they make you incredibly sick . and so , the question for my lab is whether you want to think about all the good things that bacteria do , or all the bad things that bacteria do . the question we had is how could they do anything at all ? i mean they 're incredibly small ,
because in botswana , with good economy and governance , they can manage to treat people . and if people who are infected are treated , they do n't die of aids . these percentages wo n't come down because people can survive 10 to 20 years . so there 's some problem with these metrics now . but the poorer countries in africa , the low-income countries down here , there the rates fall faster , of the percentage infected , because people still die . in spite of pepfar , the generous pepfar , all people are not reached by treatment , and of those who are reached by treatment in the poor countries , only 60 percent are left on treatment after two years .
these examples give new hope , new possibility to the problems i witnessed in uganda or that my father confronted in bihar .
now i 'm in charge of all the cooking classes and all the gardening classes in our school district . so this is a typical menu . this is what we 're serving this week at the schools . and you see these recipes on the side ? those are the recipes that the kids learn in my cooking classes . they do tastings of these ingredients in the gardening classes . they also may be growing them . and we serve them in the cafeterias . if we 're going to change children 's relationship to food , it 's delicious , nutritious food in the cafeterias , hands-on experience -- you 're looking in cooking and gardening classes --
in fact , you could be in a bottle with a cap on top , and you would not die at all , and you would not need any fresh air . we have tried these plants at our own building in delhi , which is a 50,000-square-feet , 20-year-old building . and it has close to 1,200 such plants for 300 occupants . our studies have found that there is a 42 percent probability of one 's blood oxygen going up by one percent if one stays indoors in this building for 10 hours . the government of india has discovered or published a study to show that this is the healthiest building in new delhi .
tied up in a little penned-in area , and i said ,  well , when do they go in ?  and she said ,  probably never .  and as i walked away from that , i had this crystallization , probably from the blow , because it was an insult in a way . i thought ,  oh , if there 's no pictures , then there 'll be no record . we need a record .  and i thought ,  i 'm gon na make that record . i 'll find a way to get in , because i do n't want to see this history disappear .  jb : he did . he pulled in every favor he could , and got a pass into the world trade center site ,
now it 's good to be a grownup . i do n't want to say too much about how wonderful babies are . it 's good to be a grownup . we can do things like tie our shoelaces and cross the street by ourselves . and it makes sense that we put a lot of effort into making babies think like adults do . but if what we want is to be like those butterflies , to have open-mindedness , open learning , imagination , creativity , innovation , maybe at least some of the time we should be getting the adults to start thinking more like children . so , here we go : a flyby of play .
you know that what you need to do is possible to do , even though difficult , and sense of time disappears , you forget yourself , you feel part of something larger . and once the conditions are present , what you are doing becomes worth doing for its own sake .
for the apple lisa and the macintosh . so , they learned their way to that by building prototypes . another example is a group of designers who were working on a surgical instrument with some surgeons . they were meeting with them ; they were talking to the surgeons about what it was they needed with this device . and one of the designers ran out of the room and grabbed a white board marker and a film canister -- which is now becoming a very precious prototyping medium -- and a clothespin . he taped them all together , ran back into the room and said ,  you mean , something like this ? 
on fast food . we spend 100 billion dollars a year on diet aids . we spend 50 billion dollars on vegetables , which is why we need all the diet aids . we spend 200 billion dollars a year on diet-related illness today , with nine percent of our kids having type 2 diabetes . 200 billion . so you know what , when we talk about needing 8 billion more , it 's not a lot . that 8 billion comes down to two dollars and 49 cents -- that 's what the government allocates for lunch . most school districts spend two thirds of that on payroll and overhead . that means we spend less than a dollar a day
and i immediately wrote a letter to my best friends in atlanta , georgia , who had an 11-year-old son . and my best friend had mistakenly one day said something about wishing he had another child . so here my friends gene and gail had not heard from me in about a year , and suddenly i was calling , saying  i 'm in korea , and i 've met this extraordinary girl .  and i said ,  the grandmother thinks she 's sick , but i think maybe we would have to bring the grandmother over also .  and i said ,  i 'll pay for the ...  i mean , i had this whole sort of picture .
for a general audience . and that , to me , today , is now the challenge and the fun of my job , supporting the vision of my curators , whether it 's an exhibition of samurai swords , early byzantine artifacts , renaissance portraits , or the show we heard mentioned earlier , the mcqueen show , with which we enjoyed so much success last summer . that was an interesting case . in the late spring , early summer of 2010 , shortly after mcqueen 's suicide , our curator of costume , andrew bolton , came to see me , and said ,  i 've been thinking of doing a show on mcqueen , and now is the moment . we have to , we have to do it fast . 
just plain fun . photographer paul nicklin traveled to antarctica to shoot a story on leopard seals . they have been rarely photographed , partly because they are considered one of the most dangerous predators in the ocean . in fact , a year earlier , a researcher had been grabbed by one and pulled down to depth and killed . so you can imagine paul was maybe a little bit hesitant about getting into the water . now , what leopard seals do mostly is , they eat penguins . you know of  the march of the penguins .  this is sort of the munch of the penguins . here a penguin goes up to the edge and looks out
what 's going to happen ? well , the cdc has gone further to say that those children born in the year 2000 could be the first generation in our country 's history to die at a younger age than their parents . and it 's because of what we feed them . because eight-year-olds do n't get to decide -- and if they do , you should be in therapy . you know , we are responsible for what kids eat . but oops , maybe they 're responsible for what kids eat . big companies spend 20 billion dollars a year marketing non-nutrient foods to kids . 20 billion dollars a year . 10,000 ads most kids see .
100,000 dollars . it costs 50 dollars . we can probably make it for 50 cents , if we put our mind to it . why does n't somebody do it ? and the answer is ,  how do you make a profit in a capitalist system , doing that ?  interesting problem . so , let me finish by saying that we 've thought about this as a kind of engineering problem . and we 've asked : what is the scientific unifying idea here ? and we 've decided that we should think about this not so much in terms of cost , but in terms of simplicity . simplicity is a neat word . and you 've got to think about
is a high school project . i would like to share with you this . the innovation in this project is to cast mud like you cast concrete . how do you cast mud ? we start making a lot of mortars , like you can see , and when everything is ready , when you know what is the best recipe and the best form , you start working with the community . and sometimes i can leave .
world war ii came to an end , and goering was captured , tried at nuremberg and ultimately sentenced to death . then the allied forces went through his collections and found the paintings and went after the people who sold it to him . and at some point the dutch police came into amsterdam and arrested van meegeren . van meegeren was charged with the crime of treason , which is itself punishable by death . six weeks into his prison sentence , van meegeren confessed . but he did n't confess to treason . he said ,  i did not sell a great masterpiece to that nazi . i painted it myself ; i 'm a forger . 
and i 'd like to talk very briefly about three new inventions that will change the lives of many people . at the present time , it takes an average of three hours after the first symptoms of a heart attack are recognized by the patient , before that patient arrives at an emergency room . and people with silent ischemia -- which , translated into english , means they do n't have any symptoms -- it takes even longer for them to get to the hospital . the ami , acute myocardial infarction , which is a doctor 's big word so they can charge you more money -- -- means a heart attack . annual incidence : 1.2 million americans .
where the percentage of illiteracy is very high , we use puppetry . puppets is the way we communicate . you have jokhim chacha who is 300 years old . he is my psychoanalyst . he is my teacher . he actually raises money , solves my disputes . he solves my problems in the village . if there 's tension in the village , if attendance at the schools goes down and there 's a friction between the teacher and the parent , the puppet calls the teacher and the parent in front of the whole village and says ,  shake hands . the attendance must not drop . 
if we can figure them out in these sort of primitive organisms , the hope is that they will be applied to other human diseases and human behaviors as well . i hope that what you 've learned is that bacteria can distinguish self from other . by using these two molecules they can say  me  and they can say  you .  again of course that 's what we do , both in a molecular way , and also in an outward way , but i think about the molecular stuff . this is exactly what happens in your body . it 's not like your heart cells and your kidney cells get all mixed up every day ,
and then finally , the last set of bars , which are really controlling for everything you could possibly imagine about the crash , 50 , 75 , 100 different characteristics of the crash .
this is from lahaina , and when we 're walking along a beach , we 're actually walking along millions of years of biological and geological history . we do n't realize it , but it 's actually a record of that entire ecology . so here we see , for example , a sponge spicule , two bits of coral here , that 's a sea urchin spine . really some amazing stuff . so when i first looked at this , i was -- i thought , gee , this is like a little treasure trove here . i could n't believe it , and i 'd go around dissecting the little bits out and making photographs of them . here 's what most of the sand in our world looks like .
other people , in the morning , got a slip of paper that said ,  by 5:00 pm today , spend this money on somebody else . 
so once he gets to that point of beginning to create , like jennifer did in her improvisation , a new reality -- that is , a moment of ecstasy -- he enters that different reality . now he says also that this is so intense an experience that it feels almost as if he did n't exist .
and you put on the t-10 parachute . and you 're very careful how you put the straps , particularly the leg straps because they go between your legs . and then you put on your reserve , and then you put on your heavy rucksack . and then a jumpmaster comes , and he 's an experienced nco in parachute operations . he checks you out , he grabs your adjusting straps and he tightens everything so that your chest is crushed , your shoulders are crushed down , and , of course , he 's tightened so your voice goes up a couple octaves as well . then you sit down , and you wait a little while ,
in terms of fuel , this really solves the problem . i 've got a picture here of a place in kentucky . this is the leftover , the 99 percent , where they 've taken out the part they burn now , so it 's called depleted uranium . that would power the u.s. for hundreds of years . and , simply by filtering seawater in an inexpensive process , you 'd have enough fuel for the entire lifetime of the rest of the planet . so , you know , it 's got lots of challenges ahead , but it is an example of the many hundreds and hundreds of ideas that we need to move forward . so let 's think : how should we measure ourselves ?
at rebound , it takes a lot longer -- but there 's just a lot less movement for child who 's in the seatbelt . so , i 'll show you the six-year-old crashes as well . the six-year-old is in a car seat , and it turns out that looks terrible , but that 's great . that 's like a 400 , ok ? so that kid would do fine in the crash . nothing about that would have been problematic to the child at all . and then here 's the six-year-old in the seatbelt , and in fact , they get exactly within , you know , within one or two points of the same . so really , for the six-year-old ,
performance company called lone twin . lone twin had come to minto and worked with the residents , and they had created these dances . this australian-indian girl , she came out and started to dance on her front lawn , and her father peered out the window to see what all the noise and commotion was about , and he soon joined her . and he was followed by her little sister . and soon they were all dancing this joyous , exuberant dance right there on their lawn . and as i walked through the neighborhood , i was amazed and i was moved by the incredible sense of ownership this community clearly felt
so , here is the data . here i have , among two- to six-year-olds -- anyone above six , basically no one uses car seats , so you ca n't compare -- 29.3 percent of the children who are unrestrained
in 17 countries . it reminds me of a song that i remember from my childhood ,  i 'd like to teach the world to sing ,  that also went number one on the pop charts . both songs have something in common : that same appeal of celebration and unity . so how does health and development market ? well , it 's based on avoidance , not aspirations . i 'm sure you 've heard some of these messages .  use a condom , do n't get aids .   wash you hands , you might not get diarrhea .  it does n't sound anything like  wavin ' flag  to me . and i think we make a fundamental mistake -- we make an assumption ,
we go on blind dates . you know , after all , if it does n't work out , there 's always tomorrow . people over 50 do n't go on blind dates .
i 've seen people challenging the audience again and again to believe in the impossible . so this morning at about seven o'clock , i decided that we 'd try to drive chris and the production crew here berserk by downloading all of our data from india again , so that you could see something that 's just unfolding today , which proves that the impossible is possible . and only two years ago , people were saying that this is impossible . now remember , northern india is the perfect storm when it comes to polio . over 500,000 children are born in the two states that have never stopped polio --
do n't even worry .
and it turns out that as we called around to the independent crash test companies around the country , none of them wanted to do our crash test because they said , some explicitly , some not so explicitly ,  all of our business comes from car seat manufacturers .
for my first day down under . i mean , i 'd thought about the harbour bridge or bondi beach , but minto ? but still , i 'm a producer , and the lure of a site-specific theater project was more than i could resist . so , off i went into friday afternoon traffic , and i 'll never forget what i saw when i got there . for the performance , the audience walked around the neighborhood from house to house , and the residents , who were the performers , they came out of their houses , and they performed these autobiographical dances on their lawns , on their driveways . the show is a collaboration with a u.k.-based