and it launched a global competition to crowdsource innovative apps using this data .
everybody knows that we can do better with a visual thing that can be interactive with the patient , where they see the video and they 're being videoed and they press , do you understand this ? no , i do n't . well , then let 's go to a simpler explanation . then there 's a simpler one and , oh yes , i understand that . well , press the button and you 're on record , you understand . and that is one of the ideas . now , also a video is done of the patient or spouse and medical presenter , with the patient agreeing that he understands the procedure to be done , including all the possible failure modes .
anagnorisis is the greek word for discovery . literally , the transition from ignorance to knowledge is anagnorisis . it 's what our network does ; it 's what  dirty jobs  is . and i 'm up to my neck in anagnorises every single day . great . the other word , peripeteia , that 's the moment in the great tragedies , you know -- euripides and sophocles -- the moment where oedipus has his moment , where he suddenly realizes that hot chick he 's been sleeping with and having babies with is his mother . ok. that 's peripety or peripeteia . and this metaphor in my head -- i got anagnorisis and peripetia on my chin .
right , like cutting lawns is brutal . but because i had to cut lawns all summer for all of our neighbors and get paid to do that , i realized that recurring revenue from one client is amazing .
being enslaved by this family . and i was really appalled , and i could n't figure out what to do . and the more i tried talking to him , the less friendly he was getting . so i finally decided , i said  look ,  -- this is all through the translator , because , this is all , you know , i do n't speak a word of korean -- and i said ,  look , i 'm really glad that hyun-sook has a family to live with . i was very worried about her . i made a promise to her grandmother , your mother , that i would find a family , and now i 'm so happy that you 're going to take care of her . 
that i was going to be feeling this way . and i called my sister whom i 'm very close to -- and had three children -- and i asked her ,  why did n't you tell me i was going to be feeling this way , that i was going to have these -- feeling incredibly isolated ?  and she said -- i 'll never forget --
as you can see , it 's impossible to read . you need to get halfway down to even find out which address they 're talking about , and then farther down , in tiny 10-point font , to find out how to actually get involved .
that is that younger people today may not typically experience these improvements as they grow older .
so the image that i like to think of , instead of glass ceiling , is the high bridge . it 's definitely terrifying to stand at the foot of a high bridge , but it 's also pretty exhilarating , because it 's beautiful up there , and you 're looking out on a beautiful view . and the great thing is there 's no trick like with the glass ceiling . there 's no man or woman standing in the middle about to cut the cables . there 's no hole in the middle that you 're going to fall through . and the great thing is that you can take anyone along with you . you can bring your husband along .
every time any westerners came to the village , she hid the girl . and of course , i was immediately intrigued . i saw photographs of her , and i thought i wanted to go . and the guy just told me ,  there 's no way . this grandmother wo n't even -- you know , there 's no way she 's ever going to let you meet this girl that 's she 's raising .  i took a translator with me , and went to this village , found the grandmother , sat down with her . and to my astonishment , she agreed to let me photograph her granddaughter . and i was paying for this myself , so i asked the translator
but we seem to be doing it the other way about . so i came to this conclusion that et should reach the underprivileged first , not the other way about . and finally came the question of , how do you tackle teacher perception ? whenever you go to a teacher and show them some technology , the teacher 's first reaction is , you can not replace a teacher with a machine -- it 's impossible . i do n't know why it 's impossible , but , even for a moment , if you did assume that it 's impossible -- i have a quotation from sir arthur c. clarke , the science fiction writer whom i met in colombo ,
second , the development institutions that channeled these transfers were opaque , with little transparency of what they financed or what results they achieved .
 i 'll never leave a fallen comrade to fall into the hands of the enemy .  and it 's not a mindless mantra , and it 's not a poem . it 's a promise . every ranger promises every other ranger ,  no matter what happens , no matter what it costs me , if you need me , i 'm coming .  and every ranger gets that same promise from every other ranger . think about it . it 's extraordinarily powerful . it 's probably more powerful than marriage vows . and they 've lived up to it , which gives it special power . and so the organizational relationship that bonds them is just amazing . and i learned personal relationships
or you can , i do n't know what , you know , eat a sandwich . so , what i did when i was painting was i started singing , because i really adore singing , and i think that music is the highest form of all art . so , i commissioned a wonderful composer , nico muhly , who wrote nine songs using the text , and we performed this fantastic evening of -- he wrote music for both amateurs and professionals . i played the clattering teacup and the slinky in the main reading room of the new york public library , where you 're supposed to be very , very quiet , and it was a phenomenally wonderful event ,
♫ the sound of the final boom ♫ ♫ rumbles fiercely across the land . ♫ ♫ fear , you 're the enemy . ♫ ♫ obliterating all but thee . ♫ ♫ you see what you want to see . ♫ ♫ before i 'm blinded , i will toast ♫ ♫ the shade of power that i love most , ♫ ♫ the power of creation . ♫ ♫ tembererana , hey , tembererana ... ♫ ♫ da , da , da , da ♫ ♫ da , da , da , da , da , da , da ♫ ♫ as a child , alone and afraid , ♫ ♫ escaping the impressions every feeling made , ♫ ♫ i would run , run away ♫
my name is adam garone , and that 's my story .
these are pictures the girls themselves never saw , but they gave to us this is the stuff those reviewers do n't know about and are n't listening to and this is the kind of research i recommend to those who want to do humanistic work . girl 1 : yeah , my character is usually a tomboy .
we 're discovering in nature that simplicity often lies on the other side of complexity .
we had to grow them in vermi manure , which is sterile , or hydroponics , and take them outdoors every three to four months . the second plant is mother-in-law 's tongue , which is again a very common plant , and we call it a bedroom plant , because it converts co2 into oxygen at night . and we need six to eight waist-high plants per person . the third plant is money plant , and this is again a very common plant ; preferably grows in hydroponics . and this particular plant removes formaldehydes and other volatile chemicals . with these three plants , you can grow all the fresh air you need .
just like we study any other complex neurologic process . and i think there 's some sub-questions there that i put there . is it truly possible to study creativity scientifically ? and i think that 's a good question . and i 'll tell you that most scientific studies of music , they 're very dense , and when you actually go through them , it 's very hard to recognize the music in it . in fact , they seem to be very unmusical entirely and to miss the whole point of the music . and so it brings the second question : why should scientists study creativity ? maybe we 're not the right people to do it .
thank you . back in 1992 , i started working for a company called interval research , which was just then being founded by david lidell and paul allen as a for-profit research enterprise in silicon valley . i met with david to talk about what i might do in his company . i was just coming out of a failed virtual reality business and supporting myself by being on the speaking circuit and writing books -- after twenty years or so in the computer game industry having ideas that people did n't think they could sell . and david and i discovered
so i 'm not going to go through the whole details of the study because actually you can read about it , but the next step is observation . so here are some of the students doing the observations . they 're recording the data of where the bees fly . dave strudwick : so what we 're going to do —student : 5c . dave strudwick : is she still going up here ? student : yeah . dave strudwick : so you keep track of each.student : henry , can you help me here ? bl :  can you help me , henry ?  what good scientist says that , right ? student : there 's two up there . and three in here . bl : right ? so we 've got our observations . we 've got our data .
for service for the veterans coming home . recent surveys show that 92 percent of veterans want to continue their service when they take off their uniform . and we can use veterans to improve disaster response . now on the surface , this makes a lot of sense , and in 2010 , we responded to the tsunami in chile , the floods in pakistan , we sent training teams to the thai-burma border . but it was earlier this year , when one of our original members caused us to shift focus in the organization . this is clay hunt . clay was a marine with me . we served together in iraq and afghanistan .
take your science , subtract your bullet points and your jargon , divide by relevance , meaning share what 's relevant to the audience , and multiply it by the passion that you have for this incredible work that you 're doing , and that is going to equal incredible interactions that are full of understanding . and so , scientists and engineers , when you 've solved this equation , by all means , talk nerdy to me . thank you . this is a world-changing invention . the smoke alarm has saved perhaps hundreds of thousands of lives , worldwide . but smoke alarms do n't prevent fires . every year in the usa , over 20,000 are killed or injured
so you relate people that you would n't relate , and you can actually also create concerts by looking at the audience faces . so i connect the eye , and then i play the audience 's faces . the good thing about this is , if the concert does n't sound good , it 's their fault . it 's not my fault , because — and so another thing that happens is that i started having this secondary effect that normal sounds started to become color .
and learn how to find scammers when they get email offers come in . they can come into your account or a sub account or whatever . but teach them how to fix the price , guess the price , pull up the photos . teach them how to do that kind of stuff and make money . then the money they get , 50 percent goes in their house account , 50 percent goes in their toy account . my kids love this stuff .
but what they did , of course , since it was so complicated and expensive , they only used it on the zero-year-olds and the one-year-olds .
falling in love , everything begins with perception . now if perception is grounded in our history , it means we 're only ever responding according to what we 've done before . but actually , it 's a tremendous problem , because how can we ever see differently ? now , i want to tell you a story about seeing differently , and all new perceptions begin in the same way . they begin with a question . the problem with questions is they create uncertainty . now , uncertainty is a very bad thing . it 's evolutionarily a bad thing . if you 're not sure that 's a predator , it 's too late . okay ? even seasickness is a consequence of uncertainty .
so instead of being antisocial with your money , what if you were a little more prosocial with your money ? and we thought , let 's make people do it and see what happens . so let 's have some people do what they usually do and spend money on themselves , and let 's make some people give money away , and measure their happiness and see if , in fact , they get happier . so the first way that we did this . on one vancouver morning , we went out on the campus at university of british columbia and we approached people and said ,  do you want to be in an experiment ? 
the unique design of the eiffel tower . and the trick here is to use a single , readable sentence that the audience can key into if they get a bit lost , and then provide visuals which appeal to our other senses and create a deeper sense of understanding of what 's being described . so i think these are just a few keys that can help the rest of us to open that door and see the wonderland that is science and engineering . and because the engineers that i 've worked with have taught me to become really in touch with my inner nerd , i want to summarize with an equation .
this is a book written by a consummate player by the name of kevin carroll . kevin carroll came from extremely deprived circumstances : alcoholic mother , absent father , inner-city philadelphia , black , had to take care of a younger brother . found that when he looked at a playground out of a window into which he had been confined , he felt something different . and so he followed up on it . and his life -- the transformation of his life from deprivation and what one would expect -- potentially prison or death -- he become a linguist , a trainer for the 76ers and now is a motivational speaker .
flowers are always gray ,
the rain in burkina comes very fast , and after that , you have floods everywhere in the country . but for us , the rain is good . it brings sand and gravel to the river we need to use to build . we just wait for the rain to go .
ok ? stop . all right , now . yes , lot ’ s of laughter . yeah , exactly . lots of laughter , quite a bit of embarrassment . am i hearing a few  sorry ’ s  ? i think i ’ m hearing a few sorry ’ s . yup , yup , i think i probably am . and that ’ s exactly what happens every time , every time you do this with adults . mckim found this every time he did it with his students . he got exactly the same response : lots and lots of sorry ’ s . and he would point this out as evidence that we fear the judgment of our peers , and that we ’ re embarrassed about showing our ideas
there is a fixed kind of predatory gaze that you know you 're in trouble . but on the other side of that predatory gaze is a female husky in a play bow , wagging her tail . and something very unusual happens . that fixed behavior -- which is rigid and stereotyped and ends up with a meal -- changes . and this polar bear stands over the husky , no claws extended , no fangs taking a look . and they begin an incredible ballet . a play ballet . this is in nature : it overrides a carnivorous nature and what otherwise would have been a short fight to the death .
so depending on how i display it , i can hear and i can compose music with food . so imagine a restaurant where we can have , like , lady gaga salads as starters . i mean , this would get teenagers to eat their vegetables , probably . and also , some rachmaninov piano concertos as main dishes , and some bjork or madonna desserts , that would be a very exciting restaurant where you can actually eat songs . also , the way i perceive beauty has changed , because when i look at someone , i hear their face , so someone might look very beautiful but sound terrible . and it might happen the opposite ,
in other words , mind-wandering very likely seems to be an actual cause , and not merely a consequence , of unhappiness . a few minutes ago , i likened mind-wandering to a slot machine you 'd never want to play . well , how often do people 's minds wander ? turns out , they wander a lot . in fact , really a lot . forty-seven percent of the time , people are thinking about something other than what they 're currently doing . how does that depend on what people are doing ? this shows the rate of mind-wandering across 22 activities ranging from a high of 65 percent — — when people are taking a shower , brushing their teeth ,
through plants and algae , and their waste is our breath , and vice versa . this earth is alive , and it 's made its own membrane . we call it  atmosphere .  this is the icon of our journey . and you all here today can imagine and will shape where we go next . thank you . thank you . i 'm going to discuss with you three of my inventions that can have an effect on 10 to a 100 million people , which we will hope to see happen . we discussed , in the prior film , some of the old things that we did , like stents and insulin pumps for the diabetic .
my older sister was busy torturing my parents , and they were busy torturing her . i was lucky enough to be completely ignored , which is a fabulous thing , actually , i want to tell you . so , i was able to completely daydream my way through my life . and i finally daydreamed my way into nyu , at a very good time , in 1967 , where i met a man who was trying to blow up the math building of nyu . and i was writing terrible poetry and knitting sweaters for him . and feminists hated us , and the whole thing was wretched from beginning to end .
because we have all the ethnic diversities , all the -- you know , the genetic diversity , all the racial diversities , and also all the socio-economic diversities . so , i could actually choose samples to cover a cross section that would cover practically the whole world . so i did this for almost five years , and this experiment really took us all the way across the length and breadth of india . this is the himalayas . up in the north , very cold . i also had to check or invent an engineering design which would survive outdoors , and i was using regular , normal pcs , so i needed different climates , for which india is also great ,
we need to accelerate these shifts .
what we see again though is that the specific way that you spend on other people
do n't read them bedtime stories every night . maybe four nights out of the week read them bedtime stories and three nights of the week have them tell stories .
put at the right places to keep the machines running . i want to just cut this short . we did this over and over again . this sequence is also nice . this is a small child , a six-year-old , telling his eldest sister what to do . and this happens very often with these computers , that the younger children are found teaching the older ones . what did we find ? we found that six- to 13-year-olds can self-instruct in a connected environment , irrespective of anything that we could measure . so if they have access to the computer , they will teach themselves , including intelligence . i could n't find a single correlation with anything , but it had to be in groups .
and asked the people in your office , can you show me how to do it , and then somebody taught him . so i took the experiment out of delhi and repeated it , this time in a city called shivpuri in the center of india , where i was assured that nobody had ever taught anybody anything . so it was a warm day , and the hole in the wall was on that decrepit old building . this is the first kid who came there ; he later on turned out to be a 13-year-old school dropout . he came there and he started to fiddle around with the touchpad .
its mother . it even makes its cries sound like the mother 's language , which may further endear the baby to the mother , and which may give the baby a head start in the critical task of learning how to understand and speak its native language . but it 's not just sounds that fetuses are learning about in utero . it 's also tastes and smells . by seven months of gestation , the fetus ' taste buds are fully developed , and its olfactory receptors , which allow it to smell , are functioning . the flavors of the food a pregnant woman eats find their way into the amniotic fluid , which is continuously swallowed
and an idea of liberty . it reflects an idea of dignity , the dignity of the individual , the idea that each individual should have an equal vote , an equal say , in the formation of their government . but if we 're really to make democracy vigorous again , if we 're ready to revivify it , we need to get involved in a new project of the citizens and the politicians . democracy is not simply a question of structures . it is a state of mind . it is an activity . and part of that activity is honesty . after i speak to you today , i 'm going on a radio program
so we certainly need more of that . but because so many of the issues in education are n't just in school , they 're in family and community , what you also need , definitely , is more on the right hand side . you need efforts to supplement schools . the most famous of these is reggio emilia in italy , the family-based learning system to support and encourage people in schools .
and we could tell these viruses were not from these countries . they had come from thousands of miles away . and in one case , it originated on another continent . and not only that , but when they came into these countries , then they got on commercial jetliners probably and they traveled even farther to other places like russia , where , for the first time in over a decade last year , children were crippled and paralyzed by a disease that they had not seen for years . now all of these outbreaks that i just showed you , these are under control now , and it looks like they 'll probably stop very , very quickly .
we 've seen a 99 percent reduction in polio in 20 years . so if you look back to 1988 , there are about 350,000 cases of polio on the planet that year . in 2009 , we 're down to 1,600 cases . well how did that happen ? let 's look at a country like india . they have over a billion people in this country , but they have 35,000 local doctors who report paralysis , and clinicians , a huge reporting system in chemists . they have two and a half million vaccinators . but let me make the story a little bit more concrete for you . let me tell you the story of shriram ,
we 've show that four year-olds are actually better at finding out an unlikely hypothesis than adults are when we give them exactly the same task . so in these circumstances , the children are using statistics to find out about the world , but after all , scientists also do experiments , and we wanted to see if children are doing experiments . when children do experiments we call it  getting into everything  or else  playing .  and there 's been a bunch of interesting studies recently that have shown this playing around is really a kind of experimental research program . here 's one from cristine legare 's lab . what cristine did was use our blicket detectors .
the first step was to ask a question . now , i should say that we did n't get funding for this study because the scientists said small children could n't make a useful contribution to science , and the teachers said kids could n't do it . so we did it anyway . right ? of course . so , here are some of the questions . i put them in small print so you would n't bother reading it . point is that five of the questions that the kids came up with were actually the basis of science publication the last five to 15 years . right ? so they were asking questions that were significant
we know the temples they built , where people could come to experience a different reality . we know about the circuses , the arenas , the theaters . these are the remains of civilizations and they are the places that people went to experience life in a more concentrated , more ordered form . now , this man does n't need to go to a place like this , which is also -- this place , this arena , which is built like a greek amphitheatre , is a place for ecstasy also .
i 'm at a business school , so that 's what we do .
they visit an average of one and a half times a day , spend an average of 35 minutes a visit , and look at 50 pages a visit . so we feel that we 've formed a successful online community with girls . we launched two titles in october --  rockett 's new school  -- the first of a series of products -- is about a character called rockett beginning her first day of school in eighth grade at a brand new place , with a blank slate , which allows girls to play with the question of ,  what will i be like when i 'm older ?   what 's it going to be like to be in high school or junior high school ?
but that same shift in perspective leads us to have less tolerance than ever for injustice .
perfectly nice thing to do .
they said ,  please , do n't bring anyone with a degree and qualification into your college . 
and because fertility rates fell across that very same period that life expectancy was going up , that pyramid that has always represented the distribution of age in the population , with many young ones at the bottom winnowed to a tiny peak of older people who make it and survive to old age is being reshaped into a rectangle . and now , if you 're the kind of person who can get chills from population statistics , these are the ones that should do it .
get some . so , this is really where design is able to create a conversation . i was in these venues , and people were , you know , really into getting them . they were excited . it was breaking the ice , it was getting over a stigma , and i think that 's also what design can do . so , i was going to throw some condoms in the room and whatnot , but i 'm not sure it 's the etiquette here . yeah ? all right , all right . i have only a few . so , i have more , you can always ask me for some more later . and if anybody asks why you 're carrying a condom ,
ca : and so , that would be your response to the bjorn lomborg argument , that basically if you spend all this energy trying to solve the co2 problem , it 's going to take away all your other goals of trying to rid the world of poverty and malaria and so forth , it 's a stupid waste of the earth 's resources to put money towards that when there are better things we can do . bg : well , the actual spending on the r & amp ; d piece -- say the u.s. should spend 10 billion a year more than it is right now -- it 's not that dramatic .
it 's like trying to run into a brick wall . now i 'm not trying to be negative by throwing all these obstacles out and explaining what 's in our way . quite the opposite : i actually think people are amazing and smart and that they do care . but that , as i said , we live in this environment where all these obstacles are being put in our way . as long as we believe that people , our own neighbors , are selfish , stupid or lazy , then there 's no hope .
it 's about each person coming to this platform , embracing it in their own way , and being significant in their own life .
she said ,  oh gayle , this is actually my third business . my first business was a dressmaking business i started under the taliban . and that was actually an excellent business , because we provided jobs for women all around our neighborhood . and that 's really how i became an entrepreneur .  think about this : here were girls who braved danger to become breadwinners during years in which they could n't even be on their streets . and at a time of economic collapse when people sold baby dolls and shoe laces and windows and doors just to survive , these girls made the difference
i want to write about a tornado that comes into our house and blows all the windows out and ruins all the furniture and kills everybody .   all right . okay .  you tell a teacher that , and they 'll ask you , in all seriousness ,  should we send this child to the psychologist ?  and the answer is no , he 's just a boy . he 's just a little boy . it 's not okay to write these kinds of things in classrooms today . so that 's the first reason : zero tolerance policies and the way they 're lived out . the next reason that boys ' cultures are out of sync with school cultures :
can actually get those things onto the stage . so the way they work is , you know , you just put your finger in the thing , pull them back , and off you go . so , don ’ t look backwards . that ’ s my only recommendation here . i want to see how many of you can get these things on the stage . so come on ! there we go , there we go . thank you . thank you . oh . i have another idea . i wanted to -- there we go . there we go . thank you , thank you , thank you . not bad , not bad . no serious injuries so far .
i just asked my mother one day ,  why do all these women love me so much ?  she just answered ,  they are contributing to pay for your education hoping that you will be successful and one day come back and help improve the quality of life of the community . 
so we actually tried to commission some crash tests .
every day -- this morning , i wake up and go , my life is about a mustache . essentially , i 'm a mustache farmer . and my season is november . so in 2005 , the campaign got more momentum , was more successful in australia and then new zealand , and then in 2006 we came to a pivotal point .
appreciate what it is , you have to look a little bit closer . so that 's just the eye of the bee with a microscope , and now all of a sudden you can see that the bee has thousands of individual eyes called ommatidia , and they actually have sensory hairs in their eyes so they know when they 're right up close to something , because they ca n't see in stereo . as we go smaller , here is a human hair . a human hair is about the smallest thing that the eye can see . it 's about a tenth of a millimeter . and as we go smaller again ,
and , although there 's many directions people are seeking , i really only see five that can achieve the big numbers . i 've left out tide , geothermal , fusion , biofuels . those may make some contribution , and if they can do better than i expect , so much the better , but my key point here is that we 're going to have to work on each of these five , and we ca n't give up any of them because they look daunting , because they all have significant challenges . let 's look first at the burning fossil fuels , either burning coal or burning natural gas . what you need to do there , seems like it might be simple , but it 's not ,
let 's start with city hall . you ever see one of these before ? this is a newspaper ad . it 's a notice of a zoning application change for a new office building so the neighborhood knows what 's happening .
once upon a time , there was a dread disease that afflicted children .
those three women have trained 27 more women and solar-electrified 100 villages in afghanistan . we went to africa , and we did the same thing . all these women sitting at one table from eight , nine countries , all chatting to each other , not understanding a word , because they 're all speaking a different language . but their body language is great . they 're speaking to each other and actually becoming solar engineers . i went to sierra leone , and there was this minister driving down in the dead of night -- comes across this village . comes back , goes into the village , says ,  well what 's the story ?  they said ,  these two grandmothers ... 
so i just wanted you to look at this .
and the problem with this cure was it was very expensive , and it was very complicated to use .
thank you . people are living longer and societies are getting grayer .
is that there 's a much better solution out there , that 's gotten nobody excited because everyone is so delighted with the way car seats are presumably working . and if you think from a design perspective , about going back to square one , and say ,  i just want to protect kids in the back seat .  i do n't there 's anyone in this room who 'd say ,  well , the right way to start would be , let 's make a great seat belt for adults . and then , let 's make this really big contraption that you have to rig up to it in this daisy chain .  i mean , why not start -- who 's sitting in the back seat anyway except for kids ?
i 'll just wind up by saying that i think you do n't have to look for solutions outside . look for solutions within .
and that 's because there 's all of this chemistry going on , these molecules that say who each of these groups of cells is , and what their tasks should be . again , we think that bacteria invented that , and you 've just evolved a few more bells and whistles , but all of the ideas are in these simple systems that we can study . the final thing is , again just to reiterate that there 's this practical part , and so we 've made these anti-quorum sensing molecules that are being developed as new kinds of therapeutics . but then , to finish with a plug for all the good and miraculous bacteria
and it describes the same effortless , spontaneous feeling that you get when you enter into this ecstatic state .
and remember , it 's frozen . and so you can see here , old-fashioned technology of the paintbrush being applied . we take a microscope slide . then we very carefully melt onto the slide . this will then go onto a robot that 's going to apply one of those stains to it . and our anatomists are going to go in and take a deeper look at this . so again this is what they can see under the microscope . you can see collections and configurations of large and small cells in clusters and various places . and from there it 's routine . they understand where to make these assignments .
if it would be ok if i stayed for the week . i had a sleeping bag . the family had a small shed on the side of the house , so i said ,  could i sleep in my sleeping bag in the evenings ?  and i just told the little girl , whose name was hyun-sook lee , that if i ever did anything to embarrass her -- she did n't speak a word of english , although she looked very american -- she could just put up her hand and say ,  stop ,  and i would stop taking pictures . and then , my translator left . so there i was , i could n't speak a word of korean ,
and second , and probably the more reflective one , is just about how much each of us can hold problems in opposition when they 're really not that way .
we take the sand , we mix it with clay , and we keep building . that is it . the gando project was always connected to training the people , because i just wanted , one day when i fall down and die , that at least one person from gando keeps doing this work . but you will be surprised . i 'm still alive .
to run , during the manufacturing process , 20 colors for the x and the o , which is the name of the computer , and by mixing them on the manufacturing floor , you get 20 times 20 : you get 400 different options there . so , the lessons from seeing the kids using them in the developing world are incredible . but this is my nephew , anthony , in switzerland , and he had the laptop for an afternoon , and i had to take it back . it was hard . and it was a prototype . and a month and a half later , i come back to switzerland , and there he is playing with his own version .
you say it . you ca n't catch me . children : you ca n't catch me . teacher : i 'm the gingerbread man . children : i 'm the gingerbread man . teacher : well done . very good ... sm : back at gateshead , a 10-year-old girl gets into the heart of hinduism in 15 minutes . you know , stuff which i do n't know anything about . two children watch a tedtalk . they wanted to be footballers before . after watching eight tedtalks , he wants to become leonardo da vinci . it 's pretty simple stuff . this is what i 'm building now -- they 're called soles : self organized learning environments . the furniture is designed so that children can sit in front of big , powerful screens ,
all the toys that they 've outgrown two years ago and said ,  why do n't we start selling some of this on craigslist and kijiji ?  and they can actually sell it
and kylie -- i mean , it was almost like kylie was her own child . she 's being baptized . now , a lot of parents , when they adopt , actually want to erase their children 's history . and gail and gene did the complete opposite . they were studying korean ; they bought korean clothes . gene even did a little tile work in the kitchen , which was that ,  once upon a time , there was a beautiful girl that came from hills of korea to live happily ever after in atlanta .  she hates this picture -- it was her first job . she bought a bright red karmann ghia with the money she made working at burger king .
recently , the world bank opened its vault of data for public use , releasing 8,000 economic and social indicators for 200 countries over 50 years ,
so in the philippines today , parents and students can give real-time feedback on a website , checkmyschool.org , or using sms , whether teachers and textbooks are showing up in school ,
so i may have forgotten to mention that my son is an only child . so it 's going to be really important that he be able to drive me around some day . so how do we guarantee the safety of our kids ? how can we 100 percent guarantee the safety of our kids ? let me tell you what i 've come up with . if only . my little boy 's right there , and he 's like ,  she 's not kidding . she 's totally not kidding .  so in all seriousness , should my kid play football ? should your kid play football ? i do n't know . but i do know there are three things you can do .
then you get to their political articles . here 's a great article about an important election race that 's happening . it talks about the candidates -- written very well -- but no information , no follow-up , no websites for the campaigns , no information about when the debates are , where the campaign offices are . here 's another good article about a new campaign opposing privatization of transit without any contact information for the campaign .
you could get paid . they used to pay you two cents per coat hanger . so i was just like , well there 's all kinds of coat hangers . and so i 'll just go get them . and i knew she would n't want me to go get them , so i just did it anyway . and i learned that you could actually negotiate with people . this one person offered me three cents and i got him up to three and a half . i even knew at a seven-year-old age that i could actually get a fractional percent of a cent , and people would pay that because it multiplied up .
and he 'd say ,  come back in a week , if you still feel lousy .  ok , and most of them would not come back , but some of them would come back . and when they came back , he , still convinced they were not sick , had another jar of pills . in this jar were huge horse pills . they were almost impossible to swallow . and these , to me , are the analogy for the car seats . people would look at these and say ,  man , this thing is so big and so hard to swallow . if this does n't make me feel better , you know , what possibly could ?  and it turned out that most people would n't come back ,
on where to go . but we only looked at a handful of individuals at this point . we 're certainly going to be looking at more . i 'll just close by saying that the tools are there , and this is truly an unexplored , undiscovered continent . this is the new frontier , if you will . and so for those who are undaunted , but humbled by the complexity of the brain , the future awaits . thanks . each of you possesses the most powerful , dangerous and subversive trait that natural selection has ever devised . it 's a piece of neural audio technology for rewiring other people 's minds . i 'm talking about your language , of course ,
there are many ways to be a mammal . a 'roo hops in oz ; a horse runs in asia ; and a wolf evolves stilt legs in brazil . primates emerge from jungles , as tarsiers first , becoming lemurs not much later . learning became reinforced . bands of apes ventured into the open . and forests dried out once more . going upright became a lifestyle . so who are we ? brothers of masculine chimps , sisters of feminine bonobos ? we are all of them , and more . we 're molded by the same life force . the blood veins in our hands echoed a course of water traces on the earth . and our brains -- our celebrated brains --
it looks like the world car park could grow to on the order of 1.1 billion vehicles . now , if you parked those end to end and wrapped them around the earth , that would stretch around the earth 125 times . now , we 've made great progress with automobile technology over the last 100 years . cars are dramatically cleaner , dramatically safer , more efficient and radically more affordable than they were 100 years ago . but the fact remains : the fundamental dna of the automobile has stayed pretty much the same . if we are going to reinvent the automobile today , rather than 100 years ago , knowing what we know about the issues associated with our product
women own nearly half a million firms . china , women run 20 percent of all small businesses . and in the developing world overall , that figure is 40 to 50 percent . nearly everywhere i go , i meet incredibly interesting entrepreneurs who are seeking access to finance , access to markets and established business networks . they are often ignored because they 're harder to help . it is much riskier to give a 50,000 dollar loan than it is to give a 500 dollar loan . and as the world bank recently noted , women are stuck in a productivity trap . those in small businesses ca n't get the capital they need to expand
but there were problems .
get kids to stand up in front of groups and talk , even if it 's just stand up in front of their friends and do plays and have speeches . those are entrepreneurial traits that you want to be nurturing .
first of all , they learn the sound of their mothers ' voices . because sounds from the outside world have to travel through the mother 's abdominal tissue and through the amniotic fluid that surrounds the fetus , the voices fetuses hear , starting around the fourth month of gestation , are muted and muffled . one researcher says that they probably sound a lot like the the voice of charlie brown 's teacher in the old  peanuts  cartoon . but the pregnant woman 's own voice reverberates through her body , reaching the fetus much more readily . and because the fetus is with her all the time , it hears her voice a lot .
of the best machine learning programs that we have now . and some 10 years ago , i suggested that babies might be doing the same thing . so if you want to know what 's going on underneath those beautiful brown eyes , i think it actually looks something like this . this is reverend bayes 's notebook . so i think those babies are actually making complicated calculations with conditional probabilities that they 're revising to figure out how the world works . all right , now that might seem like an even taller order to actually demonstrate . because after all , if you ask even grownups about statistics , they look extremely stupid .
has enriched his life . more than 50 people have come to stay in the 18th-century watchhouse he lives in with his cat , squeak . now , i mention squeak because sebastian 's first guest happened to see a rather large mouse run across the kitchen , and she promised that she would refrain from leaving a bad review on one condition : he got a cat . and so sebastian bought squeak to protect his reputation . now , as many of you know , airbnb is a peer-to-peer marketplace that matches people who have space to rent with people who are looking for a place to stay
the dramatic moments of the birth of our first son , declan . obviously a really profound moment , and it changed our lives in many ways . it also changed our lives in many unexpected ways , and those unexpected ways we later reflected on , that eventually spawned a business idea between the two of us , and a year later , we launched babble , a website for parents . rufus griscom : now i think of our story as starting a few years earlier . av : that 's true . rg : you may remember , we fell head over heels in love . av : we did . rg : we were at the time running a very different kind of website .
this is the control condition . this is what they memorized . computer : ♫ memory , thump . ♫ cl : ♫ thump of the beat in a known repeat ♫ ♫ rhythm and rhyme , they make me complete ♫ ♫ spittin ' rhymes that hit you like a lightning strike ♫ ♫ i search for the truth in this eternal quest ♫ ♫ psychopathic words in my head appear ♫ ♫ whisper these lyrics only i can hear ♫ ♫ the art of discovering and that which is hovering ♫ ♫ inside the mind of those unconfined ♫ ♫ all of these words keep pouring out like rain ♫
and this is a word that appears throughout early mathematics , such as this 10th century derivation of proofs .
and that selects for resistant mutants . and so now of course we have this global problem in infectious diseases . we thought , well what if we could sort of do behavior modifications , just make these bacteria so they ca n't talk , they ca n't count , and they do n't know to launch virulence . and so that 's exactly what we 've done , and we 've sort of taken two strategies . the first one is we 've targeted the intraspecies communication system . so we made molecules that look kind of like the real molecules -- which you saw -- but they 're a little bit different . and so they lock into those receptors ,
and that 's what i want to talk to you a little bit about today . these are some of my kids with a salad bar . i put salad bars in all of our schools when i got there . everyone says it could n't be done . little kids could n't eat off the salad bar , big kids would spit in it -- neither happened . when i took over this , i tried to really figure out , like , what my vision would be . how do we really change children 's relationship to food ? and i 'll tell you why we need to change it , but we absolutely have to change it .
because having a meadow or living by a meadow is transformational . that it is amazing that connection we can have with what 's there . these milkweed plants have grown up in my meadow over the last four years . add to watch the different plants , or insects , that come to these flowers , to watch that -- and we 've heard about , you know , this relationship you can have with wine , this companion you can have as it matures and as it has these different fragrances . and this is a companion , and this is a relationship that never dries up . you never run out of that companion as you drink this wine , too .
but what happened when we looked inside the pig 's heart , to the electrogram ? there was the baseline -- first of all , a much bigger and more reliable signal . second of all , i 'll bet even you people who are untrained can see the difference , and we see here an st segment elevation right after this sharp line . look at the difference there . it does n't take much -- every layperson could see that difference , and computers can be programmed to easily detect it . then , look at that after three minutes . we see that the signal that 's actually in the heart , we can use it to tell people that they 're having a heart attack
and we could not find 25 girls in high school .
on cooperation to maintain and enhance our levels of prosperity , his actions suggest to us it might be inevitable that we have to confront the idea that our destiny is to be one world with one language . thank you . matt ridley : mark , one question . svante found that the foxp2 gene , which seems to be associated with language , was also shared in the same form in neanderthals as us . do we have any idea how we could have defeated neanderthals if they also had language ? mark pagel : this is a very good question . so many of you will be familiar with the idea that there 's this gene called foxp2
are under canada , and that south carolina is on top of north carolina , this is the home that i grew up in , ok ? so , it 's a miracle that i 'm here today . but actually , it 's not . it 's actually a wonderful thing . but then she says tel aviv and lenin , which is the town they came from , and ,  sorry , the rest unknown , thank you .  but in her lexicon ,  sorry , the rest unknown , thank you  is  sorry , the rest unknown , go to hell ,  because she could n't care less .  the impossibility of february  is that february 's a really wretched month in new york
so the red levels are where a gene is turned on to a great degree . green is the sort of cool areas where it 's not turned on . and each gene gives us a fingerprint . and remember that we 've assayed all the 25,000 genes in the genome and have all of that data available . so what can scientists learn about this data ? we 're just starting to look at this data ourselves . there 's some basic things that you would want to understand . two great examples are drugs , prozac and wellbutrin . these are commonly prescribed antidepressants . now remember , we 're assaying genes . genes send the instructions to make proteins .
so the yellow bar represents car seats , the orange bar lap-and-shoulder , and the red bar lap-only seatbelts .
♫ i need a mad scientist to check my brain ♫ i guarantee you that will never happen again . so now , what 's great about these free-stylers , they will get cued different words . they do n't know what 's coming , but they 'll hear something off the cuff . go ahead and hit that right sound icon . they are going to be cued these three square words :  like ,   not  and  head .  he does n't know what 's coming . free-styler : ♫ i 'm like some kind of [ unclear ] ♫ ♫ [ unclear ] extraterrestrial , celestial scene ♫ ♫ with two microphones hovering over my head ♫ ♫ see what you grinning ♫
you know , developing countries today will not simply accept solutions that are handed down to them by the u.s. , europe or the world bank .
doing things for which many of them did n't expect either fame or fortune , but which made their life meaningful and worth doing .
thank you . i have the answer to a question that we 've all asked .
through school not really reading more than the minimum , and still to this day ca n't read silently much faster than i can read aloud , but there were a lot of benefits to being dyslexic for me because when i finally did reconcile myself to how slow i was going to have to do it , then i think i came very slowly into an appreciation of all of those qualities of language and of sentences that are not just the cognitive aspects of language : the syncopations , the sounds of words , what words look like , where paragraphs break , where lines break . i mean , i was n't so badly dyslexic that
her best friend that she used to play with after school every day . and myung sung , under some pressure from me and the translator , gave us an address on the outside of seoul . and i went to that address and knocked on the door , and a man answered the door . it was not a very nice area of seoul , as there were mud streets outside of it . and i knocked on the door , and hyun-sook answered the door , and her eyes were bloodshot , and she seemed to be in shock . she did n't recognize me -- there was no recognition whatsoever . and this man came to the door and kind of barked something in korean .
in the case of artwork , the history is special indeed . the philosopher denis dutton in his wonderful book  the art instinct  makes the case that ,  the value of an artwork is rooted in assumptions about the human performance underlying its creation .  and that could explain the difference between an original and a forgery . they may look alike , but they have a different history . the original is typically the product of a creative act , the forgery is n't . i think this approach can explain differences in people 's taste in art . this is a work by jackson pollock . who here likes the work of jackson pollock ?
and ex-probation officers . the man who ran it was an ex-army officer . every time i had a visit by a person who i did not know who would feed me grapes , once every three months , i was strip-searched . that home was full of young boys who were on remand for things like murder . and this was the preparation that i was being given after 17 years as a child of the state . i have to tell this story . i have to tell it , because there was no one to put two and two together . i slowly became aware that i knew nobody
now these are multifunctional areas of the brain . as i like to say , these are not the  jazz areas  of the brain . they do a whole host of things that have to do with self-reflection , introspection , working memory and so forth . really , consciousness is seated in the frontal lobe . but we have this combination of an area that 's thought to be involved in self-monitoring , turning off , and this area that 's thought to be autobiographical , or self-expressive , turning on . and we think , at least in this preliminary -- it 's one study ; it 's probably wrong , but it 's one study -- we think that at least a reasonable hypothesis
but this is quite extraordinary : more has been learned about the underpinnings of disease in the last two and a half years than in the history of man . and when you put that together with , for example , now an app for the iphone with your genotype to guide drug therapy ... but , the future -- we can now tell who 's going to get type ii diabetes from all the common variants , and that 's going to get filled in more with low-frequency variants in the future . we can tell who 's going to get breast cancer from the various genes . we can also know who 's likely to get atrial fibrillation .
become a cyborg , tries to encourage people to extend their senses by using technology as part of the body . we should all think that knowledge comes from our senses , so if we extend our senses , we will consequently extend our knowledge . i think life will be much more exciting when we stop creating applications for mobile phones and we start creating applications for our own body . i think this will be a big , big change that we will see during this century . so i do encourage you all to think about which senses you 'd like to extend .
culture will .
were more important than ever . we were in a difficult operation in afghanistan in 2007 , and an old friend of mine , that i had spent many years at various points of my career with -- godfather to one of their kids -- he sent me a note , just in an envelope , that had a quote from sherman to grant that said ,  i knew if i ever got in a tight spot , that you would come , if alive .  and having that kind of relationship , for me , turned out to be critical at many points in my career . and i learned that you have to give that
to a scrap metal recycler where i got paid . and i thought that was kind of cool . strangely enough , 30 years later , we 're building 1-800-got-junk ? and making money off that too . i built these little pincushions when i was 11 years old in cubs , and we made these pin cushions for our moms for mother 's day . and you made these pincushions out of wooden clothespins -- when we used to hang clothes on clotheslines outside . and you 'd make these chairs . and i had these little pillows that i would sew up . and you could stuff pins in them .
you were separated from your family by the state . you were separated from your family and placed into mother and baby homes . you were appointed a social worker . the adoptive parents were lined up . it was the primary purpose of the social worker , the aim , to get the woman at her most vulnerable time in her entire life , to sign the adoption papers . so the adoption papers were signed . the mother and baby 's homes were often run by nuns . the adoption papers were signed , the child was given to the adoptive parents , and the mother shipped back to her community to say that she 'd been on a little break .
girl 3 : this is my pretend [ unclear ] one . girl 4 : we make a school newspaper on the computer .
was carried out in dijon , france where researchers found that mothers who consumed food and drink flavored with licorice-flavored anise during pregnancy showed a preference for anise on their first day of life , and again , when they were tested later , on their fourth day of life . babies whose mothers did not eat anise during pregnancy showed a reaction that translated roughly as  yuck .  what this means is that fetuses are effectively being taught by their mothers about what is safe and good to eat . fetuses are also being taught about the particular culture that they 'll be joining through one of culture 's most powerful expressions ,
it 's changed my life .
it 's basically a large data set of information that 's all freely available to any scientist around the world . they do n't even have to log in to come use this tool , mine this data , find interesting things out with this . so here 's the modalities that we put together . you 'll start to recognize these things from what we 've collected before . here 's the mr. it provides the framework . there 's an operator side on the right that allows you to turn , it allows you to zoom in , it allows you to highlight individual structures . but most importantly , we 're now mapping into this anatomic framework , which is a common framework for people to understand where genes are turned on .
to downgrade our super , hyper-mobile phones into the essence of their function .
that they hold within themselves . let 's journey together . let 's journey together . thank you . chris anderson : thank you so much . right now in liberia , what do you see as the main issue that troubles you ? lg : i 've been asked to lead the liberian reconciliation initiative . as part of my work , i 'm doing these tours in different villages and towns --
and -- at least they told me it was her house , i guess it was at one time , she had a party there or something . but anyway , this was the house , and they all lived there . now this is 24/7 living , half-a-dozen people who 'd left their -- some had left their wives behind and families behind , and they literally lived in this house for the entire six months the project was in america , but the first three months were the most intensive .
currently , there are about seven or 8,000 different languages spoken on earth . now you might say , well , this is just natural . as we diverge , our languages are naturally going to diverge . but the real puzzle and irony is that the greatest density of different languages on earth is found where people are most tightly packed together . if we go to the island of papua new guinea , we can find about 800 to 1,000 distinct human languages , different human languages , spoken on that island alone . there are places on that island where you can encounter a new language every two or three miles .
this one is more than 400 years old . each one was pinched or carved out of a ball of clay , and it was the imperfections that people cherished . everyday pots like this cup take eight to 10 hours to fire . i just took this out of the kiln last week , and the kiln itself takes another day or two to cool down , but raku is really fast . you do it outside , and you take the kiln up to temperature . in 15 minutes , it goes to 1,500 degrees , and as soon as you see that the glaze has melted inside , you can see that faint sheen , you turn the kiln off ,
that you could build on , and perhaps help me do my work . the first piece of the puzzle is remoteness and the quality of education . now , by remoteness , i mean two or three different kinds of things . of course , remoteness in its normal sense , which means that as you go further and further away from an urban center , you get to remoter areas . what happens to education ? the second , or a different kind of remoteness is that within the large metropolitan areas all over the world , you have pockets , like slums , or shantytowns , or poorer areas , which are socially and economically remote
now i 'm not advocating for bullies . i 'm not suggesting that we need to be allowing guns and knives into school . but when we say that an eagle scout in a high school classroom who has a locked parked car in the parking lot and a penknife in it has to be suspended from school , i think we may have gone a little too far with zero tolerance . another way that zero tolerance lives itself out is in the writing of boys . in a lot of classrooms today you 're not allowed to write about anything that 's violent . you 're not allowed to write about anything
but we had a little bit over an hour where we could 've saved this pig 's life . well , because of the fda , we did n't save the pig 's life , because we need to do this type of animal research for humans . but when it comes to the sake of a human , we can save their life . we can save the lives of people who are at high risk for a heart attack . what is the response to acute myocardial infarction , a heart attack , today ? well , you feel some chest pain or indigestion . it 's not all that bad ; you decide not to do anything .
he stepped back and he watched where everybody was going and he went the other way . and i hear that story over and over . matt froind , a dairy farmer in new canaan , connecticut , who woke up one day and realized the crap from his cows was worth more than their milk , if he could use it to make these biodegradable flower pots . now , he 's selling them to walmart . follow his passion ? the guy 's -- come on . so i started to look at passion , i started to look at efficiency versus effectiveness -- as tim talked about earlier , that 's a huge distinction .
during those time periods that it 's not available . so , we 've got big cost challenges here , we have transmission challenges : for example , say this energy source is outside your country ; you not only need the technology , but you have to deal with the risk of the energy coming from elsewhere . and , finally , this storage problem . and , to dimensionalize this , i went through and looked at all the types of batteries that get made -- for cars , for computers , for phones , for flashlights , for everything -- and compared that to the amount of electrical energy the world uses , and what i found is that all the batteries we make now
so the next day i go out . and i 'm given a horse and we go get the lambs and we take them to a pen that we built , and we go about the business of animal husbandry . melanie is the wife of albert . albert is the shepherd in question . melanie picks up the lamb -- two hands -- one hand on both legs on the right , likewise on the left . lamb goes on the post , she opens it up . alright . great . albert goes in , i follow albert , the crew is around . i always watch the process done the first time before i try it .
compare that to this woman from uganda .
we are not equipped for the 21st century . evolution did not prepare us for this . we just do n't have the bandwidth , and for people who say , oh , they 're having a nice day , they 're perfectly fine , they 're more insane than the rest of us . because i 'll show you where there might be a few glitches in evolution . okay , let me just explain this to you . when we were ancient man — — millions of years ago , and we suddenly felt threatened by a predator , okay ? — — we would — thank you . i drew these myself . thank you very much . thank you . thank you .
it should n't take away from other things . the thing you get into big money on , and this , reasonable people can disagree , is when you have something that 's non-economic and you 're trying to fund that --
here 's one of the culprits .
but we know it was n't good for you and me . and that is what the usda allows in our food supply . and that has to change , you know . the usda can not be seen as the be-all and end-all of what we feed our kids and what 's allowed . we can not believe that they have our best interests at heart . the antithesis of this whole thing is sustainable food . that 's what i really try and get people to understand . i really try and teach it to kids . i think it 's the most important . it 's consuming food in a way in which we 'll still have a planet ,
because it allows you to implant a thought from your mind directly into someone else 's mind , and they can attempt to do the same to you , without either of you having to perform surgery . instead , when you speak , you 're actually using a form of telemetry not so different from the remote control device for your television . it 's just that , whereas that device relies on pulses of infrared light , your language relies on pulses , discrete pulses , of sound . and just as you use the remote control device to alter the internal settings of your television to suit your mood , you use your language
and go ,  mmmmm , broccoli . i tasted the broccoli . mmmmm .  and then she would take a little bit of the crackers , and she 'd go ,  eww , yuck , crackers . i tasted the crackers . eww , yuck .  so she 'd act as if what she wanted was just the opposite of what the babies wanted . we did this with 15 and 18 month-old babies . and then she would simply put her hand out and say ,  can you give me some ?  so the question is : what would the baby give her , what they liked or what she liked ? and the remarkable thing was that 18 month-old babies , just barely walking and talking ,
and what it does is , it changes shape . so , it goes from a circle , to a round , to a square , to a figure eight . and just by drawing on a little computer tablet , the entire light fixture adjusts to what shape you want . and then finally , the leaf lamp for herman miller . this is a pretty involved process ; it took us about four and a half years . but i really was looking for creating a unique experience of light , a new experience of light . so , we had to design both the light and the light bulb . and that 's a unique opportunity , i would say , in design .
with the same success that we had last night when we did the practice . so matt keenan , just any time you 're -- all right -- ready to let her go . but first , we 're going to make sure that it 's appearing on the screen , so you see what it sees . you can imagine yourself being a mouse or fly inside of it , looking out of its camera . matt keenan : it 's switched on . pm : but now we 're trying to get the video . there we go . mk : can you bring up the house lights ? pm : yeah , the house lights and we 'll see you all better
so we have an ironic problem -- good teachers do n't want to go to just those places where they 're needed the most . i started in 1999 to try and address this problem with an experiment , which was a very simple experiment in new delhi . i basically embedded a computer into a wall of a slum in new delhi . the children barely went to school , they did n't know any english -- they 'd never seen a computer before , and they did n't know what the internet was . i connected high speed internet to it -- it 's about three feet off the ground -- turned it on and left it there .
how did this happen ? well we 're no genetically hardier than our ancestors were 10,000 years ago . this increase in life expectancy is the remarkable product of culture -- the crucible that holds science and technology and wide-scale changes in behavior that improve health and well-being .
for our lifestyle . and with all the wonderful technology we have we can do things that are much more efficient : conserve , recycle , etc . let me just rush very quickly through things that we 've done . human-powered airplane -- gossamer condor sort of started me in this direction in 1976 and 77 , winning the kremer prize in aviation history , followed by the albatross . and we began making various odd planes and creatures . here 's a giant flying replica of a pterosaur that has no tail . trying to have it fly straight is like trying to shoot an arrow
the clinical trials of transcranial magnetic stimulators -- that 's what tms means , device to treat migraine headaches -- appears to be quite successful . well , that 's the good news . the present portable device is far from optimally designed , both as to human factors as appearance . i think she said it looks like a gun . a lot of people do n't like guns . engage a company having prior successes for human factors engineering and industrial design to optimize the design of the first portable tms device that will be sold to the patients who have migraine headaches . and that is the second wish .
sometimes they send you pictures of them using the microscope .
working at the very top of their craft -- except one . this photograph was taken by dr. euan mason in new zealand last year , and it was submitted and published in national geographic . last year , we added a section to our website called  your shot ,  where anyone can submit photographs for possible publication . and it has become a wild success , tapping into the enthusiast photography community . the quality of these amateur photographs can , at times , be amazing . and seeing this reinforces , for me , that every one of us has at least one or two great photographs in them . but to be a great photojournalist ,
so , what we did was : instead of having a staff of artists that are just your wrist , we decided to free up a team of creative designers and engineers to find out what 's the successor to the suv phenomenon in america . this is 1996 we did this project . and so we sent them off with this team name , deep blue . now many people know deep blue from ibm -- we actually stole it from them because we figured
so their scores had gone up from zero to 30 percent , which is an educational impossibility under the circumstances . but 30 percent is not a pass . so i found that they had a friend , a local accountant , a young girl , and they played football with her . i asked that girl ,  would you teach them enough biotechnology to pass ?  and she said ,  how would i do that ? i do n't know the subject .  i said ,  no , use the method of the grandmother .  she said ,  what 's that ?  i said ,  well , what you 've got to do is stand behind them and admire them all the time .
i did comic book arbitrage . when i was about 10 years old , i sold comic books out of our cottage on georgian bay . and i would go biking up to the end of the beach and buy all the comics from the poor kids . and then i would go back to the other end of the beach and sell them to the rich kids . but it was obvious to me , right ? buy low , sell high . you 've got this demand over here that has money . do n't try to sell to the poor kids ; they do n't have cash . the rich people do . go get some .
which would presumably save a lot of lives ? and i think the answer , perhaps , lies in a story . the answer both to why has a car seat been so successful , and why this may someday be adopted or not , lies in a story that my dad told me , relating to when he was a doctor in the u.s. air force in england . and this is a long time ago : you were allowed to do things then you ca n't do today . so , my father would have patients come in who he thought were not really sick . and he had a big jar full of placebo pills that he would give them ,
i promise you , parusharam will speak in the ted conference a few years from now . thank you . i 'm going to try to give you a view of the world as i see it , the problems and the opportunities that we face , and then ask the question if we should be optimistic or pessimistic . and then i 'll let you in on a secret , which is why i am an incurable optimist . let me start off showing you an al gore movie that you may have seen before . now , you 've all seen  inconvenient truth .  this is a little more inconvenient . : man : ... extremely dangerous questions .
the party line is that every single aspect of my life has just gotten dramatically better ever since i participated in the miracle that is childbirth and family . i 'll never forget , i remember vividly to this day , our first son , declan , was nine months old , and i was sitting there on the couch , and i was reading daniel gilbert 's wonderful book ,  stumbling on happiness .  and i got about two-thirds of the way through , and there was a chart on the right-hand side -- on the right-hand page -- that we 've labeled here  the most terrifying chart imaginable for a new parent . 
and painting squares out of randomness , and i was n't getting anywhere . so i went back and dumped all my paintings in the arno , and i thought , i 'm going to just start playing around . jb : richard serra says that so nonchalantly , you might have missed it . he went and saw this painting by a guy who 'd been dead for 300 years , and realized ,  i ca n't do that ,  and so richard serra went back to his studio in florence , picked up all of his work up to that point , and threw it in a river . richard serra let go of painting at that moment ,
being an apprentice , you know , you do that . albert reaches in his pocket to pull out , you know , this black rubber band but what comes out instead is a knife . and i 'm like that 's not rubber at all , you know . and he kind of flicked it open in a way that caught the sun that was just coming over the rockies , it was very -- it was , it was impressive . in the space of about two seconds , albert had the knife between the cartilage of the tail , right next to the butt of the lamb , and very quickly the tail was gone and in the bucket that i was holding .
i said ,  no , i want to take this woman .  they said ,  why ? she does n't know the language . you do n't know her . 
and we were saying ,  but who 's going to volunteer for this procedure ?  but it turns out the men do , because they 're hearing from their girlfriends that they prefer it , and the men also believe it improves their sex life . so if we can start to understand what people really want in health and development , we can change communities and we can change whole nations . well , why is all of this so important ? so let 's talk about what happens when this all comes together , when you tie the three things together . and polio , i think , is one of the most powerful examples .
which then trigger high-quality piano samples like this . cl : okay , so it works . and so through this piano keyboard , we now have the means to take a musical process and study it . so what do you do now that you have this cool piano keyboard ? you ca n't just sort of --  it 's great we 've got this keyboard .  we actually have to come up with a scientific experiment . and so the experiment really rests on the following : what happens in the brain during something that 's memorized and over-learned , and what happens in the brain during something that is spontaneously generated , or improvised ,
and we suspect that this may help to explain why older people are better than younger people at solving hotly-charged emotional conflicts and debates .
that 's one of the reasons so much of what we 've come to think of as western science and mathematics and engineering was really worked out in the first few centuries of the common era by the persians and the arabs and the turks .
we savor life .
this is what the map of tandale looked like
vocational skill program for the older siblings so the younger ones are not stopped from coming to school . there is also this myth that children from the slums can not integrate with mainstream . take a look at this little girl who was one of the 28 children from all privileged schools , best schools in the country that was selected for the duke university talent identification program and was sent to iim ahmedabad . video : girl : duke iima camp . whenever we see that iima , it was such a pride for us to go to that camp . everybody was very friendly , especially i got a lot of friends .
everyone pitches in and gives 20 hives to help him replace those lost colonies . and so , it 's a very dynamic , and i think , historic and exciting community to be involved with . of course , the real importance for bees is not the honey . and although i highly encourage you , all use honey . i mean , it 's the most ethical sweetener , and you know , it 's a dynamic and fun sweetener . but we estimate that about one in three bites of food we eat is directly or indirectly pollinated by honeybees . now , i want to just illustrate that in the fact that if we look at the breakfast i had yesterday morning --
we think this is a powerful , world-changing invention . and i 'd like to thank chris for this opportunity to unveil our technology with you , and soon the world . thank you . what is going on in this baby 's mind ? if you 'd asked people this 30 years ago , most people , including psychologists , would have said that this baby was irrational , illogical , egocentric -- that he could n't take the perspective of another person or understand cause and effect . in the last 20 years , developmental science has completely overturned that picture . so in some ways , we think that this baby 's thinking is like the thinking of the most brilliant scientists .
we are participating in a reality that is different from that of the everyday life that we 're used to .
an 18 month boy in bihar , a northern state in india . this year on august 8th , he felt paralysis and on the 13th , his parents took him to the doctor . on august 14th and 15th , they took a stool sample , and by the 25th of august , it was confirmed he had type 1 polio . by august 30th , a genetic test was done , and we knew what strain of polio shriram had . now it could have come from one of two places . it could have come from nepal , just to the north , across the border , or from jharkhand , a state just to the south .
we need more reinvention .
among the first to leave the sea . they still do what they 've done for ages , their enemies long gone . scorpions follow prey out of the sea . slugs became snails . fish tried amphibian life . frogs adapted to deserts . lichens arose as a co-op . fungi married algae ... clinging to rock , and eating it too ... transforming barren land . true land plants arose , leafless at first . once they learn how to stay upright , they grew in size and shape . the fundamental forms of ferns followed , to bear spores that foreshadowed seeds . life flourished in swamps . on land , life turned a corner . jaws formed first ; teeth came later .
they want to know how china lifted 500 million people out of poverty in 30 years , how mexico 's oportunidades program improved schooling and nutrition for millions of children .
and there , it was reviewed by five independent referees , and it was published . okay ? it took four months to do the science , two years to get it published . typical science , actually , right ? so this makes amy and her friends the youngest published scientists in the world . what was the feedback like ? well , it was published two days before christmas , downloaded 30,000 times in the first day , right ? it was the editors ' choice in science , which is a top science magazine . it 's forever freely accessible by biology letters . it 's the only paper that will ever be freely accessible by this journal .
and that sounds like a kind of a romantic exaggeration . but actually , our nervous system is incapable of processing more than about 110 bits of information per second . and in order to hear me and understand what i 'm saying , you need to process about 60 bits per second . that 's why you ca n't hear more than two people . you ca n't understand more than two people talking to you . well , when you are really involved in this completely engaging process of creating something new , as this man is , he does n't have enough attention left over to monitor how his body feels , or his problems at home .
i took my skis and i took a board and i put a mast foot in there , and some foot straps , and some metal fins , and here i was , going really fast on frozen lakes . it was really a death trap . i mean , it was incredible , it worked incredibly well , but it was really dangerous . and i realized then i had to go to design school . i mean , look at those graphics there . so , i went to design school , and it was the early '90s when i finished . and i saw something extraordinary happening in silicon valley , so i wanted to be there ,
this is waterproofing the roof .  it is a bit of jaggery , a bit of urens and a bit of other things i do n't know . but it actually does n't leak . since 1986 , it has n't leaked . this technology , the women will not share with the men . it 's the only college which is fully solar-electrified . all the power comes from the sun . 45 kilowatts of panels on the roof . and everything works off the sun for the next 25 years . so long as the sun shines , we 'll have no problem with power . but the beauty is that is was installed by a priest , a hindu priest ,
because what that means is that for the first time in the history of the species , the majority of babies born in the developed world are having the opportunity to grow old .
in a way that 's matched motorically and in terms of lower-level sensory motor features ? and so , i have here what we call the  paradigms .  there 's a scale paradigm , which is just playing a scale up and down , memorized . and then there 's improvising on a scale -- quarter notes , metronome , right hand -- scientifically very safe , but musically really boring . and then there 's the bottom one , which is called the jazz paradigm . and so what we did was we brought professional jazz players to the nih , and we had them memorize this piece of music on the left , the lower-left -- which is what you heard me playing --
they ’ re following a script that they ’ ve agreed to . and it ’ s this code negotiation that leads to productive play . so , remember the sketching task we did at the beginning ? the kind of little face , the portrait you did ? well , imagine if you did the same task with friends while you were drinking in a pub . but everybody agreed to play a game where the worst sketch artist bought the next round of drinks . that framework of rules would have turned an embarrassing , difficult situation into a fun game . as a result , we ’ d all feel perfectly secure and have a good time --
so three very tough problems that might be solvable , and so , should be worked on .
this is the best you can get in hyderabad in indian education . the reason they went on studying was this .
how the spread of the virus was in 1983 in the world , or how we estimate that it was . what we are showing here is -- on this axis here , i 'm showing percent of infected adults . and on this axis , i 'm showing dollars per person in income . and the size of these bubbles , the size of the bubbles here , that shows how many are infected in each country , and the color is the continent . now , you can see united states , in 1983 , had a very low percentage infected , but due to the big population , still a sizable bubble . there were quite many people infected in the united states .
they spend 500 dollars for every one dollar -- 500 dollars marketing foods that kids should n't eat for every one dollar marketing healthy , nutritious food . the result of which is kids think they 're going to die if they do n't have chicken nuggets . you know that everybody thinks they should be eating more , and more , and more . this is the usda portion size , that little , tiny thing . and the one over there , that 's bigger than my head , is what mcdonald 's and burger king and those big companies think we should eat . and why can they serve that much ? why can we have 29-cent big gulps
causes genetic disease , we 've understood nothing else .  it took me three years to publish that . it 's just been published in the british journal of educational technology . one of the referees who refereed the paper said ,  it 's too good to be true ,  which was not very nice . well , one of the girls had taught herself to become the teacher . and then that 's her over there . remember , they do n't study english . i edited out the last bit when i asked ,  where is the neuron ?  and she says ,  the neuron ? the neuron ,  and then she looked and did this . whatever the expression , it was not very nice .
and here i was , outwardly very successful , but inwardly very depressed . but i 'm a guy ; i knew how to fix it . i bought a fast car . it did n't help . i was faster but just as depressed . so i went to my doctor . i said ,  doc , i can buy anything i want . but i 'm not happy . i 'm depressed . it 's true what they say , and i did n't believe it until it happened to me . but money ca n't buy happiness .  he said ,  no . but it can buy prozac .  and he put me on anti-depressants . and yeah , the black cloud faded a little bit , but so did all the work ,
this equation has four factors , a little bit of multiplication : so , you 've got a thing on the left , co2 , that you want to get to zero , and that 's going to be based on the number of people , the services each person 's using on average , the energy on average for each service , and the co2 being put out per unit of energy . so , let 's look at each one of these and see how we can get this down to zero . probably , one of these numbers is going to have to get pretty near to zero . now that 's back from high school algebra ,
it 's in a little willy wonka land . it 's like a little disneyland for them . it 's not like what we see . these are little bits of individual grain of pollen there and there , and here is a -- what you see as one little yellow dot of pollen , when you look in a microscope , it 's actually made of thousands of little grains of pollen . so this , for example , when you see bees flying around these little plants , and they 're collecting pollen , those pollen grains that they 're collecting , they pack into their legs and they take it back to the hive , and that 's what makes the beehive ,
so for instance , today , in ghana , courageous reformers from civil society , parliament and government , have forged a coalition for transparent contracts in the oil sector , and , galvanized by this ,
so , who got more than five circles figured out ? hopefully everybody ? more than 10 ? keep your hands up if you did 10 . 15 ? 20 ? anybody get all 30 ? no ? oh ! somebody did . fantastic . did anybody to a variation on a theme ? like a smiley face ? happy face ? sad face ? sleepy face ? anybody do that ? anybody use my examples ? the sun and the football ? great . cool . so i was really interested in quantity . i wasn ’ t actually very interested in whether they were all different . i just wanted you to fill in as many circles as possible . and one of the things we tend to do as adults , again , is we edit things .
is on a really deep gut level , i was feeling a lot of shame and embarrassed , frankly , that , in some respects , i had failed at delivering what i 'm genetically engineered to do . and of course , it made me question , if i was n't able to have another child , what would that mean for my marriage , and just me as a woman . so it was a very difficult time . as i started working through it more , i started climbing out of that hole and talking with other people . i was really amazed by all the stories that started flooding in . people i interacted with daily ,
audience : brilliant . now , open your eyes . we 'll do it one more time . everyone over there shout . where 's the sound coming from ? thank you very much . what 's the point ? the point is what science does for us . right ? we normally walk through life responding , but if we ever want to do anything different , we have to step into uncertainty . when he opened his eyes , he was able to see the world in a new way . that 's what science offers us . it offers the possibility to step on uncertainty through the process of play , right ?
i was raised with traditional stories of leadership : robert e. lee , john buford at gettysburg . and i also was raised with personal examples of leadership . this was my father in vietnam . and i was raised to believe that soldiers were strong and wise and brave and faithful ; they did n't lie , cheat , steal or abandon their comrades . and i still believe real leaders are like that . but in my first 25 years of career , i had a bunch of different experiences . one of my first battalion commanders , i worked in his battalion for 18 months and the only conversation he ever had with lt. mcchrystal
but designers are really the glue that brings these things together . so jawbone is a project that you 're familiar with , and it has a humanistic technology . it feels your skin . it rests on your skin , and it knows when it is you 're talking . and by knowing when it is you 're talking , it gets rid of the other noises that it knows about , which is the environmental noises . but the other thing that is humanistic about jawbone is that we really decided to take out all the techie stuff , and all the nerdy stuff out of it , and try to make it as beautiful as we can .
a bunch of pacifists . confused , aspiring pacifists . i understand . i 've been wrong a lot lately . like a lot . so i could n't figure out what to read today . i mean , i 've been saying i 've been prepping . what that means is prepping my outfit , prepping options , trying to figure out what i 'm coming behind and going in front of . poetry does that . it preps you . it aims you . so i am going to read a poem that was chosen just now . but i 'm going to need you to just sit for like 10 minutes and hold a woman who is not here .
and i thought i 'd start a barefoot college -- college only for the poor .
and that being bad , but we 've done that for thousands of years . the ancient egyptians used to move bees up and down the nile on rafts , so this idea of a movable bee force is not new at all . and one of our real worries with colony collapse disorder is the fact that it costs so much money to replace those dead-out colonies . and you can do that one year in a row , you may be able to do it two years in a row . but if you 're losing 50 percent to 80 percent of your colonies , you ca n't survive three years in a row . and we 're really worried
and the standard error bands are relatively small around these estimates as well . and it 's not just overall . it 's very robust to anything you want to look at .
when some -- probably one of you in this room -- jumped into the breach and created an organization like physicians for social responsibility , which fought against the nuclear threat , medicins sans frontieres , that renewed our commitment to disaster relief , mohamed elbaradei , and the tremendous hope and optimism that he brought all of us , and our own muhammad yunus . we 've seen the eradication of smallpox . we may see the eradication of polio this year . last year , there were only 2,000 cases in the world . we may see the eradication of guinea worm next year -- there are only 35,000 cases left in the world .
and avignon was born and hundreds of others would follow in their wake . the work they did was very , very high art , and stars came along like laurie anderson and merce cunningham and robert lepage who made work for this circuit , and you had these seminal shows like  the mahabharata  and the monumental  einstein on the beach .  but as the decades passed , these festivals , they really became the establishment , and as the culture and capital accelerated , the internet brought us all together , high and low kind of disappeared , a new kind of festival emerged . the old festivals , they continued to thrive , but
you have to have more than just one or two great photographs in you . you 've got to be able to make them all the time . but even more importantly , you need to know how to create a visual narrative . you need to know how to tell a story . so i 'm going to share with you some coverages that i feel demonstrate the storytelling power of photography . photographer nick nichols went to document a very small and relatively unknown wildlife sanctuary in chad , called zakouma . the original intent was to travel there and bring back a classic story of diverse species , of an exotic locale .