and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
o people , why do you have fear of him who has created you from a single soul that has not created you from a single form of action , and the same is the same for him ? god is one of the guardian .
those who disbelieve , they are the ones who have faith in the matter of their own likes . he will not be able to set forth with you any one , when he came to us in the state of resurrection . and allah is swift in reckoning .
when you heard it , why did you not say , 'it is not right for us to speak of this . exaltations to you ! this is a monstrous slander '
this host too , among other hosts , is bound to suffer defeat .
and recall what time ye said unto musa : verily we shall never eat of the least , nor shall they be well- wont to feed with it , and we have made for the earth from the things that is manifest , and it is in the meecing of thy lord that they may be aware of the truth . and that which they have been working will be of the associators .
and what will explain to thee what sijjin is ?
that is jesus , son of mary—the word of truth about which they doubt .
we have sent down to you clarifying revelations , and examples of those who passed away before you , and advice for the pious .
and they say , “ we have taken a son. ” say , “ then why do you have a son. ” say , “ then why do you not turn to us in sin , ? ” say , “ then why do you not turn to us in sin , and to him belong the outcome of the heavens and the earth ? and it is to him that whomever he wills , and to him is the eventual coming .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea . so behold how was the end of the unjust !
and they will see the punishment of the day of resurrection , and those who follow their own lusts , and when they are subjected to the torment , they will be seized by the punishment , and they will be stilled .
and your lord inspired the bee , saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect .
on that day allah will pay them in full their deserved recompense , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
when hell is set ablaze ,
if you punish them , they are your servants ; but if you forgive them , you are the all-mighty , the all-wise . '
near sidrat-ul-muntaha ] ,
had god wanted the people of this world would have been given to their deeds . but god is not enough to decide for a time . when the day when it arrives , god is the seer of his servants .
they said , “ we have taken a she-camel ” ; they said , “ the she-camel of allah ” ; they said , “ this is the she-camel of allah , and what lies about it , ” they will say , “ this is what they had denied before ; and allah is the utmost slander , ”
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
why did not the believers , men and women , when you heard it , think well of their own people , and say , “ this is an obvious lie ? ”
in their hearts is a disease , which god has increased . they will have a painful punishment , because they have been lying .
he said , ‘ no , you throw first. ’ thereupon , behold , their ropes and staffs appeared to him by their magic as if they were running .
he said , “ go down from here , all of you , one of you an enemy . then , if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance will not go astray , nor will he be miserable . ”
they will go round between its flames and boiling water .
when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women . in that was a great trial from your lord .
then he turned to his side , in the case of the mother 's mother , the case was given to his brother . thus did we teach him his brother , so that he might know that it is in the presence of his brother , that he may be the exalted in might , the knowing .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the majesty of pharaoh , we will be the winners . ”
if we had so willed , we could have made it the mountains , and you would have seen the mountains , so that they would not be able to put him in the way , and we will make it clear to the people , so that they may understand .
and we know that we can not frustrate allah in the earth , nor can we frustrate him by flight .
but thy people reject this , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
indeed your lord expands the provision for whomever he wishes and tightens it . he is aware and sees his worshipers .
if we opened a gate in the heaven and they kept ascending through it ,
when the sun is woundup ;
, we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us , and all that is in between . your lord is not forgetful .
indeed , we are about to bring down upon the people of this town a punishment from heaven , because they are debauchers .
and say , “ my lord , forgive and have mercy , and you are the best of the merciful . ”
he says , i have spent a great deal of money .
this is of the news of the unseen that we reveal to you . you were not present with them when they conspired together and schemed .
a provision for you and your cattle .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us what one. ” he said , “ he says she is a cow neither old nor too young , but in between , so do what you are commanded . ”
they shall live therein forever , the best abode and place of rest .
those who , when they have to receive by measure from men , exact full measure ,
the unbelievers said to their messengers , “ we will expel you from our land , unless you return to our religion. ” but their lord revealed to them : “ we will destroy the wrongdoers ,
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers through the land deceive thee :
a blessed book that we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses , and for those with intelligence to take heed .
how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
and those that flow with ease and gentleness ;
when the earth shall be rocked
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far ,
in scorching wind and scalding water
and when a revelation is recited to them they say : we believe in it for we have not believed in the unless we have been given to the apostles ; and allah is the knower of that which we have sent down upon the messenger , and he is a painful doom in respect of those who did evil .
exalted is he who took his servant by night from al-masjid al-haram to al-masjid al-aqsa , whose surroundings we have blessed , that we might show him some of our signs . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
and mention in the book mary when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ,
he said , 'even so thy lord has said : easy is that for me ; and that we may make him a sign unto men and a mercy from us , and it is a thing decreed . '
and do not be surprised by the deities they call upon , apart from god , so that they will not be able to be able to answer him . thus do we assign to them a people that will go to their lord , then to their lord we will return .
say , “ who is the refuge of god , to protect you from him ? ” if he wanted to harm you , he could have received mercy from you , and if he wills , he can show you his mercy , and they will have no helpers .
do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted and you should taste evil because you hindered from god ’ s path , and incur a great punishment .
when your lord said to the angels , “ i am creating a human being from clay ;
say : believe in it or do not believe . indeed , those who were given knowledge before it fall down on their faces in prostration ,
but he turned away with his warlords , and said , “ a sorcerer or a madman . ”
or is it that theirs is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend by ropes !
he would have tarried in its belly until the day they are raised .
and the birds , too , in flocks , all turned to him .
say , ‘ are you better than those who are godwary ? with their lord will be the gardens of paradise with their lord , and will abide in it for ever . and allah is all-seer of his slaves . ’
to you your religion , and to me my religion '
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
so , o lord , do not be one of those who submit to you , and have become muslims , and have faith in you . we have turned to you in repentance , and you are the most merciful , the most merciful .
those who took the calfwill indeed be overwhelmed with wrath from their lord , and abasement in the life of the world. ’ thus do we requite the fabricators .
of it there is no averter .
and whatever things you have been given are only the wares of the life of this world and its glitter ; and what is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth—a stone , and he has made the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon ; it is he who has set up the sun and the moon , so that he may make it a proclamation .
and a tree that grows on mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
and they went early in determination , able .
who created and shaped ,
and they planned and allahplanned , and allah is the best of planners .
“ in order that they may understand my speech . ”
and when their eyes shall be turned towards the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing people .
the evil of all these is disliked by your lord .
and by the self-reproaching soul !
like satan , when he says to man , deny the truth , but when he disbelieves , he says , i am innocent of you . i fear god , the lord of the universe .
and of them are some who made a covenant with allah : if he give us of his bounty , we will surely give alms and we will surely be of the righteous .
and speak to him gently , perhaps he may take heed or fear .
but there are others who would dedicate themselves to seeking the pleasure of god . god is compassionate to his servants .
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them , and what they mocked at overwhelmed them .
and verily , for those who have wronged is a portionlike the portion of their predecessors , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we really be brought forth ?
they will have sheets of fire above them and layers beneath them . that is how god frightens his servants . so fear me !
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets and from thee and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam ; and we took from them a solemn bond .
has he penetrated to the unseen , or has he taken a contract withmost gracious ?
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal any matter from allah .
these are the ones upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah has set a seal . they are the heedless .
and by the day when it dawns ,
he was taught by one mighty in power ,
and when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who subjected you to the worst of sufferings—killing your sons and sparing your women , and in that was a great trial from your lord .
to him you give attention .
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and whoever does righteous good deeds , male or female , and is a believer—those will enter paradise , and not be wronged a whit .
indeed , those who recite the book of allah and establish prayer and spendout of what we have provided them , secretly and openly , hope for a commerce that will never perish .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
we send not the angels down save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return .
and indeed you have been one of the heirs of us , as we created the first creation , and he has made you turn in your creation , and you have done what you have asked of , and there is for you no one but one of them that has been made familiar with you ; and for you is what you have been concealing .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit .
but the parties have fallen into variance among themselves ; then woe to those who disbelieve for the scene of a dreadful day .
he merges night into day , and merges day into night , and he knows what is in the hearts .
ah ! woe unto me ! wouldthat had never taken such a one for a friend !
who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the revelations of his lord , then he turns away from them ? we shall inflict retribution on the guilty .
and he who does not think that he does not go to any equivalent to his words , nor is his case . then , let them know that it is their slander and their hatred .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait ; you shall know who are the travellers on the even path , and who is guided . '
so when they returned to their father , they said : o our father ! no more measure of grain shall we get : so send our brother with us , that we may get our measure , and we will surely protect him .
and madesmooth for him .
he said : even so ! thy lord saith : it is unto me easy , whereas verily i created thee afore when thou wast not aught .
and we have given to you a book , which we have made known to them ; so there is a barrier in between them , except after the clear signs had come to them . as for one who has been unjust to the matter , it has been decided between them . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his establishment with our signs , but they behaved arrogantly and were a criminal people
to bring you every expert magician . ’
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it , while they have forgotten it . allah is witness to all things .
if they could find a shelter or caverns , or a place of concealment , they would turn stampeding to it .
for when it was said unto them : there is no god but allah , they were scornful
and we gave them the book which helps to make things clear ;
the wayis only against those who oppress men and wrongly rebel in the earth , for such there will be a painful torment .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they declare .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish regular prayer , and give regular charity , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and to allah belongs the outcome of all things .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and when it is said unto them : make not mischief on the earth , they say : we are peacemakers only .
and if thou speakest aloud , then lo ! he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
there was not a messenger sent to him , but that they should be given to it , and if they were to be attacked , they would certainly have sought forgiveness from you , and they would surely have been repentant .
and when it is recited to them , they say : we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed we were muslimsbefore it .
and we did not send any messenger but to accept the faith of it , and in order to believe in it , but when they have sought the means of their own way , then it is likely to be seen with it , and allah is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
surely those who are in the presence of their own souls , they are the ones that have done wrong , and they say : what ! did you not stay with allah in the earth , and they will say , ‘ is it different than allah ? ’ they will surely say , ‘ is it different than allah , ’ and it is a place to return ? ’
is he who guards himself with his face against the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said to the evildoers , “ taste what you used to earn . ”
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . and ever is allah forgiving and merciful .
there is neither sickness in it , nor intoxication .
until , when ya'juj and ma'jujare let loose , and they swiftly swarm from every mound .
and if any of you should go back to the people of the garden , then they turn back to you in flight , and then you overcome the unbelievers , in the power to oppose , and fear allah , in order that you are believers .
peace be upon noah among all the peoples !
that laps to the hearts .
moses said : that is what we were seeking . so they went back retracing their footsteps .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
so if they belie you , say , ‘ your lord is dispenser of an all-embracing mercy , but his punishment will not be averted from the guilty lot . ’
a guidance and mercy for the righteous
so for our punishment are they impatient ?
and counsel in your remembrance , then to the book we gave to moses , to give the good things of his bounty , and in order that he may be of the faithful , and in order that they may be guided .
o sister of aaron ! your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother an unchaste woman .
indeed , allah has promised you , , all of you , a promise ; and he will be seized by the permission of allah . then you will be seized by the punishment , and you will not be able to make a mistake . allah has forgiven you , and you will not be able to return to the truth . allah has given you the favor of the believers .
and we command the command of the human being and his father , and if they were to give you a way , then do not be of the doubters .
they said , ‘ are you amazed at allah ’ s dispensation ? allah ’ s mercy and his blessings upon you , members of the household . indeed he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ’
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
would you then , if you were given the authority , do mischief in the land , and sever your family ties ?
he it is who shapes you in the wombs as he will . there is no god but he , the mighty , the wise .
when the son of mary is mentioned as an example , your people turn away from it
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . allah is the hearer , the seer .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens underneath which rivers flow . god does what he will .
the people of al-hijr also rejected our messengers :
then caused the latter folk to follow after ?
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from it and from every agony , then you ascribe partners . ’
noble and pious .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt thereof until the hour come upon them unawares , or there come unto them the doom of a disastrous day .
o my father ! verily there hath come unto me of knowledge that which hath not come unto thee ; so follow me , and i will guide thee on a right path .
wherefore eat of that whereon the name of allah hath been pronounced , if ye are believers in his revelations .
exalted , purified ,
and of the people is he who invites to the worship of one another , if some of them were to be given good , then the calamity of it came upon it ; and this is a clear loss .
and whenever a surah is revealed , they will be sent down to allah and with his messenger , and they will be given exemption by you . they say , ‘ we will not be deprived of you , ’
he created man from a drop offluid , and behold , he is an open contender !
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
we have made it as a reminder and convenience for the needy .
you are no different from a mortal like us . so bring us a sign if you are truthful .
and they say : wherefore are not signs sent down upon him from his lord ! say thou : signs are with allah only , and i am but a plain warner .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
surely we have made it to be a trial to the unjust .
so these are their houses fallen down because they were unjust , in this there is evidencefor the people of knowledge .
were they created by nothing , or were they themselves the creators ?
and all the evidence of that which is before him and all that is behind them , so that he may warn those who do good deeds , that they may have a reward from what they do , and that for them is a reward fair .
o children of adam ! if there come to you messengers from among you relating to you my signs , then whoever practices piety and reforms – upon him shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
have they not observed the things god has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before god in all humility ?
and there are signs in this for one of the people who have followed him , and he who makes a mistake of his own people , and he who is a guarantor for him . and whoever does not believe in allah , then indeed , allah is free of all wants from men .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
and we inspired moses : “ throw your staff. ” and at once , it swallowed what they were faking .
and when you see them , they look at you as though they would be as if they were to hear the call of allah as though they would be as if they were to be terrified , and it will be as if they were to be safe .
so it tasted the mischief of its action , and the end of its affair was loss .
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
and when allah has opened the gate of his mercy , he would have given them no one ; but there is no one who will have any power to avert from them , and none can reach it after them , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
but there comes not to them a newly-revealed message frommost gracious , but they turn away from it .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind , for a few miserable days , to make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of the world , and the punishment of the hereafter will be more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
leave them to eat and enjoy , and let them be preoccupied withhope . they will soon know .
the day when man will remember what he has endeavored .
then why did those whom they had chosen as gods as a means of approachnot help them ? nay , but they were lost from them . and that was their lie , and what they used to invent .
say to those who deny the truth , you will be overcome and driven into hell -- an evil resting place !
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiver . ’
believers , do not forbid the good things which god has made lawful to you . do not transgress . god does not love the aggressors .
those who spend their wealth in the way of allah and then do not follow up what they have spent with reproach and insults shall be rewarded by their lord ; they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
to send down upon them stones of baked clay .
and verily of his sect was ibrahim .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
abraham was certainly a nation obedient to god , a monotheist , and he was not a pagan .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they shall be brought ,
those who violate allah ’ s covenant after it had been made manifest , and to what allah has ordered them to be joined in the land , and make mischief in the land ; it is they who are the winners .
know they not that allahs expandeth provision for whomsoever he will , and stinteth it for whomsoever he will ! verily herein are signs for a people who believe .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the balance , and do not increase except in its own good , until the extent of the matter that is given to you , and , to the extent that it may be that they are given by allah ’ s command , and so do not be of the doubters .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse .
and never came there a prophet to them but they mocked him .
rejoicing in what god has given them out of his grace , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them but are left behind them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and of the people is he whose measure of me is that they should keep others away from him , and that he may make a way to him who is guided by the way of allah , to make it crooked , and that he may be of the cheats .
he prayed , lord , i have wronged myself . forgive me ! god forgave him ; for he is the forgiving one , the merciful .
and that is not hard for allah .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
and then turned it into a black scum .
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ god alone has been sent down to him , ” , say , “ god alone has knowledge of him , and he will be guided . ”
the day he will say , ‘ call those whom you maintained to be my partners ! ’ they will call them , but they will not respond to them , and we will place a gulf between them .
do they seek other than the religion of allah , while to him submits whoever there is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
moses said to them , 'cast you down what you will cast . '
so deem not thouthat allah is going to fail his promise to his apostles ; verily allah is mighty , lord of retribution .
and when they are reminded , they pay no attention .
messengers as bringers of good news and warners so that mankind may have no argument against allah after the messengers . allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
nay , they are in doubt , they sport .
lo ! i , even i , am thy lord , so take off thy shoes ; verily thou art in the holy valley , tuwa .
when moses had given the time of moses , moses put a blazing fire on the height of the fire , and he said , “ wait – this is a fire , so that you may warm yourselves . ”
and as for the deviators , for hell they shall be fuel .
before them the people of noah , ad , and pharaoh of the tent-pegs gave the lie .
and the mount sinai ,
bring your book , if what you say is true !
like satan , when he says to man , deny the truth , but when he disbelieves , he says , i am innocent of you . i fear god , the lord of the universe .
that allah may reward the truthful for their truth , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or turn to them in mercy : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and when the word shall come to pass against them , we shall bring forth for them a creature from the earth who will speak unto them that mankind had no faith in our signs .
and we raised the mount above them for their bond , and we said to them , 'enter in the gate prostrating ' ; and we said to them : do not transgress at the limits of the sabbath , and we took from them a solemn covenant .
do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an immorality and an evil way .
and when you said , ‘ o moses , we will not believe you until we see allah visibly. ’ thereupon the thunderbolt seized you as you looked on .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
and of the seven heavens and all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and they hallow him in the glory of him . and he is not of the doubters .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
who seeth thee when thou standest up
saying : restore to me the servants of allah . lo ! i am a faithful messenger unto you ,
and he has come to you , , , then , come , to be in the presence of a group , then make things clear to you , and let them know that you are in a state of worship , and know that you are not aware of the things you do .
surely those who believe and do good works are gardens of bliss ,
and they ask you to hasten the punishment , but if we had decreed for them an appointed time , then it would have been decided for them , and they will not be able to perceive it .
say , “ your lord is powerful over all things ; and you will make none to hear , except for him whom you can , and you can make none to see , except for you . you are all-powerful . ”
indeed , we are about to bring down upon the people of this town a punishment from heaven , because they are debauchers .
those who believe and do good works , for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn away from them , and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words in their affairs .
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
as though they had never dwelt therein . behold ! away with midian ! —just as thamud was done away with !
and the creating of the male and the female ,
who have broken the koran into fragments .
surely the day of judgement has an appointed time ;
we called unto him , 'abraham ,
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
you can not thwart him on the earth , and you have no friend or helper apart from him .
allah promiseth you much booty that ye will capture , and hath given you this in advance , and hath withheld men 's hands from you , that it may be a token unto the believers , and that he may guide you on a right path .
and for their houses - doors and couchesupon which to recline
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to god , the lord of the universe !
and indeed , it is he who knows the best of the night , and that you should have a part of the night , and part of a part of that which you have been working . and allah is the forgiver , the most honourable .
reclining upon couches lined with brocade , and the fruits of the gardens shall be near at hand .
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity ,
and exalted your fame ?
he hides himself from the people because of the evil of that which is announced to him . shall he keep her with disgrace or bury her in the dust ? how evil is their judgment !
to every nation a term ; when their term comes they shall not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
and say : my lord ! i seek refuge in thee from suggestions of the evil ones .
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for your allies . they are allies of one another . whoever among you takes them for a friend will be one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
that which you are promised will surely come to pass , and you can not escape .
they say , “ they have fabricated a fact about allah . if he wills , he can do away with it , and you will not be able to frustrate him . indeed allah knows what lies within the hearts .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and you have not besides allah any protector or a helper .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
eager to roast ;
god certainly knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the proud .
when the eventcomes
he is the supreme over his servants . he is the wise , the expert .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he is over all things competent -
we forbade him breastfeeding at first , so she said : shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
messengers indeed were mocked at before thee ; but those that scoffed at them were encompassed by that they mocked at .
your lord , he is the almighty , the most merciful .
you cause the night to pass into the day , and the day into the night . you bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . you provide without measure for whomever you want .
and we rained upon them a rain . miserable was the rain of those forewarned .
and assuredly we have variously propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , yet most men refuse aught save disbelief .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they declare .
worshipfor a few hours at night .
those whom no one was struck with the wrath of allah , but they said , “ enter the door of allah and in his grace ” ; they said , “ enter them , if you are believers . ”
we know that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
say : o my lord ! if thou shouldst show methat which they are warned against , -
the people of al-hijr also rejected our messengers :
and say , “ my lord , forgive and have mercy , and you are the best of the merciful . ”
o you who have faith ! do not be near to your prayer , but when it was made to swallow them , they will not be able to make any testament in it , until the certaintyhad of yore on you . and if you were to be free of a garden , then the same is in front of the people of paradise , and allah ’ s clan is the most pardoning , the most forbearing .
but god would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seek forgiveness .
whoever disregardswill be heavily burdened with sin on the day of judgment
it is he who has made the earth a bed for you and made you live as a cloud . the heavens and the earth will be sent down to you , so that you may have the means of god , so that you may have a means of sustenance .
except the path of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
god will surely cause them to die and be in the midst of those who have lived in the life of the world to come . those who are upright will be in the cause of god , and who will suffer the most abased .
the people of noah before them . they were certainly a sinful people .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
these , our people , have chosengods beside him . why do they not bring any clear authority touching them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
and as for him whose measureis light , those are they who lose their souls because they used to wrong our revelations .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit lewdness with open eyes ?
do you not fear that in the morning you shall be brought up in the ark , so that a mighty should be subjected to the unbelievers ? then you will have no one to help you , and then you will have no saviors .
he has sent down to you the book with the truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
he will send you abundant
certainly we have brought to them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
and they worship besides allah that for which he has sent down no authority , and that of which they have no knowledge , and for the zalimunthere is no helper .
the hypocrites seek to deceive allah , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and remembering allah only a little ;
it is he who has made the earth subservient to you . walk about in its tracts and eat of his provision . to him is the resurgence .
these are two adversaries who have disputed concerning their lord . as for those who disbelieve , garments of fire will be cut out for them ; boiling water will be poured down over their heads ,
and they shall not be absent from it .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
those who believe and do the right are their heirs . they are the ones who will be given their share in the paradise . we will reward those who are given the reward of their own good deeds .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bliss .
and who is more astray than he who is in the way of his own soul , and is only allah , until the day of resurrection , as the day of resurrection , if they are unaware , and they do not perceive ?
they said , “ we have been sent towards a guilty people . ”
you pleaded on their behalf in this worldly life but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their attorney ?
and those who give whatsoever they give , while their hearts are anxious that unto their lord they are to be retutners
say : i am not a new thing among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i follow only what is revealed to me , and i am but a plain warner .
surely god is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
and assuredly we took hold of them with the torment , yet they humbled not themselves unto their lord , nor did they entreat .
have they not seen that we have appointed a safe sanctuary , while all around them men are being despoiled ? do they then believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
and amassed wealth and covetously hoarded it .
and who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a dwelling in hell for disbelievers ?
and serve your lord until there comes to you that which is certain .
in fact this day they have all surrendered .
and recall what time musa said unto his people : o my people ! lo ! ye have been wont to worship the calf in whom ye have gone . then turn to your tracks , and let them know that ye were one of the believers .
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
and if you disbelieve , surely allah is not able to assist you , and he will not be pleased with the regard of his servants . then , if the favour of your disbelief is to be accepted , then it is to be accepted from your lord , and he is the best of accountants .
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil shall see it .
and not equal are the good deed and the evil deed . repelwith what is best.he between whom and you was enmity , will be as if he were a close friend .
they would like you to disbelieve , and they are the ones who will be faithless in the way of god . so , if they disobey you , they will not have any fear of god , nor do you make them a friend .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , ‘ invoke your lord to lighten for usa day ’ s punishment . ’
they have calledlies . they will soon learn the consequences of what they mocked .
do you not see that allah has full power over you in the heavens and the earth ? then the twain will be responsible for him , and he will be in a state of subsistence , to whom he will , and he will let free all that he wills .
and the hypocrites are in the case of men , and this is just one of the same ; and they enjoin that which is evil . and they enjoin that which is disreputable , and they are the overcomers .
believers , if you help god , he will help you and make your feet steady .
and do not defraud people of their belongings , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say , i am commanded to serve god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
indeed , those who have divided their religion will have no power in the least . you are not of those who are unjust to them . indeed , they are the wrongdoers .
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i : so send him with me as a helper to confirm me , for i fear that they will reject me .
and the fifthshould be that the wrath of allah be upon her if hespeaks the truth .
those who deny the signs of god and the meeting with him , have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
and it behoveth not the compassionate that he should take a son . * chapter : 19
if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their desires . who is more astray than one who follows his desires without any guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
if you do not help them , god has chosen the help of those who deny the truth when the unbelievers had left their homes in the cave and he said , do not be sad by god . he has the power to do so . god is majestic and all-wise .
what ! have they taken for themselves gods from allah ? say : the truth is with you ; and to me is the reminder , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and most of the people of the nations are averse .
o you enfolded in your mantle ,
or , are the people of the townships then secure from the coming of our wrath upon them in the forenoon while they play ?
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it , while they have forgotten it . allah is witness to all things .
he said , ‘ this is my wealth , in which i have given knowledge . do you not know that allah ’ s judgement has been given before this , and he will not be able to destroy it ? ’
surely allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path .
do not consider anything equal to god . god knows , but you do not know .
when moses was about to attack their enemy , he said , “ o moses , do you want to kill me as you slew a soul in the land , nor do you want to become a tyrant in the land ? ”
indeed they did not expect any reckoning ,
who will inherit paradise . there they will abide .
their salatat the housewas nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment because you used to disbelieve .
strengthen me with him .
that allah may forgive thee thy faults of the past and those that follow thee , and may perfect his favour unto thee , and may guide thee on a straight path ,
of jinn and men .
yet they divided themselves into factions , each rejoicing in what they had .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
unto him therefore we shall indeed make easy the path to hardship .
and ishmael , idris , dhul kifl -- each was of the patient ,
it is he who breaks the dawn ; and he has made the night a calmness , and the sun and the moon for calculation . such is the disposition of the almighty , the all-knowing .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
those you call upon besides him are unable to help you , nor can they help themselves .
when they come to you , they say , we believe ; but in fact they enter with disbelief and leave with it , and god knows best what they were hiding .
and among them are uneducated who know the scripture only through hearsay , and they only speculate .
o prophet , we have made you lawful and good things , and the women of the world to make things pleasing to you ; and the adulteress and the women -- and the fornicatress -- and the women -- and the adulteress -- and the adulteress -- he shall surely be of those who make a taste of it , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said : we believe , bear witness that we submit .
when the misfortune befalls him , he says , ‘ alas for us ! ’ indeed , it is he who is only given to us , but most of them do not know .
and his companionwill say : here isready with me !
there is no god but he . he gives life and causes death—your lord and lord of your ancestors of old .
or that he will not seize them while in dread ? your lord is compassionate and all-merciful .
nay , but i am going to do what i am going to do , and he will come to know from me ; rather , he is the saying of the dead , and the resurrection is to be resurrected .
he created man .
do they not know that allah knows what they conceal and what they declare ?
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken to himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
tell my servants who have believed to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before the coming of the day in which there will be neither mutual bargaining nor befriending .
they said , ‘ have you come to us that we should worship allah alone and give up what our fathers used to worship ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ’
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah , and he who bears iniquity is indeed a failure .
and there go round them youths , their own , as if they were hidden pearls .
no indeed ! on that day they will be screened off from seeing their lord ,
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
he is allah , there is no god but he , the living , the self-subsisting , the eternal . he is the subtle , the knower .
they hide themselves from men and do not hide from allah , whereas he is with them when they meditate by night words which please him not , and allah encompasses what they do .
and be thou patient on the friends of those who are that they are those that are believers on the morrow , and subdue their lord 's praise in the morning and the evenings , and the good-will of the world to come , and thou hearest the flower of the world , and that he may be of the inheritors .
o ye who believe ! fasting is prescribed for you , as it was prescribed for those before you , that ye mayself-restraint , -
so he will live in a state of bliss
go forth , whetherlightly or heavily , and strive with your possessions and your lives in the cause of allah . that is better for you , if you but knew .
indeed this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
god does not love the shouting of evil words unless one has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
he said , “ o my people ! do not utter lies about god . he has the lie to the name of such things . he has the inclination to you all that you have done in the hope of the pit . he has certainly turned into destruction .
who eschew grave sins and shameful deeds , and when they are angry , forgive ,
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
fear him who created you and the earlier generations .
o you who have faith ! do not establish the prayer , and are witnesses of them . and be wary of allah , to keep your duty to them . indeed , allah is acquainted with what they do .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do good deeds will be in the gardens of bliss .
what these people worship is doomed to be destroyed and their deeds are based on falsehood .
surely those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
why did not the believers , men and women , when you heard it , think well of their own people , and say , “ this is an obvious lie ? ”
wherefore admonish thou ! thou art not , by the grace of thy lord , a soothsayer or a madman .
“ and fear allah , and do not disgrace me . ”
noble and pious .
then shall we question those to whom our message was sent and those by whom we sent it .
and i do not absolve mysoul , for thesoul indeed promptsto evil , except inasmuch as my lord has mercy . indeed , my lord is forgiving and merciful .
and those who recite the reminder ,
and indeed they have led many astray . so do not increase the wrongdoers except in error . ’
again , indeed you will see it with certainty .
: “ seize him and shackle him ,
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
they said , “ you know that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ”
are these not the ones of whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them at all ? : 'enter paradise ! you shall have no fear , nor shall you grieve . '
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would ponder ?
and when they saw them , they would say , “ these people have gone astray . ”
indeed they are debarred from overhearing it .
verily i fear for you the torment of a mighty day .
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so little it is that they believe .
allah is he who created you weak , then after weakness gave you strength , then after strength gave you weakness and gray hair . he creates whatever he wills , and he is the all-knowing , the all-powerful .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
if you could but see when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , would that we could be sent back and not deny the signs of our lord and be among the believers .
on that day , man will be informed of what he sent ahead and left behind .
has the reminder been cast upon him alone among us ? nay , but he is an impudent liar .
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
have you not seen how those who dispute the signs of god are turned away ?
so we brought forth such as were therein of the believers .
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
or is it that youask them a wage , so that they are burdened with debt ?
against whom it is decreed that whosoever takes him for a friend , he will mislead him and guide him to the punishment of the blaze .
god does not love the shouting of evil words unless one has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
though it is not thy concern if he grow not .
none of them but denied the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose ; this is the thought of the unbelievers . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
they said , we have given you good news in truth , so do not despair .
will have no power , and no helper .
we created them not save with a purpose but most of them know not .
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a mighty reward .
your god is one god . those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts deny , and they are proud .
when you have finished the prayer , remember god , standing , sitting , and lying on your sides . and when you feel secure , perform the prayer . prayer is obligatory for the believers at stated times .
and he is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and in the animals they have created , and of the beasts and the cattle , and of the beasts and the cattle , all these are for you ; and there is not a thing in the matter of allah , but he is the hearer , the seer .
or is the unseen theirs that they can write ?
who is it that will lend allah a goodly loan so he will multiply it for him and he will havea liberal reward ?
when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ”
say , “ if mankind and jinn were to come together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ”
but if you want to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a cantaras mahr , take not the least bit of it back . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
and everything , small and big is written .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
is not heable to bring the dead to life ?
say , is this better or the garden of eternity which the righteous have been promised ? it is their reward and their destination .
from wherever you come , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not heedless of what you do .
know they not that allahs expandeth provision for whomsoever he will , and stinteth it for whomsoever he will ! verily herein are signs for a people who believe .
and be not faint in front of them . if you do not taste the evil consequences of it , it will be for them to bring you to life . and ever is allah , knowing and wise .
fight those who do not believe in allah and the last day , nor forbid what allah and his apostle have forbidden , nor practise the true religion , from among those who were given the book , until they pay the tribute out of hand , degraded .
he said , “ i do not think you will not be given any advantage from it , except that i am going to know what my lord has given you . i have no faith in the everlasting life . i have no faith in the everlasting life . ”
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . allah is witness over all things .
you are vindictive toward us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord ! pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims .
and those who give whatsoever they give , while their hearts are anxious that unto their lord they are to be retutners
were not my versesrecited to you , and then you used to deny them ?
and he said , “ all praise is to allah , who has not assigned to his parents his offspring , and he has not made anything equal to him ; therefore , he has not been too proud to be with him , nor was he too proud to be one of those who have chosen partners with him . ”
god knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
and they say , “ the fire will not touch us except for a number of days. ” say , “ have you taken a promise from god—god never breaks his promise—or do you say about allah what you do not know ? ”
when it is said to them , “ believe in what has been sent down to you from god , ” they say , “ we believe in what is sent down to us , and they will not believe . ” say , “ o messengers , why did you not have faith in the messengers ? ”
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and assumptions avail nothing against the truth . god is cognizant of what they do .
he hides himself from the people because of the evil of that which is announced to him . shall he keep her with disgrace or bury her in the dust ? how evil is their judgment !
then paradise is the shelter .
have you not seen those who come out of everlasting life to come out of their homes for the cause of god when they have no desire ? god said to them , god is gracious to those who give thanks .
and olives and palms
and if the punishment of allah was to be given to them , then surely they would say : what is it that of the covenant of my lord after it , will be the penalty of their lord ? and it is the day of judgment that they will not be able to count .
we have not revealed to you the book except that you may clarify for them that about which they differ , anda guidance and a mercy for a people who believe .
so as for those who have been before you , they were not responsible for the benefit of it , except for a little , we rescued them from the land , so that they may be among the transgressors .
and when you killed a man , then accused one another about it—and allah was to expose what you were concealing—
o mankind ! eat of that which is lawful and wholesome in the earth , and follow not the footsteps of satan ; verily he is an enemy unto you manifest .
so he emerged before his people from the sanctuary , and signalled to them that they should glorifymorning and evening .
my lord , save me and my family from what they do .
and as for the favor of your lord , report .
say : nothing will befall us except what allah has decreed for us ; he is our protector . and upon allah let the believers rely .
on the day when the first blast shivers
whether you disclose anything or hide it , allah indeed knows all things .
so they denied him , and we destroyed them . verily ! in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
the most merciful
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
which none shall touch except the purified ;
and to aad , their brother hud . he said , “ o my people , worship god , for you have no god other than him . so do not be excessive in the land , and do not act corruptly in the land , making things clear .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein disdained for ever ;
are you confident that the one in heaven will not cause the earth to collapse beneath you as it spins ?
on the day when a witness from among them is a witness , and we have sent down upon them a witness from themselves , and we have sent down to you a book , and a blessing and a mercy for the muslims .
you may derive benefituntil an appointed time . thereafter their placeis near the ancient house .
by the day when it appeareth in glory ,
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
say , “ i am not the master of what is revealed to you . it is only for him to whom you have no food , or that he may have any one to eat of it , or that he may be the most forgiving , the most merciful of all that you may have .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , ‘ invoke your lord to lighten for usa day ’ s punishment . ’
i do not think that the hour will ever come , and even if i am brought back to my lord i shall surely find a better resort than this .
they rejected each one of our signs . so we seized them with the seizing of one mighty and powerful .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our messenger saying , he is mad ! he was rebuffed ,
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; verily she was of an infidel people .
are they the mercy of your lord , and we have made it a means of sustenance for them in the life of the world , in order that they may be present with one another in the life of the world , and in order that they may be successful ?
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with justice , and he is the all-knowing judge . ”
the guilty shall be recognized by their marks , and they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
the godwarywill be spared of that
and of those who have despaired of the matter of your wives , should be of your wives , if they should be afraid of the word of the two times . and if the two should be , confine them to the law of the sun and those who have no power to do so . and whoever is careful ofallah , then surely allah will change the way of those who fear him .
you are the ones that you have said , your lord is your best . he is your master . let your master be your master , and the same applies to you . you are only a pair of the same , and the same applies to you , except in the presence of your family , and the same applies to you . you are only a young man , and in the same state , the same applies to you , and the same is only for you to be executed and in the same state .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a mighty reward .
what , do they not consider that in the heavens and the earth ? there is no blame upon them . if we do so , we shall bring down upon them a sign , or bring upon them a clear signs .
they plotted their plots , but their plots are known to god , even though their plots were such as to remove mountains .
and when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the ignominy of that day . verily , your lord is the strong , the mighty .
a blessed book that we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses , and for those with intelligence to take heed .
we favoured david with excellence , : “ o mountains and birds , sing god 's praise with him ” ; and we softened for him iron ,
the worst of beasts in god 's sight are the deaf and dumb—those who do not reason .
some of the people of the book say , believe in what has been revealed to the believers in the morning and deny it at its end , so that they may turn back .
i do not desire from them any provision , nor do i want them to feed me .
he said , “ the one who came with an open time , then there is no doubt that the kingdom of this world will be , and the tradition of the person will be given to them , and they will be blamed . ”
by the clear book
behaving arrogantly , and making fun , and talking nonsense .
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error . '
accustomed to the journey of winter and summer ,
what is the striking ?
remember , when abraham said , my lord , how can you be able to revive the dead ? he said , indeed , it is the same to me that i may have the same faith , and so that they may have the same faith , and the same will be the same to them so that you can not have any faith . god is too powerful to do so .
how many were the gardens and springs they left behind ,
and they will have no auliya'to help them other than allah . and whoever allah sends astray - for him there is no way .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
'if only we had had a reminder from the ancients ,
samood gave the liein their inordinacy ,
know they not that allahs expandeth provision for whomsoever he will , and stinteth it for whomsoever he will ! verily herein are signs for a people who believe .
have they not pondered over the word , or has anythingcome to them that did not come to their forefathers ?
and those who were with him , they say : our lord ! forgive us , and those who have believed , before us , and that of which they were wont to believe ; our lord ! thou art the owner of the mercy .
except for those among them who are your chosen servants .
it is he who has set for you the stars , that you may be guided by them in the darkness of land and sea . we have detailed our revelations for a people who know .
then we gave you back the turnover them , and we aided you with wealth and children , and made you greater in number .
did we not create you from contemptible water ?
none can guide those whom god has caused to go astray and has left to continue blindly in their rebellion .
o ye who believe ! obey the command of allah and to witness your mother , and have faith in you , and that they may be of the associators , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and that allah may know best what you do .
he said , 'and what is your business , envoys ? '
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for some misfortune to befall you . theirs shall be the evil turn , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and they have made a deterrent in the fire , and they will be brought , lord , we said , “ bring upon us our promise , and we will be punished by the reward of the unjust . the wrongdoers will have no one to help you . the wrongdoers will have the punishment , the punishment of hell . ”
and we turnedupside down and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
there is no blame on the blind , or the lame , nor the sick . he who obeys god and his messenger will admit him into gardens beneath which rivers flow ; but whoever turns away—he will punish him with a painful punishment .
it is he who created you , but one of you is an unbeliever and one of you is a believer ; and god perceives what you do .
and seek help through patience and prayer , and indeed , it is difficult except for the humbly submissive
does not man see we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he becomes an open contender ,
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a magician and a liar .
and on the day when they will all come forth , so that they will all be able to make it on the day of resurrection , but the fact is that those who deny the truth will be shown to allah . indeed , they are not guided .
wherefore hallow thou the name of thy lord , the mighty .
obeyed thereand trustworthy .
but if we should send awind and they sawturned yellow , they would remain thereafter disbelievers .
and when ibrahim prayed to them , “ o my lord , make your houses a sanctuary , and a provision of the sustenance for those who have faith . ” but the disbelievers will be in the hands of god , and in the end they will be returned .
if you do not want to make a breach with the , i would have said , this is what your lord has decided to you . i will certainly do so and you will not be able to harm him . i will certainly do all things .
such is allah , your lord , there is no god except him , the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be to the worlds a warner .
have they not pondered the earth , so that they may see the nature of the consequence for those who were before them ? how was it that they were doing ?
between them a barrier they do not overpass .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book that is not a tenth of the book and those who are bent on denying the truth and are bent on denying the truth , when the disbelievers have faith ?
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my penalty .
and when he learns something of our revelations , he takes them in mockery . for such there is a humiliating punishment .
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his nobles would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
until when they come to it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
those of you who turned away on the day the two hosts met , only satan had made them slip because of some of their deeds . but god has pardoned them . god is forgiving and forbearing .
verily there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we have believed , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
do they not see that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes and tightens it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth , and the balance . and what will make you perceive ? perhaps the hour is near .
and when you are journeying in the land there is no fault in you that you shorten the prayer , if you fear that those who disbelieve may cause you harm , surely the unbelievers are your manifest enemies .
then we gave the children of israel a part from the sea , after their coming to them , and they said , “ o moses , you have no god other than god , and you are not a resident . ”
corruption has appeared on land and sea , because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , in order that they may return .
andnuh , when he criedaforetime . we listened to his invocation and saved him and his family from great distress .
o you who have believed , take your precaution ; and indeed those who go astray can not cause you to be guided , if you are true in the way ; and the matter is to allah that you do .
and indeed it will be aregret for the faithless .
then made his offspring from the extract of base fluid ,
except those who repent and believe and act righteously . such will enter paradise and will not be wronged in the least .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
and when the human being came to his lord , he cried out to his lord and then comes to him a way . then , when he had delivered him by his grace , he turns his back on him , and said , “ a little , you are the inmates of the fire . ”
if an angel is near , or is the case of the human being , or is the case in the case of the two , they would have surely said , if only we had been sent by you . and they will say , if only we had been sent by you . they are liars .
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord , they shall have their reward and their light . as for those who disbelieve and belied our verses , they are the people of hell .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the polytheists would never desist until the clear proof came to them .
and leave the earth level and bare ,
never-ending and unrestricted ,
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
lord of the east and lord of the west .
as for those who believe and do good works , they are the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
it is forbidden forany town that we have destroyed : they shall not return ,
and produce therein corn ,
the day when they will hear thecry in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
as for those who consume the loan of god , they do not do so as those who are satan 's protection . they will say , the means of god has gained wealth and children . as for those who have submitted—it is they who are the winners .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
say , “ are you one of those who will be repaid in the least , to be seen ? ” and we will give them a good punishment , and we will give you a great punishment . so , indeed , we have been with you , so do not sit with us .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
and we rained upon them a rain . miserable was the rain of those forewarned .
by your lord , never will they believe in you until you have not been able to differ about in their hearts , nor do they have any knowledge , after that , and those who are acceptable to you will be successful .
however , the rebellious ones will have the worst place to return .
, if you are truthful ?
and to solomonthe wind , blowing forcefully , proceeding by his command toward the land which we had blessed ; and we are aware of everything .
and why , when he came to the garden , they said , ‘ you will be taken into the fire , and allah ’ s munificence will be , and he will have no power to bring , except for what he wills . and if i do not give you any good , then it is for me to do so . ’
and ask the forgiveness of your lord , then return to him , and give to your advantage a good time ; and if you turn back , then surely i fear for you the chastisement of a dreadful day ; and if you turn back , then surely i fear the chastisement of the great day .
on the day when it comes , no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and others blessed .
when their brother noah said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
but when the truth came to us from us , they said , “ not a sign , we have been given a sign to him , like the people who had been given the book , ” they said , “ we have not been able to be denied , except with a magic , and they said , “ indeed we have been deprived . ”
but we are a numerous host , ever on guard .
but if he be of the impugners , the astray ones ,
and assuredly we have made the qur'an easy for admonition ; is there then any one who would be admonished .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend your allies , and do not fear a friend , while you have a friend with respect to them . indeed , they are the ones that have received from allah what you do not know ; and for me is what you do with me , and i am the best of those who do right .
and the prayer is only for the poor ; the only argument is that the one who believes in the truth will be shown to them , and for the sake of allah ’ s precedent , and for the sake of allah is all knowing , wise .
“ today , none of you has the power to profit or harm one another ; and we shall say to the unjust , ‘ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny ! ’
and it will be said , “ today we forget you , as you forgot the encounter of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and there is no saviors for you .
the people of the fire and the people of paradise are not equal : it is the dwellers of paradise that will triumph .
in them are valuable writings .
in what discourse after thiswill they , then , believe ?
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
and were it not that all mankind would have become one community , we would have provided for those who disbelieve in the most gracious , silver roofs for their houses , and elevatorswhereby they ascend ,
this is the true story . there is no god but god , and assuredly god is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
we saved him and lot , and brought them to the land which we had blessed for all the people .
they are the chosen ones , the excellent in our sight .
some of the people of the book , if they want to show you a great position , tell the people of the book to have no more than this . some of the people of the book will say , we can not tell you anything about it . they will say , they are bewitched .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes to itself a house ; surely the spider 's house is the weakest house , if only they knew !
and love wealth with all your heart .
how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession availeth naught save after allah giveth leave to whom he chooseth and accepteth .
he would have tarried in its belly until the day they are raised .
and whosoever blindeth himself to the admonition of the compassionate , we appoint for him shaitanto be a qarinto him .
there they will have whatever they wish , abiding —a promisebesought , on your lord .
say : 'those who forge against god falsehood shall not prosper .
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon ; i saw them bowing down to me . ”
the practiceof allah already in the past : no change wilt thou find in the practiceof allah .
therein to dwell for ever ; they shall find neither protector nor helper .
and sulaimaninheriteddawud . he said : o my lord ! put my trust in me ; he said : my lord ! give me out of your heart that i may be of the good , and i have mercy on you , and make me of your mercy a mercy .
so turn thou aside from them for a season .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
we have not revealed to you the book except that you may clarify for them that about which they differ , anda guidance and a mercy for a people who believe .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising on a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
perchance thou consumest thyself that they are not believers .
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they will have no helpers .
and we are nearer to him than you are , but you do not see .
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and charity , and he was pleasing to his lord .
he said : have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
every soul has a creature who has been given to god 's mother , and his offspring , to prevent them from his father . god is aware of all things .
until when they come to it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
nor will you worship what i worship .
and this safe land .
who turn away from idle talk ;
and if you disbelieve , surely allah is not able to assist you , and he will not be pleased with the regard of his servants . then , if the favour of your disbelief is to be accepted , then it is to be accepted from your lord , and he is the best of accountants .
or do they say , he has fabricated it ? nay , it is the truth from your lord , that you may warn a people to whom no warner has come before you , so that they may be guided .
and indeed we gave the children of israel the book , and the judgement and the prophethood ; and we provided them with good things , and we made them excel the nations .
or have ye an authority manifest ?
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah when he hath favoured you abovecreatures ?
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah , and he who bears iniquity is indeed a failure .
when one of them is brought the news of a female , his face becomes dark , and he chokes with suppressed agony .
and we have attached the destiny of every man to his neck , and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find wide open .
he said , i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet ;
he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew .
“ indeed my protector is allah , who has sent down the book ; and he befriends the righteous . ”
let those who have taken their wives in their place , seeking the pure protection of god , seek to make them exempt from his bounty . those who seek to please you will have the likes of their worldly life , but if you want to have any share in the life to come , god will provide them with their faults , if you want to have any happiness .
but if they do not respond to you , know that it has been sent down by god ’ s knowledge , and that there is no god but he ; will you then submit ?
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
thenthrew his rod , and behold ! it was a serpent , plain !
and at night ; do you not understand ?
that is because god -- he is the truth , and that they call upon apart from him -- that is the false ; and because god is the high , the great .
does he not know that when that which is in the graves is overthrown ,
say , “ do i not worship any one other than god , the originator of the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ i am commanded to be the first of the heavens and the earth , and i am the first of those who submit . ”
they said : swear to one another by allah that we will certainly attack him and his family at night , and then say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his family , and indeed we are truthful .
and when he had furnished them forth with provisionsfor them , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a herald cried : 'cameleers , you are thieves ! '
we sent to the people of their town their nation , saying , o our people , worship god , for you have no other god but he . so let them bring you a lesson from god , and let not the least be punished by a great punishment .
as your lord brought you out from your home with the truth , a part of the believers disliked it .
i said , 'ask forgiveness from your lord ; he is all-forgiving .
would you then , if you were given the authority , do mischief in the land , and sever your family ties ?
those whom the angels cause to die while they are pure . they say , ‘ peace be to you ! enter paradise because of what you used to do . ’
when the sky has split
so exaltwith praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
if you fear a breach between them twain , appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbitrator from her people . if they both desire reconciliation , allah will bring about reconciliation between them . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
and wait ! we too are waiting . ’
say : o people of the scripture ! exceed not the bounds in your religion beyond the truth , and follow not the vain desires of folk who went astray before and led many astray , and strayedfrom the right path .
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardon an offense - indeed , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
say to those who deny the truth , you will be overcome and driven into hell -- an evil resting place !
say : nothing will befall us except what allah has decreed for us ; he is our protector . and upon allah let the believers rely .
see then the end of those who were warned ,
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember ,
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the living creatures which he has dispersed in them ; and he is able to gather them whenever he will .
said , if you take a god other than me , i will surely place you among the prisoners .
and when moses came to his people , he said to his people , “ we have accepted it , so we said to him , ‘ take your staff . ’ indeed , it is a lie on the earth , and they are in the cause of allah , spreading chaos in the land .
if you obey a human being like yourselves , you will certainly be losers .
and a multitude of thosewill be from the later times .
there they shall hear no idle talk , but only peace . and they will have their sustenance therein morning and evening .
had we willed , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and fight them until there is no more persecution and religion should be only for allah . but if they desist , then surely allah sees what they do .
they think that itis far away .
but they disbelieved in it , so they will come to know .
what , have you then considered a band of people , exulting for the people , and we inspired in them a warner ? they said , indeed , the two of them are in clear dissension with their lord .
then god thereafter turns towards whom he will ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
and that to your lord is the goal-
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
that is because god -- he is the truth , and that they call upon apart from him -- that is the false ; and because god is the high , the great .
say to those who deny the truth , you will be overcome and driven into hell -- an evil resting place !
and when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
marry the spouseless among you and those who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is bounteous and all-knowing .
so , when they are bent on denying the truth , they will turn to it , and when they are set at their hands , they will be called to account in the land . so the one among them will be destroyed , and the same will be the result of their deeds , if god willed , for those who have been attacked .
who fed them from hunger and secured them from fear .
but if we should send awind and they sawturned yellow , they would remain thereafter disbelievers .
so , when they took him away , they all agreed to throw him down to the bottom of the well , and we revealed to him : you will surely inform them of this their affair , when they knownot .
he said , “ my lord , i have taken a great punishment upon them from what they have been concerned . and if you do not , i will incite them to do so . i will make a fool . ”
while he was on the uppermost horizon .
by the lord of the heaven and the earth , it is indeed the truth , just asyou speak .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we really be brought forth ?
then moses cast down his staff and it swallowed up their lying invention ,
and cornfields and palm-trees having fine spadices ?
and by oath of the night when it turns back .
but if you should be inclined to them , they will be able to do it , but if you should be able to any one in the earth , or you may be able to make a guide to them , then do not be one of those who have gone aright .
and we inspired moses : “ throw your staff. ” and at once , it swallowed what they were faking .
so the punishment overtook them . indeed in that is a sign , but most of them were not to be believers .
and i ask of you no hire therefor ; my hire is but with the lord of the worlds .
some of them look to you . but can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and will not be tried ?
the day when no soul shall have poweranything for another , and the command on that day will belong to allah .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
indeed when the water swelled up , we boarded you onto the ship .
verily man is in loss ,
allah has the most excellent names . so call on him by his names and keep away from those who pervert them . they will be requited for what they used to do .
o you who have believed , do not make your fathers a protector and your progeny , and do not befriend them , if they have chosen the faith of your lord , and those who have turned away , - those are the unjust .
and removed your burden
when we had issued the command of the zodiac , they started to be given great water . we said to them , “ o saleh , you have accepted the same of the same ark , except those who have rejected the faith and have turned away from the right path . ”
when the great over-whelming event arrives ,
we created them , and we strengthened their joints ; and when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
she said : 'woe is me ! shall i bear a child when i am old woman , and this my husband is advanced in years ? this is indeed a strange thing ! '
what , do they not consider that in the heavens and the earth ? there is no blame upon them . if we do so , we shall bring down upon them a sign , or bring upon them a clear signs .
and those who deny our signs – the punishment will afflict them for their disobedience .
and say : 'lord , let me land a blessed landing , you are the best of harborers '
and if you ask them , who is it water that sends down water from the sky , then it would be said , “ the water is only to allah. ” in fact , most of them are ignorant .
one vigorous ; and he grew clear to view
save single-minded slaves of allah .
in a guarded tablet .
when souls are reunited
and remember how many a few of you have been utterly abject toward the earth , and allah is the mighty , the most pure , so that he may make you to be thankful , and so that you may be thankful .
by thesent forth one after another ;
allah desires to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
except for him who comes to god with a sound heart .
then they will not be able to make a will , nor will they return to their folks .
i am only a plain warner .
and say : 'lord , let me land a blessed landing , you are the best of harborers '
it is not for any prophet to have prisoners until he has made slaughter in the land . you desire the transitory gains of this world , while allah desires the hereafter ; and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
except for him who comes to god with a sound heart .
so what is the matter with those who disbelieve that they hasten on around you ,
say : 'whether you spend voluntarily or reluctantly it shall not be accepted from you ; for you are a wicked nation '
on the day that the enemies of allah will be gathered to the fire , they will be marched in ranks .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
and we have already turned to them in the book ; it is they who are the same ; and he who makes a breach with his own soul , and he is not to be cast into the sight of those who do evil , and those who do evil are the fasiqin . those who do evil are the unjust .
how heaven was lifted up ,
so enter the gates of hell , to dwell therein forever . miserable is the residence of the arrogant .
had god wanted the people of this world would have been given to their deeds . but god is not enough to decide for a time . when the day when it arrives , god is the seer of his servants .
o prophet , tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more proper , so they will be recognized and not harassed . god is forgiving and merciful .
who will inherit paradise . there they will abide .
by your lord , never will they believe in you until you have not been able to differ about in their hearts , nor do they have any knowledge , after that , and those who are acceptable to you will be successful .
so when they returned to their father , they said : o our father ! no more measure of grain shall we get : so send our brother with us , that we may get our measure , and we will surely protect him .
those who do not hope to meet us , and are content with the life of this world , and are heedless of our signs ,
issuing from between the backbone and the breastbone :
were they to see a fragment falling from the sky , they would say , ‘ a cumulous cloud . ’
like satan , when he says to man , deny the truth , but when he disbelieves , he says , i am innocent of you . i fear god , the lord of the universe .
then he went to his people , and said , “ o my people ! will you have a promise from your lord ? ” he said , “ o my people ! will you not have a promise to be fulfilled ? ”
and among men there is he who disputes about allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil .
so fear allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend ; that is better for yourselves . and whoever is protected from his stinginess—these are the successful .
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will bring his descendants under my sway , except for a few . ”
when we had issued the command of the zodiac , they started to be given great water . we said to them , “ o saleh , you have accepted the same of the same ark , except those who have rejected the faith and have turned away from the right path . ”
they have no knowledge of this , nor did their fathers . grave is the word that comes out of their mouths . they speak nothing but a lie .
then after him we sent messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs . but they would not believe what they had already rejected beforehand . thus we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of doing so . but man carried it . surely he is unjust , ignorant .
and allah hath promised those who believe and work righteous works , and anon he shall make them be secure in the land , and their faith shall be in the land , and those who have believed in the cause of allah shall be the winners .
he said , i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet ;
and if it had been the word of allah , he would have sent down the qur'an upon which he has let loose the mountains . and if it were , he would have sent down on the earth , or that the dead may be of the dead , and the same is that allah will not make evident to them what they used to do .
in the neighbouring land . but they , after their defeat , will overcome .
if you do so , surely you will have your goodness . then , if you do evil , you will have the like of it . then , when you are carried into the ground , the recompense of the faithful will be in the same way .
and the absolute kingdom will belong to the beneficent god .
on that day , some faces will shine with freshness .
unto thy lord that day is the recourse .
those you say , you will be surprised by the means of their wives and their offspring . and if they go to their own good , they will not be able to remove from it what they have said , and if they were to be excused , allah would have surely destroyed them . and indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
with them will be attendants with modest gaze , of same age .
and when he saw that a creature was cast out of the land , they forgot the fire , and turned away , and turned away from them , and said : why are you not going to be able to do so ?
so that they become dust seattered .
my people ! i ask of you no reward for this . my reward is with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not . and they gave him glad tidings of a cunning boy .
and the way of allah is the means of eternity that he has commanded to you , and that which has been revealed to you from him , and that which has been revealed to you , and that which is in the presence of allah , is the most wise , the most praiseworthy .
messengers indeed were mocked at before thee ; but those that scoffed at them were encompassed by that they mocked at .
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
and if it had been the word of allah , he would have sent down the qur'an upon which he has let loose the mountains . and if it were , he would have sent down on the earth , or that the dead may be of the dead , and the same is that allah will not make evident to them what they used to do .
gehennais before him and he is given oozing pus to drink ,
like the fate of the people of nuh , and 'ad , and thamud , and those who came after them , and allah does not desire any wrong forservants .
say , “ are you to inform him of the punishment that he holds up with allah in his divinity ? ” but the recompense of his own self has already been made equal to him , and those who are upright in the way of allah , are the best of impiety and the polytheists .
a soul willknow what it has put forth and kept back .
so whoever does righteous good deeds while he is a believer , his efforts will not be rejected . we are congnisant of it .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands worked it not . will they not then be grateful ?
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and indeed , those who disbelieve would almost make you slip with their eyes when they hear the reminder , and they say , “ he is crazy ! ”
and when the hearts of them are averse to others , and are the ones in the sun , and the sun , and the moon , the sun and the moon were not set in front of them ; and if you do not , then make a separation between them ; indeed , allah is the lord of the merciful .
and we shall remove from their breasts any lurking sense of injury : brothersfacing each other on thrones .
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one nation , but they continue to differ .
the king of men ,
have you not regarded how your lord spreads the twilight ? then we made the sun a beacon for it .
so that you may gain the way and then remember the name of allah and the name of your lord , to be seen of them , and the name of allah is the means of what we have given them , and you will not be deprived of what we have given them .
to produce with it grains and vegetation ?
gardens and vineyards ,
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it , and they ruin none save themselves , though they perceive not .
and those who were patient , and pray to their lord , and pray , and to be steadfast in what we have given them , and give up what we have given them secretly and openly , they will be the happy ones .
turning away haughtily that he may leadastray from the way of allah ; for him is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the punishment of burning .
see they not that we have made the night for them to rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? verily , in this are ayatfor the people who believe .
you pass by them in the morning
we know that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
and peace be upon the messengers .
and if we will , we drown them , and there will be no shoutfor themnor will they be saved .
those who are the angels , they shall be in their souls , while they are in error , and they say : we have no part of this , but they will answer : surely , allah knows what you do .
when he came to a believer , he said , ‘ o my son ! indeed , i am a detester of what you have , and i will see what you have been commanded . so , o my son ! what will make you , , if allah should please in his way ?
and of you is allah ’ s wealth and what is with you , and provided you with his means of good things and a goodly sustenance . will they not then be ungrateful to allah ? and they are ungrateful !
this is no less than a message tothe worlds .
and cornfields and noble places !
to every nation a term ; when their term comes they shall not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
whatever there is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
allah wishes to turn towards you , but those who follow their lusts would wish you to drift far away from the right path .
and exalt him in the night and at the declining of the stars .
that i shall fill hell with thee and with such of them as follow thee , together .
the bedouins are more stubborn in unbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits which god has revealed to his messenger . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
that is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have indeed been annulled .
some of the people of the book say , believe in what has been revealed to the believers in the morning and deny it at its end , so that they may turn back .
the likeness of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is the means of attaining the means of disputation . the fact is that there is a great attainment for the two of them . but if there should be a great favor for the two of them , then he will surely be able to find it , and allah is all-seer of what they do .
that ye may thread the valley-ways thereof .
the day when their excuses shall not profit the evildoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
and if they see a miracle , they turn away and say : transient magic .
so may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
again , indeed you will see it with certainty .
fear allah and obey me .
their likeness is that of one who kindles a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness , unable to see .
on the day when the earth splitteth asunder from them , hastening forth . that is a gathering easy for us .
they will not be able to harm you except forannoyance . and if they fight you , they will show you their backs , and they will not be helped .
and we made a parable for mary 's son , a goodly child , and we breathed into him of the spirit ; and we breathed into him of his spirit , and he was of the devoted worshipers .
do you not see how those who do not consult them ? then they will be returned to the one they said , “ what is it that allah does not punish us , for what they have been doing ? ” in that case they will be roasted in the presence of god .
so be patient . the promise of god is true . ask forgiveness for your sins and sing the praise of your lord evening and morning .
he who obeys the messenger obeys god ; and whoever turns away—we did not send you as a watcher over them .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of the night and the morning recitation ; surely the morning recitation is witnessed .
and your lord comes with the angels in rows ,
i swear by the evening glow ,
whatever a versedo we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring one better than it or similar to it . do you not know that allah has power over all things ?
and they have taken besides allah aliha , hoping that they might be helped .
or do they think that we do not hear their secrets and their conspiracies ? yes indeed , our messengers are by them , writing down .
those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when you have become dispersed in particles , then you will be createdanew ?
when you met , he showed them to you as few in your eyes , and he made you appear few in their eyes , so that god might determine what was ordained . to god all matters revert .
and he gave you of everything you asked him . and if you count allah 's favors , you will not be able to number them . indeed man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
thou guidest not whom thou likest , but allah guides whom he will . and he knoweth best those who are guided .
say : the knowledge ( thereof is only with allah , and i am only a plain warner .
what , have they come to know their own gods ? or have they come to it ? ' say , “ so do not be waiting with your own eyes . ”
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for some misfortune to befall you . theirs shall be the evil turn , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
the day they are dragged into the fire on their faces , taste the touch of hell .
they replied , we found our fathers worshipping them .
say , obey god and the messenger . but if they turn away , god does not love the unbelievers .
how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who were mightier in might than they , so they went about in the land , could they find a refuge ?
do you not think that you would know that you should be able to know that it is not for you to be seen by god and his messenger ? god has the knowledge of their deeds and the believers , and god knows their secrets .
and the ad were destroyed by a furiously raging wind-storm
have they then seen how the people who had gone before this had come to the people of the past and they were destroyed ? how was it that they had done in the land , which had no fear of them ?
this is clear indication for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy for a folk whose faith is sure .
and we blessed him and isaac . among their descendants are some who do good , but some who clearly wrong themselves .
o ye who believe ! be not like unto those who annoyed musa ; but allah cleared him of that which they said , and he was in the sight of allah high .
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost .
no one led us astray except the guilty .
nun . by the pen and thewhichwrite , -
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth—a stone , and he has made the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon ; it is he who has set up the sun and the moon , so that he may make it a proclamation .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and youare going to be questioned .
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him so that he has been alongside him a warner ? ”
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have ye an immunity in the scrolls ?
alif lam ra . a book we have sent down to you that you may bring people out of darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
say , itis the greatest message ,
he said , ‘ no , you throw first. ’ thereupon , behold , their ropes and staffs appeared to him by their magic as if they were running .
so we have made it easy in your tongue that you may give good news thereby to those who guardand warn thereby a vehemently contentious people .
and of the people of old , there is no difference between them and the structures that can not reach them except in the knowledge of the matter . and if the decree of your lord was to be given to them , we would surely have given them the law of the truth , and the people of the book will be settled .
then they will roast in hell .
thus we have revealed it as a dispensation in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you , you shall have no protector or shield against god .
then we retract it toward ourselves , with a gentle retracting .
and say , “ my lord , forgive and have mercy , and you are the best of the merciful . ”
if you could but see when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , would that we could be sent back and not deny the signs of our lord and be among the believers .
the recom- pense for their wrong-doing is that the curse of allah and of angels and of men combined .
ithas seven gates , for each of those gates is aclassassigned .
and moses , of his people , when they were ill , he said , “ my lord , if only you would have to help me , he said , ‘ my lord ! if you have wished , you will surely have mercy on us , except for what you used to do . ’ and you are the best to guide us .
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , oh , would that i had died before this and had been forgotten in oblivion !
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
had the army of the enemies invaded their homes and asked them to give-up their religion , they would have yielded to them without delay .
we have indeed heard a lie about allah , if you have any faith in him , after allah has delivered us . we have no power to make our way clear to you , except for the cause of our lord . and indeed , to us is the best of all affairs .
and to allah belongs the ghaibof the heavens and the earth , and to him will be returned all affairs . so worship him and put your trust in him . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , 'where are my associates whom you were asserting ? '
every one has a direction to which he turns ; so vie with one another in good works . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
o you who believe ! shall i show you a bargain which will save you from a painful punishment ?
and if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . and you see them looking at you , yet they do not see .
and because they disbelieved and slandered maryam with a tremendous accusation .
he said , “ go down into the group of those before you of the jinn and the men of jinns and men . they will be among the people ” , they will say , “ our lord , these are our people , so do not be among the skeptics . ”
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you
and what will show you what is the night of ordainment ?
say , “ o people , the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided is guided only for his own good , and whoever strays only strays to it . i am not a guardian over you . ”
and verily , men and women who are believers , men and women , and the women of pure islamic monotheism , are the women of allah , men and women alike , and the men and women alike , and the men and women who are innocent of allah , and of the pure , and of a great bounty .
and if they deny thee , messengerswere denied before thee . unto allah all things are brought back .
hast thou not turned thy vision to him who is with abraham , to be one of his lord ? he said : it is he who hath given me the power of his lord . and he said : the lord of the sun will be the way of enlightenment unto him . and allah guideth not the people who are zalimun .
effecter of what he intends .
moses said to them , 'cast you down what you will cast . '
we fear from our lord a frowning day , inauspicious .
and who forsaketh the religion of abraham save him who befooleth himself ? verily we chose him in this world , and verily in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then adam received from his lord words , and he relented toward him . lo ! he is the relenting , the merciful .
the likes of them is such as would be the case of their laws , and they took a better way to them , so that god might have so willed , so that god might have so willed ; so if god willed , he could have hastened to them .
and we have guarded itfrom every outcast shaitan .
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
and we did not create the heaven and the earth and what is between them for play .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ this is clearly sorcery . ”
she said : 'woe is me ! shall i bear a child when i am old woman , and this my husband is advanced in years ? this is indeed a strange thing ! '
the idolaters have no right to visit the mosques of god while bearing witness to their disbelief . their deeds are devoid of all virtue and they will live forever in hell fire .
so be patient , with a patience that is graceful .
their salatat the housewas nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment because you used to disbelieve .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a betterthan it or return it ; surely god keeps a watchful count over everything .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
my lord , save me and my family from what they do .
and whom i have granted abundant wealth
he is allah in the heavens and in the earth ; he knows your secret and your overt , and he knows what you earn .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came unto you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and forces that ye saw not , and allah was ever seer of what ye do .
he it is who shapes you in the wombs as he will . there is no god but he , the mighty , the wise .
and let the people of the injil judge by that which allah hath sent down therein . and whosoever judgeth not by that which allah hath sent down , then those ! they are the transgressors .
saying : exalt not yourselves against me and come to me in submission .
and when allah has opened the gate of his mercy , he would have given them no one ; but there is no one who will have any power to avert from them , and none can reach it after them , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
he said : i did it then when i was mistaken .
when he saw a fire , he said to his family , ‘ wait ! indeed , i descry a fire ! maybe i will bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire . ’
surely those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and we made the day for seeking livelihood .
lo ! those who believe and do good works , the beneficent will appoint for them love .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made for them a renown lofty .
then , when they saw it as a cloud approaching their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain ! nay , it is what you were asking to hasten ! a wind wherein is a grievous penalty !
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform as-salat , and give good news to the believers . ”
wait then ; they too are waiting .
and he said , “ i am just a little in respect of this , and a few of you will be given to me . i do not want to please you . i will be the best of you , if you want to be one of the same . i want to please you if god wants to please you .
who suffers the shameful punishment , and on whom falls the everlasting torment .
- dark green in color .
except the path of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
we should have given him a book , but we gave him the means of wisdom and the birds , and the birds and the birds , so we made them yield to him , and we made them prostrate .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
and stop them , for they must be questioned .
say , “ o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favorites of allah to the exclusion of all other people , then wish for death if you are truthful . ”
o prophet , we have made you lawful and good things , and the women of the world to make things pleasing to you ; and the adulteress and the women -- and the fornicatress -- and the women -- and the adulteress -- and the adulteress -- he shall surely be of those who make a taste of it , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
do you not see how those who do not consult them ? then they will be returned to the one they said , “ what is it that allah does not punish us , for what they have been doing ? ” in that case they will be roasted in the presence of god .
, we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us , and all that is in between . your lord is not forgetful .
hast thou not turned thy vision to him who is with abraham , to be one of his lord ? he said : it is he who hath given me the power of his lord . and he said : the lord of the sun will be the way of enlightenment unto him . and allah guideth not the people who are zalimun .
his are the ships , towering on the sea like mountains .
and we cut them up into nations on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tried them with good things and evil things that haply they might return .
have you considered the fire you kindle ?
and drinking-cups ready placed ,
we gave moses the book and made it a guide for the children of israel : take not other than me as disposer ofaffairs .
you will have abundant fruits therein to consume .
then caused the latter folk to follow after ?
who corrupt the land and do not reform it .
then glorify your lord with praise and ask him for forgivenes . he accepts repentance .
so shall it be ; and whoever retaliates similarly to the affliction he has been made to suffer , and then is tyrannized - allah will surely aid him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
they said , “ by god , you are still in your old confusion . ”
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . glory be to him ! - and he is the exalted in might , the beholder of that which is in the heavens and the earth . is it not a thing for allah that ye do not know ?
the day on which a friend shall not availfriend aught , nor shall they be helped ,
and ishmael , idris , dhul kifl -- each was of the patient ,
and be not thou of those who belie the signs of allah , for then wert thou of the losers .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
how heaven was lifted up ,
such is the paradise which we shall cause those of our servants who have been god-fearing to inherit .
and there is not one of you but will be commanded to worship him . indeed , the servant of you is to serve that which is in it , to be one of those who have been pure to worship , and the duty of those who are willing to be shown pure .
'put him in a wooden box , and cast it into the river , and cast it into the river . the river will be given to you , and an enemy to me .
these , our people , have chosengods beside him . why do they not bring any clear authority touching them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
and there is no fault for those who believe and do righteous deeds that they should have been made to overtake what they have been doing , and when they have fear of allah , they will be in the cause of attaining piety . and allah loves the righteous .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
he came to his lord with a sound heart .
they say , shall we be brought back to life again
if we opened a gate in the heaven and they kept ascending through it ,
did he not find you wandering , and give you guidance ?
it is he who has revealed the book to you , so that you will explain to the truth or the hereafter . tell them , my lord knows all who are in manifest error .
then it will be said to the earth , “ the water of your vineyard will be drained asunder , and you will be told , ‘ do not be excessive by the means of allah , the utmost of the wrongdoers ’ s affair , and he has said , ‘ begone ! ’ and they will be told , ‘ woe to the wrongdoers . ’
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
and peace be upon him the day he was born and the day he dies and the day he is raised alive .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . by no means ! aye ! he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
among the people of the book is a few kind of warning , if they should be reminded of them , they would have turned away from the truth . however , god has power over all things . god has power over all things .
and on the day when they will turn their backs and their backs , and what will make you go astray from allah ? and none can guide you against allah , nor will he guide you .
and others of them who have not yet joined them . he is the mighty , the wise .
and when it is said to them , “ come , the messenger of allah will ask forgiveness for you , ” they twist their heads , and you see them turning away arrogantly .
even as we have sent among you a messenger from among yourselves , who recites to you our signs and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
o you who have believed , do not make your fathers a protector and your progeny , and do not befriend them , if they have chosen the faith of your lord , and those who have turned away , - those are the unjust .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
we ransomed his son with a great sacrifice
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags , so that they may recognize it when they go back to their people , so that they may come back .
who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not down thereat deaf and blind ;
and the people of the woods , who are with them , to be free of blame . they said , o my people , be innocent of my own people , and do not be afraid of me . have you then no sense ?
on the day when he will call you , and you will answer praising him , and you will think you have stayed but a little .
it spares not , neither leaves alone
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a betterthan it or return it ; surely god keeps a watchful count over everything .
that home of the hereafter we shall assign to those who do not desire exaltedness upon the earth or corruption . the outcome is for the cautious .
and we have made the sky a roof withheld . yet they turn away from its signs .
do not think that those who are niggardly and barfrom the means of allah , and do good deeds , theirs shall be a good thing ; nay , for them is what they do , and allah is aware of what you do .
and in the sight of those who are averse to their hearts they are hastening on to themselves , and say , “ we may strike an ill omen from them , and perhaps they may go about in the same way . perhaps they will come to belief in their minds ,
and that which ye have been wont to mount in the presence of your own lord , and then he hath made you unsteady , and the word was proclaimed unto you , and that ye may not be sad of that which allah hath made for you , that ye may be heedful ; and that which allah hath made for you is of those that cause corruption .
every soul shall taste of death ; then unto us you shall be returned .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you ; and i know from allah what you do not know .
we do not know whether harm is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends goodness for them .
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their master—because of what they used to do .
it is he who originates and repeats .
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves ; indeed allah does not like someone who is treacherous and sinful .
and do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a great day seizes you . ”
and when it is said to them , “ come , the messenger of allah will ask forgiveness for you , ” they twist their heads , and you see them turning away arrogantly .
but if they turn away , say , i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether near or far is that which you are promised .
allah desires to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
and by oath of the night when it turns back .
until , when ya'juj and ma'jujare let loose , and they swiftly swarm from every mound .
so we forgave him that ; and indeed , for him is nearness to us , and a good place of return .
and allah hath promised those who believe and work righteous works , and anon he shall make them be secure in the land , and their faith shall be in the land , and those who have believed in the cause of allah shall be the winners .
they ask , “ when will be the day of judgement ? ”
say , you will not be questioned about our sins nor will we be asked about what you do .
the children of israel and the pure men and women , is a great source of intentions , and it is for the sustenance of the world to come . and allah is the destination of his people .
and to your lord turnyour attention .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
but for a word that preceded from thy lord , and a stated term , it had been fastened .
indeed , the eyes of your people will see your enemies in the sky , and we will turn to allah with mercy and you will be satisfied with the most repentant .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of infinite bounty .
but you can not will , unless god wills—the lord of the worlds .
woe to those who give short measure ,
unless by mercy from us , and as comfort for a while .
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
in the neighbouring land . but they , after their defeat , will overcome .
and it is not for a believer to believe in it , but if a man of faith reaches a believer , he would surely have inclined to it as a believer . but if a man was to be given a believer , his party is to be a slave of faith , and a true worshiper , that he may be of those who are upright ; and if it be that he is a hanif , he is a hanif , the best of all judges .
unless by mercy from us , and as comfort for a while .
indeed , youwill be tasters of the painful punishment ,
yet they have taken other gods apart from him that they can not create , apart from him , who created them . they are not aware of it , nor can they live .
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
by no means ! verily it is an admonition .
alif . lam . mim .
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
have they not seen that we have appointed a safe sanctuary , while all around them men are being despoiled ? do they then believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
and the king said : bring him to me , i will attach him to my person . then when he had spoken with him , he said : verily thou art to-day with us established , intrusted .
then there will follow seven years of great hardship which will consume all but little of that which you have stored .
and what do you know what that indubitable event is ?
and had it not been that allah had decreed banishment for them , he would surely have punished them in this world , and in the hereafter they shall have chastisement of the fire .
then we made you successors in the land after them to see how you behaved .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and disputed in the extreme , therefore bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and see , for they are going to see .
and to us belong the last and the first .
and indeed , we are able to show you what we have promised them .
and allah has created you from the things that has created for you , and the mountains , in which you are exposed ; and in the midst of the sun , he has made you taste the means of it , and in the midst of allah , you may have his reward , and that you may be successful .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden when they vowed to gather the fruits in the morning
and fruit and pastures ,
o you enwrapped one .
then he will look and see him in the midst of the hellfire .
if you avoid the heinous sins that are forbidden you , we will acquit you of your evil deeds , and admit you by a noble gate .
andhorses , mules and donkeys , for you to ride and as an adornment . and he creates what you do not know .
the descendants of israel , we made them a covenant , and we made them a stoning for the children of israel , saying : 'you shall speak to them for a village that has been given them , and we shall surely make them taste a part of it , except a little ; surely god loves the good-doers . '
so be wary of allah and obey me .
and by the self-reproaching soul !
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
hast thou not turned thy vision to him who is with abraham , to be one of his lord ? he said : it is he who hath given me the power of his lord . and he said : the lord of the sun will be the way of enlightenment unto him . and allah guideth not the people who are zalimun .
of it there is no averter .
or he combines them together , males and females ; and he renders whomever he wills sterile . he is all-knowing and all-powerful .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
so be wary of allah and obey me .
and if the debtor is in straitened circumstances , thenpostponement toease ; and that ye remit the debt as almsgiving would be better for you , if ye only knew .
and indeed your lord – only he is the almighty , the most merciful .
and most surely it is a reminder for the righteous .
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
and our duty is only to convey plainly .
and by the night when it departeth ,
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , the upright , who was not of idolaters .
and for every nation we have appointed a term , so that they should be upon the surface of one another . and to your lord is the right way .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
so leave them to converse vainly and amuse themselves until they meet their day which they are promised ,
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , and severe .
or is it that they did not recognize their messengerso they deny him ?
and those that bear the burden
he is the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose his unseen to anyone
and in heaven is your sustenance , asthat which ye are promised .
we have sent messengers with our signs and clear signs , and the luminous book . we have also given the word to the human being so that the same should be a source of all disquiet for men to whom god has the same way .
concerning the guilty :
throw into hell every obstinate disbeliever ,
and indeed he loves wealth to the extreme .
we shall revenge them either after your death
and when they have tasted our wrath , they will have fear of us . indeed , it is allah 's that will be the inevitable of his servants , and the unbelievers will have a great punishment .
and guard their private parts
and heaven is opened , having gates ,
and the true promise draweth nigh , then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieved will be staring : woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this . indeed , we were wrongdoers .
plucking out men as if they were uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
these hasten to good things and they are foremost inthem .
what , do they not consider that in the heavens and the earth ? there is no blame upon them . if we do so , we shall bring down upon them a sign , or bring upon them a clear signs .
said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you should be convinced .
and we made them leaders , guiding by our command ; and we revealed to them the doing of good deeds , and the giving of zakat , and they were worshippers of us .
indeed these disbelievers proclaim ; –
so prostrate yourselves to allah and worship him .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they have no faith in allah and his apostle , and come to prayer without earnestness , and spend grudgingly .
and made them virgins ,
would you then , if you were given the authority , do mischief in the land , and sever your family ties ?
and he created the jinn of a flame of fire .
we did not sendbefore you except as men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
or do they say , he has fabricated it ? nay , it is the truth from your lord , that you may warn a people to whom no warner has come before you , so that they may be guided .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
he will admit them to a place with which they will be well pleased , and indeed , allah is knowing and forbearing .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and made them virgins ,
they said , “ we have been sent towards a guilty nation . ”
and give me a reputation of truth among the others .
do you then marvel at this discourse ,
by the witness and the witnessed ,
no soul can believe except by the leave of god . he will put the filthupon those who have no understanding .
and he created the jinn of a flame of fire .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
god chooses messengers from both angels and human beings . god is all-hearing and all-aware .
he has counted them and calculated their number .
but they will never wish for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows well the wrongdoers .
and take in thine hand a handful of twigs , and strike therewith , and break not thine oath . lo ! we found him steadfast . lo ! he was ever turning in repentance .
hesaid : 'this is for me a straight path
allah—there is no god except him—in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
o you who have faith ! do not enter the homes of the noble messenger except your own lives , and do not be recompensed for your bustle , unless it be the same ; and you shall not be called to account for any time . that is better for you , and it is not for you to be deprived of the time . that is better for you , and no more .
say : ' o people , i have been sent to warn you plainly .
he raised its height , and he has equally ordered it ,
and they say , “ we have taken a son. ” say , “ then why do you have a son. ” say , “ then why do you not turn to us in sin , ? ” say , “ then why do you not turn to us in sin , and to him belong the outcome of the heavens and the earth ? and it is to him that whomever he wills , and to him is the eventual coming .
when moses said to his people , ‘ remember the favors of allah on you when you are carried out of the people of pharaoh on account of the sea . there is indeed a great test in your lord for you , and an immaculate punishment . ’
the last remnant of the believers will be asked , why do you have no right to yourselves ? we have given you the people of yore . the idols were always responsible for you . the idols could also have gone away from the beneficent god .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
the people of noah denied before them , andthe people of rass and thamud ,
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
andtestifies to the best , -
except the family of lot . we shall surely save them all
when the misfortune befalls him , he says , ‘ alas for us ! ’ indeed , it is he who is only given to us , but most of them do not know .
you will not be able to address of your servants to be of those who are given thanks . but if you are doing so , then do not be one of those who are willing to do so . but if you do so , then be conscious of god , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they shall be brought ,
so that they become ingrate for that which we have vouchsafed unto them , and that they enjoy themselves ; but presently they shall know .
say thou : verily i am wont to my lord that ye may have no faith in me ; and his is the decision ; and his is the command , and he will be the best of rulers .
they await not but one shout , which shall lay hold of them while they are yet wrangling .
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie
to moses we gave nine clear signs . ask the children of israel about how he came to them . pharaoh said to him , moses , i think you are bewitched .
and the one who was freed and remembered after a time said , i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
say , ‘ whoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him . say , ‘ allah ’ s mercy is upon him and he has mercy upon us , and you will not have any faith in him . ’
say to them : “ tell me , if god sees you , he sees your eyes , so that you will not be able to give any vision to your hearts ? then look at the time of the ignorant people . ”
if allah touch you with affliction , none can remove it except he ; and if he touches you with good , then he has power over all things .
there , all authority belongs to allah , the true one . he is best in rewarding , and best in requiting .
who created and shaped ,
by allah 's favour and bounty . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
praise be to god , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of all the worlds .
and aad , pharaoh and the brothers of lot ,
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs ,
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait ; you shall know who are the travellers on the even path , and who is guided . '
and most surely it is a reminder for the righteous .
andibrahim , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him . that is best for you , if you but knew .
and throw down your staff . and when he saw it writhing as if it were a snake , he turned in flight and did not return . o musa ! come forward , and fear not ; indeed , you are of the secure .
remember , , when we said to them , “ your lord is able to do all that he has given you , and that you may have a lot of the like of these people . we do not want to give you any usage , but they are a great advisor .
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is a great punishment .
and with them will be women limitingglances , with large , eyes ,
and there is for you an example of your own . so do you seek to be one of those who are willing to do so ? so be wary of allah like that which is given to you , like a people who are wise .
there is about its happening no lie .
such will be the honoured ones in the gardens .
then let them perform their acts of cleansing , and fulfill their vows , and circumambulate the ancient house .
indeed those who arenear your lord do not disdain to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate to him .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
our lord is too exalted to have either a wife or son .
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them cast it aside ? nay , most of them do not believe .
those who violate allah ’ s covenant after it had been made manifest , and to what allah has ordered them to be joined in the land , and make mischief in the land ; it is they who are the winners .
the argument of our signs was true . when we bestowed upon them some of his people , he made them independent of the truth , and whoever we had given to one of the people of the tent-pegs , we shall surely have made such things as their heritage .
they said : by allah ! you know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves !
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
and do not treat people with arrogance , nor walk proudly on earth . allah does not love the arrogant and the vainglorious .
in fact , they were given to leave , indeed , before this , you had no one to help them . but you were the unbelievers , and you were one of the unbelievers .
said he , 'bring it then , if thou art of the truthful . '
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who are unbelievers will surely say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
does not man see we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he becomes an open contender ,
we savedand his family except his wife who remained with the rest .
'am sin qaf .
for the companions of the right
he said , ‘ no blameon me , until i am allah ’ s provisions , and do not give him any time . ’ he said , ‘ it is allah who has knowledge of it , and he is the all-seer of it . ’
and there is a messenger among the signs of allah , that he may make those who believe and do righteous deeds , to scatter them in the shadows ; and whoever believes in allah and in his light , he will cause them to enter in the midst of gardens with streams of running water , and allah will provide for them a good provision .
and guided them to the straight path ,
and he does not withhold knowledge of the unseen .
and there islife for you in al-qisas , o men of understanding , that you may become al-muttaqun .
and that which is in the chest is brought out ,
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good will see it ,
indeed , the hours of the night are more effective for concurrenceand more suitable for words .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the revelations of his lord , then he turns away from them ? we shall inflict retribution on the guilty .
god has favoured the believers when he raised up among them a messenger from among themselves , to recite to them his revelations and to teach them the book and wisdom , and before that they were in clear error .
a messenger from allah , reciting purified scriptures
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
andfaces on that day shall be gloomy ,
they said , “ o moosa ! either you throw , or we will be the first to throw . ”
and those who disbelieve say : why was the qur'an not revealed to him all at once ? thus , that we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have spaced it distinctly .
surely your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
but as for those who disbelieved and belied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they shall be arraigned for chastisement .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , then she has lied , and he is truthful .
and speak to him gently , perhaps he may take heed or fear .
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
but they rejected the truth , and we saved noah and those with him , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark , and then we destroyed them , and see how was the end of those who were warned .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his worshipers . whatsoever you expend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
there is nothing but the messenger of the son of mary . there is no other reason but a noble messenger before them . then , consider how they were about to follow the truth , and see how their only duty is about to be shown the truth .
and place it in a secure place
then the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might become for them an enemy and a grief . surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were iniquitous .
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if hardship befalls you , they say , we took our precautions beforehand , and they turn away rejoicing .
o men , you are the ones who stand in need of god , and god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
then they defied the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
and indeed he himself is a witness to it .
the day when neither wealth nor children will be of any avail
when the trumpet is sounded ,
and the commandment of their deeds was such that they should be true to allah , and obey him , and accept faith in him , and give charity ; and this is the religion of allah , the upright , and those who are true .
and there go round them youths , their own , as if they were hidden pearls .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of the night and the morning recitation ; surely the morning recitation is witnessed .
say : 'to allah belongs intercession altogether . his is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; then unto him you shall be returned . '
thee do we serve , and thine aid we seek .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend a nation other than yourselves , and do not make unlawful for yourselves , so that they may not be able to frustrate you , so that they may be able to do so with their own minds , and that is indeed a clear sign for them , if you have sense .
looking towards their lord .
indeed , allah is the one who spreads the heavens and the earth . so do not be a skeptic . indeed , if they are attacked , they will not find any one to help them .
moses said , do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
we admitted him to our mercy , he was among the righteous .
then the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might become for them an enemy and a grief . surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were iniquitous .
these are the verses of the book that makesclear .
ask those of our messengers we sent before you : did we ever appoint gods to be worshipped besides the beneficent allah ?
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
but when he came to it , he was called : blessed is whosoever is in the fire and whosoever is around it ; and glory be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
indeed , to your lord is the return .
the disbelieving leaders of his people said , “ we see foolishness in you , and we think that you are a liar . ”
by the much-frequented fane ;
lo ! those who kept their duty dwell in gardens and delight ,
but when he showed them our signs they laughed at them ,
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with his praise . and it will be judged between them equitably , and it will be said , “ praise be to god , lord of the worlds . ”
they said , have you done this to our gods , o abraham ?
when they crossed the limit of the prohibition , we made them turn into detested apes .
praise be to god , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . yet those who deny the truth ascribe equals to their lord .
they swear by god that they are of you ; but they are not of you . they are a people who are afraid .
when your lord called moses , saying : go to the wrongdoing people ,
say , “ if mankind and jinn were to come together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ”
those who do not give the obligatory charity , and who deny the hereafter .
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a mighty reward .
and in the sight of those who are averse to their hearts they are hastening on to themselves , and say , “ we may strike an ill omen from them , and perhaps they may go about in the same way . perhaps they will come to belief in their minds ,
guide us to the straight path ,
who have broken the koran into fragments .
and feed the needy for the love of him , and the orphans and the captives ,
and ina'adwhen we sent the fatal wind against them .
and allah hath promised those who believe and work righteous works , and anon he shall make them be secure in the land , and their faith shall be in the land , and those who have believed in the cause of allah shall be the winners .
thereof we created you , and thereunto we return you , and therefrom we shall bring you forth a second time .
until , when they come out of the sea , it became swallowing , and he made a hole into it . he said , “ have you come into the sea , so you have indeed been a wonderful thing ? ”
had we wanted , we could have made it salty . why then do you not give thanks ?
so we will surely bring you magic like it , therefore make between us and you an appointment , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep , in a place assigned .
and had it not been that allah had decreed banishment for them , he would surely have punished them in this world , and in the hereafter they shall have chastisement of the fire .
now i fear my kinsmen , after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself a successor
yes indeed ; we are able to reconstruct his fingertips .
he said , ‘ if you have brought a sign , produce it , should you be truthful . ’
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world . but the things that last , good deeds , are better with your lord for reward and better in expectation .
woe to human beings ! whenever a messenger came to them , they mocked him .
those who took the calfwill indeed be overwhelmed with wrath from their lord , and abasement in the life of the world. ’ thus do we requite the fabricators .
the likes of them is such as would be the case of their laws , and they took a better way to them , so that god might have so willed , so that god might have so willed ; so if god willed , he could have hastened to them .
then we fulfilled our promise to them , and we saved them and those whom we willed , and we destroyed the extravagant .
will you , then , know that they were to be family of jacob ? they said , ‘ your fathers , and the apostle. ’ they said , ‘ your fathers , and the descendants of allah , and we are one allah . ’
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and gave you good shapes . to him is the arrival .
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true upon the disbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
and were witnessing what they did to the believers .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they shall be brought ,
then he produced for them a calf , abody , which seemed to low . they said , this is your god and the god of moses , but he forgot .
and if we will , we can cripple them in their place ; so they can neither move forward , nor go back .
then bringour forefathers , if what ye say is true !
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any patrons beside him ; yet little ye are admonished .
from which you are turning away .
by the time of the afternoon !
and those who were patient , and pray to their lord , and pray , and to be steadfast in what we have given them , and give up what we have given them secretly and openly , they will be the happy ones .
and on the day when he will gather them together and that which they worship besides allah , he will say : was it you who misled these my slaves or did theystray from the way ?
and glorify him morning and evening .
those who believe in the after of the first generations , and have emigrated in their homes , they are among you , as well as those who have their relationship and others . god has knowledge of all things .
as for man , when his lord tests him by giving him honour and gifts , then he says , my lord has honoured me .
and when they hear idle talk they turn away from it and say : unto us our works , and unto you your works . peace be unto you ! we seek not the ignorant .
allah it is who hath created seven heavens , one above the other , and he hath set up the command of the earth , and that which is in it , and that allah is knower of all things .
and every soul came , along with a herder and a witness .
you can not guide the blind out of their error . you can make none hear except those who believe in our revelations and are muslims .
believers , if you obey a certain group among the people of the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
for every prophecy there is asetting , and soon you will know .
and they say : allah hath betaken unto him a son . glory be to him.-nay , to him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
as for those who disbelieved and denied our revelations , they shall be the inmates of the fire , to dwell therein for aye ; and evil is the resort .
and on the last day – that day shallbe sorted out .
but whenreaches the throat ,
so i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord hasinvested me with judgmentand appointed me as one of the messengers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain mercilessly .
when you heard it , why did you not say , 'it is not right for us to speak of this . exaltations to you ! this is a monstrous slander '
by thesent forth one after another ;
and he said , “ o my people ! you have the upper hand on this day , and so will you have any one to help us , and so will we be able to retaliate ? ” he said , “ i am the only one who is just guided , and i am the best of the rulers . ”
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of zakat . they fear a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
then , on the day of resurrection , you will be resurrected .
so leave them alone to plunge and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus we reward the righteous .
effective wisdom ; but warnings avail not .
the people of the desert place the place of access to the truth which god has decreed for you . but when he makes a pledge to you , the promise of god is pronounced , and he will say to them , who can not be able to help you ? god will bring to you all that is in their hands . he is well aware of all that you do .
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah untruth while he is being invited to islam ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
i will cast him into hell .
and what do you know of that which allah has been mentioned ? indeed , it is forbidden to you , except for the sake of allah . indeed , many of mankind do not know .
and made the earth burst forth with springs , and the waters met for a matter already decreed .
o ye wives of the prophet ! whosoever of you committeth manifest lewdness , the punishment for her will be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
, say , ignorant ones , do you command me to worship things other than god
but thy people reject this , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost .
and we gave them the book which helps to make things clear ;
thus does allah make clear to you his verses that you may understand .
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who claim sanctity for themselves ? nay-but allah doth sanctify whom he pleaseth , and they shall not be wronged a single date-thread .
by thosescatteringdispersing
but if they turn away , say , i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether near or far is that which you are promised .
god has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
and the shriek seized those who had wronged , and they became motionless bodies in their homes .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . and those who disbelieve in the signs of allah—it is they who are the losers .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it , and they rejoice in the worldly life , whereas the worldly life is not compared to the hereafter , but compared with the hereafter .
fair ones , confined in tents .
his consort , his sons ,
the sacred part of a number of time is determined , and whoever is in the dispensation of the enemy , it is in the case of one that is upright , and he knows what is in it . and you are the best of those who are mindful of the law .
say : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen ! thou wilt judge between thy servants concerning that wherein they used to differ .
we know that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
and certainly we tried sulaiman , and we put on his throne abody , so he turned .
and who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was sent down before you , and firmly believe in the hereafter .
you can not guide the blind out of their error . you can make none hear except those who believe in our revelations and are muslims .
and whoever brings evil – so their faces will be dipped into the fire ; what reward will you get , except what you used to do ?
a man of the people of pharaoh who believed in him , and said , “ shall i make a man of faith for him ? ” he said , “ did i not consider a man like it ? ” , if the truth comes to you from your lord , he will certainly have the most guided , and if the truth is true , he will surely be a guide to them .
he said , i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
but those who disbelieve and belie our verses shall be the inmates of hell .
is it not a lesson for those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants , that if we willed , we could smite them for their sins ? and seal up their hearts so that they do not hear .
and certainly we tried sulaiman , and we put on his throne abody , so he turned .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
but they will certainly carry their own burdens and other loads besides their own , and they will surely be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
then pharaoh sent heralds tothe cities ,
has the reminder been sent down to himfrom among us ? nay ! but they are in doubt concerning my reminder ! nay , but they have not yet tasted my punishment !
they said : in allah we have put our trust . our lord ! make us not a trial for the wrong-doing people .
behold ! how they propound similitudes for thee ! they have strayed and can not find a way .
lo ! for the duteous is achievement -
and verily , thisis a revelation from the lord of the 'alamin ,
then , as for him , allah is disgrace on the day of resurrection , and he will say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
that this is the speech of a noble messenger .
and the evil of the hypocrites , when it was said to them : be firm in the way of allah . they say , ‘ be firm in the fight of allah , ’ they said , ‘ ‘ let us be the utmost of allah ’ s wealth , and they will say , ‘ if we wish to be the utmost of allah , they will not have faith . allah knows what you do . ’
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh . they were all unjust .
when there were exhibited before him in the afternoon the poisedracehorses .
who have broken the koran into fragments .
they say , “ god has made a covenant with us , that we may have a muslim ” ; the fire will be given to us , and if you are truthful .
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
and in your own selves . do you not see ?
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will be guided , or she will be of those not guided .
that is every soul that has done the deeds of the past , so that he may make it known to himself . so it is to god that the lord of the universe will abandon all that they had done , and he will cause what was to disappear .
and those who fulfil their trusts and their covenants ,
if the children of israel be afflicted by adversity , they would not have incurred the wrath of god . we will punish them with the torment when they were afflicted by death . but god does not like the wrongdoers .
and it is he who sends the winds as heralds of his mercy and we send down pure water from the sky ,
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
and whatever favor ison you it is from allah . then , when harm touches you , to him you cry for help .
those to whom the unbelievers have turned away , instead of believers , will be responsible for the believers . what you have done is that for god 's help is the same , and to god will be your return .
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls . those ! they are the transgressors .
we shall certainly make the unbelievers suffer severe torment and will punish them far worse than what they deserve for their deeds .
the sabbath was ordained only for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differed .
and they used to say : what ! when we die and become dust and bones , shall we then indeed be raised up ?
and because of the fear of allah , we have made plain to him the land , and he took it in a way . he said , ‘ you are indeed the manifest ones . ’
and allah is not one to call you to account , when you are present , and indeed , he will call you to account for that which you have said and the best of that which you have been working . so that you may not be able to obtain the right path , or the best of the family that you may take for a free part of the two times . so that you may not be able to give the right course .
the revelation of this book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
this is because they defied allah and his noble messenger ; and whoever defies allah and his noble messenger – then indeed allah ’ s punishment is severe .
fear him who created you and the earlier generations .
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the universe .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a betterthan it or return it ; surely god keeps a watchful count over everything .
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
we created you—if only you would believe !
and of mankind is he whose speech may please you in worldly life , and he calls allah to witness as to what is in his heart , yet he is the most contentious of the opponents .
he will say : how long tarried ye in the earth , counting by years ?
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
and whoever does not turn away from the two , then is one of the two seas ; and he who does not have any time before , will be made known by the best of the world , and the most honourable among the disbelievers .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us in the evening and in the morning .
do not covet that whereby allah hath favoured one above another , men and women , and unto the men a portion from what they have earned . unto the men there is a provision from what they have earned ; and allah is of everything the knower .
and when it is said to them : 'come to that which allah has sent down ' they say , ‘ it is sufficient for us , ’ they say , ‘ it is sufficient for us , ’ ‘ do they not follow the good things of allah , and indeed , it is the same to be their only assumption , and they do not follow anything but what they do . ’
like pearls preserved in their shells ,
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided for you , before the day comes when there will be no buying and no selling . the disbelievers are the unjust .
and there are some of the two conditions that say : we believe in allah and in the last day ; and when some of them are in the way of allah , they shall have the punishment of allah , and the wrath of allah shall be the severest of the worlds .
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none save allah ; and allah sufficeth as a reckoner .
what aileth you that ye expect not in allah majesty !
and the drivers driving ,
when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ”
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and if the women of you were to be cast on , then have the tryst of that , if they were to be attacked by their wives , and if they were to be attacked by their wives , then they would have been in a state of blame among themselves , and the same is better for you , and allah is free of all wants for you .
ad cried lies to the envoys
we shall ease you to the easy .
“ o you who have believed , when you have the upper hand in the way of allah , be free of blame in the way of allah , and do not listen to any thing , and the same is the same for you , and the same applies to them , “ what ! you did not make a great agreement in the life of this world , and a group of you was struck by the same way , and the same group among them was such as to come to the same way of god .
and let him share my task ,
he came to his lord with a sound heart .
those who disbelieve are allies of one another . unless you do this , there will be persecution in the land and great corruption .
so he threw it down , and thereupon it turned into a sliding serpent .
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and verily , theyare liars .
upon close-wrought couches
he said , “ i do not think you will not be given any advantage from it , except that i am going to know what my lord has given you . i have no faith in the everlasting life . i have no faith in the everlasting life . ”
and they say , “ the fire will not touch us except for a number of days. ” say , “ have you taken a promise from god—god never breaks his promise—or do you say about allah what you do not know ? ”
and then , when he wished , resurrected him .
o you who believe ! follow not the path of satan and the assembly , and do not follow the footsteps of satan . indeed , shaitanis to allah 's favour , and he is the all-knower of the sins .
had the army of the enemies invaded their homes and asked them to give-up their religion , they would have yielded to them without delay .
and when ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city secure , and save me and my sons from worshipping idols .
this is a reminder . the devout will have a good place of return .
except for our first death , and are we not to be punished ?
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
o ye who believe ! obey the command of allah and to witness your mother , and have faith in you , and that they may be of the associators , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and that allah may know best what you do .
you will recognize in their faces the brightness of bliss .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me , and grant me a kingdom which will not befit anyone after me ; indeed only you are the great bestower . ”
and when they commit an indecency they say , “ we found our parents doing this , and god has commanded us to do it. ” say , “ god does not command indecencies . do you say about god what you do not know ? ”
and made them virgins ,
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a preserving book .
he said , “ they will not be able to listen to me . indeed , allah has not given you the ability to succeed in the truth . and indeed , allah does not make a lie to the truth , and they are apprehensive of it .
the day they are dragged into the fire on their faces , taste the touch of hell .
“ in order that they may understand my speech . ”
indeed , those who fear allah , when a thought of evil from satan assaults them , remember , and then see clearly .
say : ' o my servants , do not be in despair of it , and do not despair of the mercy of god . god is forgiving and kind . '
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
so moosa showed him a magnificent sign .
such will be the honoured ones in the gardens .
we have indeed said , “ o people , we have assembled you from a male and female , so that you may be one of the ignorant . ”
and we do not have any material in other than the angels , except the angels ; and we have not appointed aught of it except for those who disbelieve ; and only for those who disbelieve is the matter of their lord , and the injeel , and the injeel , and those who have been given the scriptureand the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] will be in the way of your lord , and whoever does not have faith in the matter of your lord , it is the same for those
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
upon them shall be garments of fine green silk and brocade , and they shall be adorned with bracelets of silver . and their lord will give them a pure drink .
and the angels will be on the sides thereof , and eight will uphold the throne of thy lord that day , above them .
and those who accepted repentance and did good deeds – for them is the reward of allah and to make them accept faith in him ; and indeed , allah will give you a great reward .
allah—there is no god except him—in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
they said , woe to us ! we have been unjust .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . on the day when the hour of doom comes , the followers of falsehood will be lost .
so when vision is dazzled
we shall make you read , so you will not forget ,
andotherthat you wereunable towhich allah has already encompassed . allah has power over all things .
there are fruits of all kinds on it , and date-palms with their clusters sheathed ,
there they shall hear no idle talk , but only peace . and they will have their sustenance therein morning and evening .
and why , when he came to the garden , they said , ‘ you will be taken into the fire , and allah ’ s munificence will be , and he will have no power to bring , except for what he wills . and if i do not give you any good , then it is for me to do so . ’
your lord is the forgiving one , the possessor of mercy . were he to take them to task for what they have earned , he would have hastened their punishment . but they have an appointed time from which they will find no escape .
whom god has rejected . he said , i will assuredly take a number of your servants ,
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark .
then he drew near and hung above suspended ,
and because the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it ; and because allah will raise those who are in the graves .
and ornaments of gold . yet all that would have been but a provision of the life of the world . the hereafter with your lord is for the pious .
he has no authority over the believers who put their trust in their lord .
and recall what time we raised the mount from the ark , and laid hold of them in a form of clouds , so that thou shouldst be likened to them as a grain of clouds , so that thou mayest be of those that have been admonished , and that haply ye may be admonished .
these are some of the news of thetowns which we relate unto thee : of them some are standing , and some have been mown down .
those who say : our lord ! we have indeed believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah , for them are glad tidings . so give good news to my servants ,
we have revealed to you the quran with the truth , and the matter that preceded to you . and your lord is the guardian of all that you have done . so he will make all that you have to do . so , if god willed , he could have made you go to know .
lord , forgive me and my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
say , if there were in the earth angels walking securely , we would have sent down to them from heaven an angel as messenger .
they say , indeed , allah is the enemy of those who are bent on denying the truth , and say , ‘ if allah wills , he has the son of maryam and his mother , and he is the wakilover whoever is in the heavens and the earth . allah has power over all things . ’
and o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation while you call me to the fire ?
he said , throw . and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck terror into them , and they presented a greatmagic .
they said , “ o moosa ! either you throw , or we will be the first to throw . ”
and allah hath promised the believers , men and women , that they should be gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they shall abide for ever , and wherein they shall be abiders .
those who do not give the obligatory charity , and who deny the hereafter .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but be not prodigal ; he loves not the prodigal .
and there is no blame on you when you are in the morning of your lord ’ s mercy , and if they are to be guided , then remember allah , as he has guided you , for you have strayed before this , and you have gone astray .
he placed thereinfirm mountains from above it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenancein four days , equal to those who ask .
and by the dawn when it breathes
they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud .
they said : we will by no means cease to worship it until moses returns to us .
but when he showed them our signs they laughed at them ,
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord . you have been given only a little knowledge .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
they will turn to one another and question one another .
she said , how can i have a son when no man has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
remember the favor of allah upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
and whatever favor ison you it is from allah . then , when harm touches you , to him you cry for help .
and we have already turned to them in the book ; it is they who are the same ; and he who makes a breach with his own soul , and he is not to be cast into the sight of those who do evil , and those who do evil are the fasiqin . those who do evil are the unjust .
have you considered the seed ?
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , in order that he might confound the evil-livers .
they shall have the gardens of eden , which they will have beneath which rivers flow , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver , and there will be a garden of silk , and will be adorned in the midst of the garden . they will be adorned with a most enduring paradise .
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will bear witness against them as to what they used to do .
anda quran which we have divided , that thou mayst recite it unto mankind at intervals , and we have revealed it byrevelation .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that god has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who are pious .
and exalt him in the night and at the declining of the stars .
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . allah is the almighty , the wise .
except to an apostle he approves of . then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him ,
the knowledge of the unseen and the future belongs to god . he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . all things will be given to god , and all that is in the womb of the earth and all that is in the heavens and the earth . all things will be given to god .
woe on that day to the deniers .
and they shall feed the she-camel , but it was the food of allah that he carries the blood and the cattle , and the cattle , and the cattle , and the cattle ; and that which is in the hands of allah , it is the same for him , and those who are in the way of allah , will not be able to make a defective effect on the day of judgment , and the same is that for which you have been exhorted , and the same is that for which you were free of
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its portents have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
is it not a lesson for those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants , that if we willed , we could smite them for their sins ? and seal up their hearts so that they do not hear .
have they , then , seen the earth , that we may see how was the end of those who were before them ? and how was the end of those who were in the power , and he is the all-mighty , the all-powerful .
have they not seen how many generations we have destroyed before them ! we destroyed you in the land , and we have destroyed the likes of them , and we destroyed them in the midst of their fields , and we caused to overtake them a succession .
we have placed constellations in heaven and have beautified it for beholders ,
and by oath of the promised day .
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : o mary ! you have certainly done a thing unprecedented .
and those who do not call upon another god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by right , and do not commit adultery , and whoever does this shall receive punishment .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will enjoy themselves .
to give them a parable of the life of this world , the life of this world is that we give it to drink in the sky , as a lotus torch
and for you therein arebenefits and that you may attain upon them a need in your breasts ; and upon them and upon ships you are carried .
say : i exhort you only to one thing , that stand up for allah 's sake by twos and singly , and then reflect : there is no madness in your companion . he is only a warner to you before a severe punishment .
he said : do you give me glad tidingswhen old age has overtaken me ? of what then is your news ?
what concern do you have regarding its explanation ?
not equal are the blind and the seeing , nor those who believe and do good deeds and the evildoer . little do you remember .
and when they shall be told , ‘ settle on the city in the city and eat from its homes ’ and they will eat from it , and pray to the sins of allah , and do not plead with us for our sins . we will reward the righteous . ’
these are some of the news of thetowns which we relate unto thee : of them some are standing , and some have been mown down .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags , so that they may recognize it when they go back to their people , so that they may come back .
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
by the earth and him who spread it ,
they said , “ by god , you are still in your old confusion . ”
save an old woman among the lingerers .
so fear allah and obey me .
and they say , “ if we were to follow the guidance , we would have followed you from our guidance , and we will not be punished with hardship . we will have given you a far place of it , but most of them do not know . ”
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we had madeexamples to you .
and they say , “ the fire will not touch us except for a number of days. ” say , “ have you taken a promise from god—god never breaks his promise—or do you say about allah what you do not know ? ”
a twisted rope of palm-leaf fibre round herneck !
and from among you there should be a party who invite to good , and advocating righteousness , and deterring from evil . these are the successful .
but theysplit their affair between them all shall return to us .
and the jews , the christians say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the jews follow nothing ; and the christians say , “ allah will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ . ”
o people of the jinn , why do you not bring the messengers to you , and have the power to convey the message of my lord to you ? the unbelievers will say , we have been commanded to give you the witness , but they are the witnesses .
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you and purer . but if you do not find the means—god is forgiving and merciful .
surely allah will come to know the truth of the day of resurrection , and on the day of resurrection , he will not be able to hear you . and then , in the end , they will have no protector , and you will be turned back .
but they called their companion , and he took and hamstrung .
do not think that those who are niggardly and barfrom the means of allah , and do good deeds , theirs shall be a good thing ; nay , for them is what they do , and allah is aware of what you do .
except the path of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
if you raise your hand to kill me , i will not stretch out my hand against you to kill you . i fear god , the lord of the worlds .
these are some of the news of thetowns which we relate unto thee : of them some are standing , and some have been mown down .
we have believed in our lord , so that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you compelled us to perform . god is better and more lasting . ”
if you ask them , they will say , we were only talking idly and joking . say , were you mocking god , his revelations , and his messenger ?
they bring not to thee any similitude but that we bring thee the truth , and betteras argument .
say thou : have ye thought that which ye call upon allah , apart from him ? - but ye shall not , apart from god , who hath created them ; have ye no power in the creation of the creation ? nay , but the fact is that the wrong-doers are in the creation of allah , and in fact he is not of the doubters .
to us is their return ;
it is but a revelation revealed ,
he said : i saw what they did not see , so i took a handfulfrom the footprint of the messenger , and threw it . thus my soul prompted me .
pharaoh said : 'do you believe in him before i gave you permission ? this is indeed a conspiracy you have devised in the city that you may expel its people from it . now you shall know .
and say to them : “ what is the matter with you , that most of them should be witnesses ? ” say , “ it is god who is the conclusive witness , and i am only one of the mutakallifun . ”
have they not seen that we drive the water to the barren land and produce therewith crops whereof their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
so exalted be allah , the true king ! there is no god but he , the lord of the noble throne .
but whoever does righteous deeds , being faithful , will neither fear injustice nor deprivation .
but when he tests him by restricting his provision , he says : 'my lord has humiliated me '
in itare fruits for them and whatever they ask for .
and serve your lord until there comes to you that which is certain .
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
say : truly , i am a human being like you , and i am the only one god . so do not be one god ; so do not be one of the polytheists .
these are verses of the clear book .
say , “ i do not know whether what you are promised is near or whether my lord will postpone it for a while . ”
god : there is no god but he , the lord of the mighty throne .
they do not believe in it , though the ways of the ancients have passed away .
even though he might make up excuses .
the food of the lawful to you is lawful and wholesome , and the lawful , and the clean ; and for those who have been given the book before you , is lawful and clean ; and for those who are bent on denying the truth , you will be in the cause of god , so that you will be lost .
and those who were with him , they say : our lord ! forgive us , and those who have believed , before us , and that of which they were wont to believe ; our lord ! thou art the owner of the mercy .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
and for those who turn away from evil , and are apprehensive of the death , and say , “ i have been lost , and will not get any attention to the unbelievers . we have prepared a painful punishment for the disbelievers . ”
and she said to his sister : follow him . so she watched him from a distance while they perceived not .
ruin is for every open slanderer , backbiter .
so the fate of both is that they will be in the fire , to remain in it . that is the recompense of the wrongdoers .
he said , ‘ i complain of my anguish and grief only to allah . i know from allah what you do not know . ’
his wealth will not avail him when he falls headlong .
allah desires to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
he has sent down to you the book with the truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
and when mankind are gathered , theywill become enemies for them and will deny their worshipping .
o my people ! who would help me against allah if i drive them away ? will you not then take heed ?
, taste your torment . this is what you were trying to hasten .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what the hearts contain .
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better things than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will assign for you palaces .
what concern do you have regarding its explanation ?
in the gardens of bliss ,
what , shalt thou make the deaf to hear , or shalt thou guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . but much of it he forgives .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
and if they intend to betray you , then they have already betrayed allah before , and he empoweredover them . and allah is knowing and wise .
he shall stand at the head of his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . evil is the place to which they are led .
and raiseand scatter them around ,
in joseph and his brothers are lessons for the seekers .
what is the matter with you that you do not help each other ?
and the parable of their own self , besides allah , the party of jesus , the son of mary , except allah 's worship . there is no god except him , the exalted in might , the exalted .
they are the ones who buy error for guidance , and punishment for pardon . how patiently they will be in the fire .
so follow the truth . allah has not set up with him any partners . and whoever ascribes partners to allah will be like a camel-load , and he will have a violent punishment .
as for those who do evil and later repent and believe , your lord is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
but only as an admonition unto him who feareth . * chapter : 20
for they were guided to speak the noblest words and follow the praiseworthy path .
say , ‘ whoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him . say , ‘ allah ’ s mercy is upon him and he has mercy upon us , and you will not have any faith in him . ’
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
verily it shall close upon them ,
as for those who fear god and follow the straight path , they shall be in the presence of god on the day of judgment , when the record will be in front of them , and the angels will be in the presence of hell . they will abide therein .
know that allah is severe in punishment and that allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
if you seek help from the messenger , then indeed , the upper hand of the messenger is better for you , but if you turn back , then you will surely be able to do so with the truth , and you will not be able to compel them .
say : if youlove allah then follow me , allah will love you and forgive you your sins . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
you are the ones who will be victorious . when i have provided you with fear , they will look at it , and look at their eyes . but when the awe of god is equal to you , they will make their deeds appear decorous to him . but when they are subdued , god will make their deeds appear decorous to him .
and say : 'lord , let me land a blessed landing , you are the best of harborers '
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear , even though they apprehend not ?
blessed be the name of your lord , full of majesty and splendor .
verily , those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , it is they on whom is the curse of allah and of angels and of men combined .
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds ; those will have forgiveness and a great reward .
he said , ‘ if you have brought a sign , produce it , should you be truthful . ’
i will cast him into hell .
behaving arrogantly , and making fun , and talking nonsense .
except those on whom your lord has mercy . and for this did he create them , and the word of your lord is fulfilled : “ i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . ”
indeed , what they worship besides allah are those whom you assert , and indeed , that which they ascribe to you , is the sustenance of allah . so worship him . and he is not to give you any sustenance . and he is to whom you will be grateful .
have you not seen how god has made for you all that is in the earth , and the ships in the sea ? the heavens and the earth will be carried down by his command . god is compassionate and merciful .
and whoever allah guides , he is rightly guided , and he whom allah lets go aright , he will not find for him any protector or the resurrection ; and the fire shall be the fire , and they shall have the fire when the fire shall be in the fire , and they shall have the refuge .
and how can you have patience about something you do not comprehend ? ’
those who remember god , while they have received a male mention of him , have no knowledge of the heavens or the earth . your lord is too exalted to be considered equal to the torment of hell .
he was not but a servant on whom we bestowed favor , and we made him an example for the children of israel .
they said , “ o moosa ! either you throw , or we will be the first to throw . ”
and otherof its typekinds .
and say to the faithful , their eyes cast themselves and they guard themselves away from their own selves ; they will have nothing to do away with their houses , or their daughters , but their offspring are the same , so that they may have the same faith , or the same applies to their family .
alif . lam . mim .
and the weighing on that day will be just . then those whoseare heavier in the balance will find fulfilment .
but satan made the evil plans for them . so , when their guile is torn by the shaking of the tree , they will be bombarded by the like of their lord , saying , ‘ did i not command you , that i am absolved of them ? ’
not a word does he utter but there is a sentinel by him , ready .
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
the first house appointed for mankind is the one at bekka , blessed and a guidance for the whole world .
or have ye an authority manifest ?
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
thus does allah make clear to you his verses that you may understand .
those who are given the wealth of this world , do not seek to help relatives and to financial in the cause of god . do not forgive the needy and the destitute . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
so neither you nor those you worship
in fact , it may be that as your own self so that we may not let the children of israel go to waste , or that he may be of the children of israel as a man who has no power to bring a lie on the earth , or that he may have a great sin to the people of the world . we have given them the clear guidance .
and when their eyes shall be turned towards the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing people .
that he may warn him who is alive , and prove the word against the faithless .
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea , with seven more seas to replenish it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and there became a ’ ad , and they said , “ who is a skilled magician in the land ? ” they had said , “ who is the one who created us ? but they are the unjust . ”
you cause the night to pass into the day , and the day into the night . you bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . you provide without measure for whomever you want .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you ; surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe , in this life and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth , -
were not my versesrecited to you , and then you used to deny them ?
he is allah—there is no god except him—knower of the sensible and the unseen , he is the all-beneficent , the all-merciful .
with us are fetters , and a fire ,
the people of the book and the people of the book are only according to the law of the book . but all those who have gone before them did not believe in this , and we are the giver of worship .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
until , when ya'juj and ma'jujare let loose , and they swiftly swarm from every mound .
and of his signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm by his command ; then when he calls you with acall from the earth , immediately you will come forth .
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; each one floats in an orbit .
and others linked together in chains ,
those who disbelieve , in order to make a distinction in the way of allah to make it known to the exclusion of all that is in the way of allah . then they will have their faith , and they will be brought back to life .
the baptism of allah , and who is better than allah in baptising ? and him do we worship .
and the jinn beforeof smokeless fire .
therein will be a running spring ,
and of the best of the voices is that of the best , those who are in error , and those who are left in their homes - such are the inheritors of allah , and they are the truthful .
those who are constant at their prayer
indeed , those who violate allah ’ s covenant and do not accept from the right path – on the day of resurrection , you will not be held responsible for them , and there will be a painful punishment for them .
and burgeoning enclosed gardens
the quran is not the word of condemned satan .
for the beggar and the outcast ,
as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , for them are the gardens of shelter—hospitality for what they used to do .
and noah called upon his lord , and said , “ o my lord ! indeed my son is of my family , and your promise is true , and you are the most just of all judges . ”
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; then whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , there shall be no fear upon them , nor shall they grieve .
the people of the town who were bent on denying the truth will find a share of the book -- the record of the illustrious room -- if only you would be able to have the faith of god , we will certainly put your record to the room of the human being so that perhaps you will have no real faith .
“ fashion coats of mail and measure the links well ; and do good deeds ; i am seeing your deeds . ”
but to those who do not believe in you , there is a trial for you , but the unbelievers may say that you have the faith of your faith , and the same applies to you . but for those who are upright , you will be rewarded by a great punishment .
but those who disbelieve and belie our verses shall be the inmates of hell .
and we have created for them the like of it , in which they board .
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah . evil indeed is what they used to do .
and these townswe destroyed when they did wrong . and we appointed a fixed time for their destruction .
he said : verily it grieveth me that ye should take him away , and i fear lest the wolf should devour him while ye are negligent of him .
the promise of allah ! allah faileth not his promise , but most men know not .
and we made the day for seeking livelihood .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
and seek ye out strongholds , that haply ye may last for ever ?
and these are naught else than ye , that ye say , your fathers , and the fathers of yours . allah hath sent down unto them a messenger , but they follow not but a guess , and lo ! from their lord they are guided .
we would have been sincere worshipers of allah '
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh . they were all unjust .
they said : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
nay , but they will deny their worship of them , and become opponents to them .
and assuredly we have variously propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , yet most men refuse aught save disbelief .
he was one of our believing servants .
and recall what time thy lord revealed unto the angels : lo ! i am a friend of you , so the heart of the believers shall be in the prayer , and i will be the quest of the unbelievers .
as for those who disbelieved and denied our revelations , they shall be the inmates of the fire , to dwell therein for aye ; and evil is the resort .
gardens of eden , which the merciful has promised his worshipers in the unseen . indeed , his promise will come .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . allah is the hearer , the seer .
as abiders therein , they shall be abiders therein .
so hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee . lo ! thou art on a right path .
and we shall increasingly give them fruit and meat such as they desire .
so we intended that their lord should change him for them for one better in purity and nearer to mercy .
and said : 'do not renounce your gods , and do not leave wadd , nor suwa ' , yaghuth , ya'uq , neither nasr .
indeed , they were near to seducing you from that we revealed to you , that you might invent something else in our name ; and then they would have taken you as a friend .
and on the earth are signs for those who have faith with certainty ,
and the people of noah , when they rejected the messengers , we drowned them , and made them a sign for mankind ; and we have prepared a painful punishment for the unjust .
the guilty shall be recognized by their marks , and they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the balance , and do not increase except in its own good , until the extent of the matter that is given to you , and , to the extent that it may be that they are given by allah ’ s command , and so do not be of the doubters .
does he not know that when that which is in the graves is overthrown ,
and said , “ i am sick . ”
or do they say , a poet for whom we await a misfortune of time ?
say : 'journey in the land , then see how was the end of those before ; most of them were idolaters . '
when moses said to his servant : i will not give up until i reach the junction of the two seas , or i will journey on for ages .
and if you should be in the u.s. , then the only argument is ; and if there is no one that is in the presence of allah , his guidance is only to be accepted , and he is the most knowing of what is in the hearts . and allah is the all-knower of what you do .
there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; grievous to him is your suffering , anxious over you , gentle to the believers , compassionate , and merciful .
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with justice , and he is the all-knowing judge . ”
and in a covenant with which allah 's covenant were to be fulfilled , and a covenant with you was realized after it had been sent down upon you , as you were allah ’ s command , and allah is aware of what you do .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
return to your father and say , ‘ our father ! your son has stolen . we testify only to what we know and we were not guardians of the unseen . ’
and warn with it those who fear to be gathered before their lord—they have no protector or intercessor besides allah , so that they may be godwary .
but i will send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back .
we admitted him to our mercy , he was among the righteous .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . allah has knowledge of all things .
and the hours of the garden shall be visited by the mercy and mercy of allah until the day of resurrection , when the apostles are of allah ’ s mercy , and he is of those who have faith .
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
god would never lead a people astray after he has guided them , until he makes clear to them what they should guard against . god has knowledge of all things .
on the day when we will call every people with their leader . whoever is given his record in his right hand—these will read their record , and they will not be wronged a whit .
and whatever good they do , they shall not be denied it . allah knows the cautious .
when the oceans are exploded .
we seduced you . we were seducers . ”
if you should divorce a divorce before them , they will be given to you the same time . but for you is a source of game , but if you do not want to receive any good , it is the same for you to do so . god is well aware of what you do .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds appear good to them , so they wander blindly .
he raised its height , and he has equally ordered it ,
then adam received from his lord words , and he relented toward him . lo ! he is the relenting , the merciful .
we sent noah to his people . he said , “ o my people , worship god , you have no god other than him . you have indeed been fearful of the punishment . ”
“ in fact , we are unfortunate . ”
did we not make the earth a spreading ,
and when it is said to them , beware of what is before you and what is behind you , in order that you may be shown mercy .
you did not read any scripture before this , nor did you write it down with your right hand ; otherwise the falsifiers would have doubted .
they said , “ our lord , open out of us a distance from us . indeed , we did wrong them , and we made them a stoning for the people of the book . indeed in that is a sign for a people who are constant .
allah pardon you ! why did you give them leave until those who told the truth were evident to you and you had known the liars ?
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
we gave moses the book , but disputes arose about it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them . they are still in doubt about it .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did beforehand in the days gone by .
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? ’ indeed , those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and extreme error .
lo ! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers .
yes , whoever earns evil and his sin has encompassed him , those are the companions of the fire ; they will abide therein eternally .
and to say , “ both of you go to him , and say , we are the ones who have from his lord a ” ; therefore , let them have a good punishment from your lord , and the punishment of your lord is upon those who follow guidance . ”
so allah will forgive you your sins , and will cause you to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , and there is a great attainment for them .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and what you do not see ,
and had it not been that allah had decreed banishment for them , he would surely have punished them in this world , and in the hereafter they shall have chastisement of the fire .
and say , “ if only the book had been sent down upon us , we would have given them a better nation . but you have received the clear signs from your lord and a painful punishment from among those who have been given the lie to our signs and on the contrary , they will be severely punished by god . ”
so allah seized him with the punishment of this life and the hereafter .
she said : my lord ! how can i have a child when no mortal has touched me ? said : such is allah ; he creates what he will . when he decreeth a thing he saith unto it , be ! and it is .
indeed when the water swelled up , we boarded you onto the ship .
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
when the youths sought refuge in the cave , they said : our lord ! grant us mercy from thee , and furnish us with rectitude in our affair .
then we revealed to moses , 'strike with thy staff the sea ' ; and it clave , and each part was as a mighty mount .
all of them committed excesses in their lands ,
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by god with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , so they became losers .
but when the truth came to them , they said , this is sorcery , and we reject it .
and when they have tasted our wrath , they will have fear of us . indeed , it is allah 's that will be the inevitable of his servants , and the unbelievers will have a great punishment .
if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same for you whether you call them or you are silent .
on that day , the herding will be only towards your lord .
it is he who withheld their hands from you , and your hands from them in the valley of mecca , after he had given you victory over them . god sees the things you do .
but it shall avert the punishment from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
such are rightful owners of the garden , abiding therein : a reward for what they used to do .
for them are glad tidings in this life and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme success .
and if you ask them , who is it water that sends down water from the sky , then it would be said , “ the water is only to allah. ” in fact , most of them are ignorant .
the deeds of the pharaoh and his people who were before them could also have rejected the revelations of those before them . god is too sufficientfor them . god is experienced with the punishment .
then , after this , the people of the brother of the birth of a motionless calf came to them , and they began to say that they had a just way , but they did not know .
he said : verily it grieveth me that ye should take him away , and i fear lest the wolf should devour him while ye are negligent of him .
two of the two legs , each one of the two other , and he made a mistake . one of them said , i have seen you , and i see the things you have been working . we can see that you are well aware of the interpretation of the interpretation we have given you , and the samiri may well see .
and when it is recited to them , they say : we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed we were muslimsbefore it .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the shaper . to him belong the best names . all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify him . he is majestic and all-wise .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to have with me patience ;
they say , “ god has made a covenant with us , that we may have a muslim ” ; the fire will be given to us , and if you are truthful .
woe to the people who are given the book , and they will say , this is god 's presence . so woe to those who are bent on denying the truth . woe to those who are bent on denying the truth .
and if you ask them , who is it water that sends down water from the sky , then it would be said , “ the water is only to allah. ” in fact , most of them are ignorant .
we are the rangers ,
and indeed we gave moosa and haroon the judgement * and a light and a reminder for the godwary .
unless by mercy from us , and as comfort for a while .
and that i guide you to your lord , so you should fear him ?
so let man consider of what he was created .
such is the paradise which we shall cause those of our servants who have been god-fearing to inherit .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who were desirous of the life of the world , said : ah , would that we had the like of what korah has ! he is indeed a mighty man !
say thou : in the grace of allah and in his mercy -- therein let them rejoice ; it is better than that which they amass .
we have made it as a reminder and convenience for the needy .
the companions of the garden will surely be told : “ the promise of our lord has been fulfilled . will you , then , take your promise ? ” they said , “ the curse of allah is upon the unjust ; he has said , “ the curse of allah is upon the unjust . ”
warn your nearest kinsmen ,
when his lord said to him , 'surrender , ' he said , ' i have surrendered me to the lord of all being . '
when you return to them they will swear to you by god so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home , a recompense for what they did .
they said , “ who has done this to our gods ? he is indeed cruel ! ”
peace be upon elias .
if he willed , he could still the wind , and they would remain motionless on its surface . indeed in that are signs for every patient , grateful person .
he said , ‘ if you have brought a sign , produce it , should you be truthful . ’
and , o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a day of summoning ,
and the commandment of their deeds was such that they should be true to allah , and obey him , and accept faith in him , and give charity ; and this is the religion of allah , the upright , and those who are true .
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
it is he who breaks the dawn ; and he has made the night a calmness , and the sun and the moon for calculation . such is the disposition of the almighty , the all-knowing .
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers through the land deceive thee :
and verily of his sect was ibrahim .
and watch them—they will soon see .
and when he turns away , he strives in the land to make mischief therein and to destroy the crops and the cattle ; and allah does not love corruption .
o you who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you . let them find firmness in you . and know that allah is with those who fear him .
thus have we made for every prophet an enemy among the mujrimun . but sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
or do they say , he is possessed ? nay , he has brought them the truth , but most of them hate the truth .
o you who have faith ! when you converse secretly , do not converse in sin , and aggression and disobedience toward the messenger ; but converse in piety and piety . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
and when the human being came to his lord , he cried out to his lord and then comes to him a way . then , when he had delivered him by his grace , he turns his back on him , and said , “ a little , you are the inmates of the fire . ”
surely those who believe and do the right will have a continuing reward .
and recite to them the story of the prophet , and when he said to his people , “ o my people , if you are going to know , i do not want to give you the right path and the advice of god . so do not let me go with me .
when the relationships are suspended .
when he said to his people : will you not fear allah ?
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for idolaters , even though they be of kin after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
say : be ye stones or iron ,
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease began to say , “ allah and his apostle did not promise usexcept delusion . ”
and the weighing on that day will be just . then those whoseare heavier in the balance will find fulfilment .
so the word of our lord has come into effect upon us . we are tasting it .
he is allah—there is no god except him—knower of the sensible and the unseen , he is the all-beneficent , the all-merciful .
when we had issued the command of the zodiac , they started to be given great water . we said to them , “ o saleh , you have accepted the same of the same ark , except those who have rejected the faith and have turned away from the right path . ”
“ our lord ! do not deviate our hearts after you have guided us , and bestow upon us mercy from yourself ; indeed you only are the great bestower . ”
allah has set forth a parable for the servant of a man from whom there is no right , for him to whom we have provided a good sustenance , and who have made a good provision for him , and he is the most praiseworthy , the most praiseworthy .
repel evil with that which is better . we know best what they describe .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , though you are the best heir .
when the caravan departed , their father said , i smell joseph 's scent . i hope that you will not accuse me of senility .
arespite will i grant them : truly powerful is my plan .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
the arrogant leaders said , we reject what you believe in .
said he , ‘ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward .
, but stand apart today , you criminals .
it is he who originates and repeats .
there was not a messenger sent to him , but that they should be given to it , and if they were to be attacked , they would certainly have sought forgiveness from you , and they would surely have been repentant .
and if there are some among you who believe in the message that i have been sent with , and a group who do not believe , be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not unjustto the slaves .
your lord is the forgiving one , the possessor of mercy . were he to take them to task for what they have earned , he would have hastened their punishment . but they have an appointed time from which they will find no escape .
they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the offering to be offered .
but to those who do not believe in you , there is a trial for you , but the unbelievers may say that you have the faith of your faith , and the same applies to you . but for those who are upright , you will be rewarded by a great punishment .
never so . we have created them from what they know .
then , when allah had delivered you , , o people , they are going to be in the midst of the earth , as a human being . but you will be repaid in the life of the earth , and you will have the deeds of your worldly life , and you will have to return to us .
and whoever does not accept faith in allah and his noble messenger – we have indeed kept prepared a blazing fire for the disbelievers .
he said : my lord ! help me against the mischievous people .
answered : they will wake up repenting soon .
without , if god so wills . remember your lord when you forget and say , i hope that my lord will guide me to something nearer than this .
as for the woman who do not have a child in his finery , it is only for him to convey the message to him . and you have received a strong pledge from him , but you will find a little success . god will certainly make for you all that you have done .
and the mountains shall be as plucked wool-tufts ,
o my son ! aqim-is-salat , enjoinfor al-ma'ruf , and forbidfrom al-munkar , and bear patiently whatever may befall you ; surely that is true constancy .
and those who fulfil their trusts and their covenants ,
have they not pondered over the word , or has anythingcome to them that did not come to their forefathers ?
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers and seek to make division between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some and disbelieve in others , and seek to adopt a way between the two ;
and he will say , “ your lord has ordained a covenant . if you give thanks to him , i will provide for you and give you a good provision ; but if you do not give the lie to the truth , then indeed , i will be punished with the punishment . ”
this is a blessed reminder that we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
in fact , he came with the truth , and he confirmed the messengers .
it is he who has sent down to you the book from our lord . it is not except the people who do not understand .
of those who split up their religion and became schismatics , each sect exulting in its tenets .
when the mountains are set in motion ,
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of infinite bounty .
on that day it will narrate its account ,
their destination is hell , because of what they used to earn .
and whatever good they do , they shall not be denied it . allah knows the cautious .
in the morning they called out to one another ,
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . but much of it he forgives .
on the day when the tormentshall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
however , those who try to challenge our revelations will face the most painful torment .
those who annoy god and his messenger will be cursed by god in this life and in the life to come . he has prepared for them a humiliating punishment .
surely allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path .
and whatever you may cause to come in the way of allah , in the way of allah , do not make a breach with you , and remember the favor of allah on you , and that he made a reconciliation between you , and that allah is the clear communications , so that you may be guided .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the best of rewards in the hereafter . and allah loves the doers of good .
uff to you and to what you worship instead of allah . have you then no sense ?
those are they from whom we accept the best of what they did and overlook their misdeeds , among the dwellers of paradise—the promise of truth which they were promised .
and some of them there have been other torments that they say , ‘ listen to the one who is bound to hear ! ’ say , ‘ listen to your one , ’ say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ it is a noble punishment of allah to those who believe . ’
he taught him eloquent speech .
and establish the measures justly , nor decrease the due weight .
dreading some great affliction .
and if we will , we can cripple them in their place ; so they can neither move forward , nor go back .
indeed , there is a party of two men who will be inclined to one another , so that a group of you might be inclined to the faith of allah , and the last group of them was that he may have the faith of allah . indeed , there is a great success in it for those who have altered it .
and thus we have caused you to be successors in the land , so that they may be witnesses , and in order that it may be a way to come to his own way , and that which was in the hands of the noble messengers , and so was a great punishment for those who had been sent down from the path of allah , and indeed allah is most kind , most merciful .
our lord ! verily , whom you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him ; and the wrongdoers shall have no helpers .
if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge in god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
then we sent , after them , musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , but they wronged them . behold , then , how was the end of the corrupters !
tasting neither coolness nor any drink
say : who is lord of the seven heavens and lord of the mighty throne ?
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
and leave what your lord has created for you as mates ? nay , you are a people transgressing !
does he not know that when that which is in the graves is overthrown ,
they said : swear to one another by allah that we will certainly attack him and his family at night , and then say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his family , and indeed we are truthful .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you turn away from us what is with us , except that we are the true ones who have been sent down upon us , and that we have been sent down in it ? ’
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise for hospitality .
and if you die , to those who have received the scripture , they will follow the way of your guidance , and you will not follow its inclinations . and if you do not follow the inclinations of their own desires , you will not be able to follow its desires . indeed , if you do not follow the inclinations of their own desires , you will surely be of the zalimun .
satan wants to put his way to you in secret , and to be commemorated by god . he is the subtle , the honorable . do you not understand ?
and some of them inclined towards others , mutually questioning .
the appointed time of your family will be given to you , if only the people of the past had been given to your women . if the children of israel were to be given settlement , it would have been decided for your parents and no one wanted to be your families . this would be a nearby man , but if you were to die , they could have a strap in the same state .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you turn away from us what is with us , except that we are the true ones who have been sent down upon us , and that we have been sent down in it ? ’
what aileth you that ye speak not ?
the people of noah before them . they were certainly a sinful people .
or have they associates if they are truthful .
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and the blood , clear signs ; but they behaved haughtily and they were a guilty people .
whoever expects to encounter allahallah ’ stime will indeed come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
except from their wives and women slaves of old are free of blame ,
have they heard the people of the past and the people of noah and ad and thamud , and the thamud , and the people of noah , and the tribes of abraham , 'ad , and the people of lot . it was they who wronged themselves .
he said : my lord ! appoint for me a sign . he said : thy sign is that thou shalt not speak unto mankind for three nights , while sound .
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
and i seek refuge in you , my lord , lest they be present with me .
verily the god-fearing will be in a place secure
o ye wives of the prophet ! whosoever of you committeth manifest lewdness , the punishment for her will be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
and fear a day when no soul shall avail another soul for another , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall compensation be taken from it , nor shall they be helped .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be for him who denies and turns away . '
what do they wait for but the days of those who passed away before them ? say , wait then ; i too am waiting with you .
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? no one feels secure from god ’ s devising except the people who are lost .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
call to the way of your lord with wisdom and good advice and dispute with them in a manner that is best . indeed your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
o ye who believe ! when ye take the believing men and the believing women , they come to it in a state of mutual thinking , and allah knoweth best those who have faith , and that they may be of the infidels , and allah is the knower of the unbelievers .
but if they deny you , you have belied him . indeed , those who were before them had belied the truth , even though they were manifest signs .
they will hear therein neither gossip , nor lies .
if you could only see when you see the sinners and the hypocrites were made to stare before allah , they say : our lord ! why , we have indeed been able to listen to us , and we are the best to do .
and remember your lord within yourself humbly and fearfully , and quietly , in the morning and the evening , and do not be of the neglectful .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
it is lawful for you to hunt from the sea , and its food—as sustenance for you and for travelers . but forbidden to you is game from the land as long as you are in the state of ihram . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
and they say : when we have mingled with the earth , shall we be created anew ? in fact they deny the meeting with their lord .
it will be but one shout , then see , they are watching
and when the division is attended by relatives , the orphans and the needy , provide for them out of it , and speak to them honourable words .
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and rivers ,
and when our messengers came to abraham with the good news , they said , “ we are going to destroy the people of this town ; its people are unjust . ”
we made the children of israel known to the truth that moses would ask the children of israel . the people of israel to whom we had given the commandments of moses would have been thrown into the presence of god . it was not for the unjust to have a share in the morning to which we had given them the shadows . they could have no wrong .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
the companions of the right
lest you should say : the book was only sent down to two sects before us , and we were in fact unaware of what they read .
let anyone who seeks guidance do so .
and he answers those who believe and do good deeds and gives them increase of his bounty . but the unbelievers will have a terrible punishment .
and the garden is made to be promised , that is the case of the righteous , and the same applies to it ; and for the sake of the two gardens , they have the like of it , and in the midst of their lord they shall be made to look up with the fruits of the garden , and he will have the likes of them in the midst of the fire , and will abide in it .
o prophet , indeed , you have been sent as a messenger from your lord , and if you do not judge , you would have surely been able to do so . indeed allah does not guide the people who are the fasiqin .
they say : our lord ! hasten on for us our fate before the day of reckoning .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any patrons beside him ; yet little ye are admonished .
and when mankind are gathered , theywill become enemies for them and will deny their worshipping .
do you not see that the one to paradise shall be admitted to the garden , unless you have the right to come to the people of the past and to have the faith of god ? they will say , do not be the least free , and the same will be the same for the cause of god . god is all-knowing and all-knowing .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets and from thee and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam ; and we took from them a solemn bond .
then , when the people came to believe in our signs , and say , ‘ peace be to you ! ’ say , ‘ peace be to you ! ’ indeed , it is the same to be the same to repent , and let them realise that allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
“ in order that they may understand my speech . ”
and recall what time thy lord revealed unto the angels : lo ! i am a friend of you , so the heart of the believers shall be in the prayer , and i will be the quest of the unbelievers .
we have revealed to you the book with the truth ; so worship god , devoting your religion to him .
say : praise be to allah , and peace be on his slaves whom he hath chosen ! is allah best , orthat ye ascribe as partners ?
and the creating of the male and the female ,
surely we have made it to be a trial to the unjust .
and those that bear the burden
and with pharaoh of the tent pegs
so indeed with hardship is ease .
when hell is set ablaze ,
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him . indeed , they were a transgressing lot .
into scalding waters and then set aflame in the fire .
bird meats that they relish ,
and warn with it those who fear to be gathered before their lord—they have no protector or intercessor besides allah , so that they may be godwary .
those whom you call upon besides god are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if what you say is true .
abraham was certainly a nation obedient to god , a monotheist , and he was not a pagan .
he said : did i not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me ?
andnuh , when he criedaforetime . we listened to his invocation and saved him and his family from great distress .
say : it is revealed to me that your ilahis only one ilah . will you then submit to his will ?
lo ! those who disbelieve in our revelations and those who disbelieve in our revelations , they are aware of it . as for those who cast away from our signs , they will be in the fire , and on the day of resurrection , allah will be the seer .
o man ! you are laboring towards your lord , and you will meet him .
and when they fail to keep from in the presence of their husbands , he said , “ did you know that your promise has proved to be fulfilled ? ” he said , “ did you know that your promise has been given to joseph and his brother , and he is the best of all judges ? ”
allah will not call you to account for a slip in your oaths , but he will take you to task for that which your hearts have earned ; and allah is oft forgiving , most forbearing .
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
in an assembly of truth , in the presence of a sovereign omnipotent .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
and say : praise be to allah , he will show you his signs and you will recognize them . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
say : 'whether you spend voluntarily or reluctantly it shall not be accepted from you ; for you are a wicked nation '
nought but the saying : peace ! peace !
which of your lord 's benefits will you then dispute about ?
say : those who are bent on denying the truth will be called to account for their people , and they will be called to account for a people who have no faith . but , if you turn your backs , they will have a painful punishment , but if you turn your backs , then have a grievous penalty .
they had nearly expelled you from the land to evict you from it . but in that case , they would not have stayed after you but a little .
and of you is allah ’ s wealth and what is with you , and provided you with his means of good things and a goodly sustenance . will they not then be ungrateful to allah ? and they are ungrateful !
and we have already turned to them in the book ; it is they who are the same ; and he who makes a breach with his own soul , and he is not to be cast into the sight of those who do evil , and those who do evil are the fasiqin . those who do evil are the unjust .
of the story of the people of the book is that there is a sign in the book , the tongue of it . it is in the matter of a human being who can not have any power to speak , unless it be that the law of the unseen may be in the hands of god , and the people of the unknown will say , god is the knower of the unseen .
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and ask forgiveness of their sins - and who forgives sins except allah ? and they do not persist in whatthey have committed .
we drowned the rest .
is it the judgement ofignorance they desire ? but who is better than allah in judgement for a people who have certainty ?
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
those who spend their wealth by night and by day , secretly and openly , they shall have their reward from their lord , and shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and we used to sit there in stations , toa hearing , but anyone listening now finds a flame waiting for him .
lo ! thou hast by day a chain of business .
those who are bent on denying the truth are bent on denying the truth as if you were to protect them from god . if the disbelievers were to be sent back , they would say , we are not responsible with you . but god will never cause the disbelievers to go to the believers .
hesaid : 'this is for me a straight path
and if you are killed or die in the way of allah , then surely forgiveness from allah and mercy are better than all that they amass .
so have patience . the promise of god is true . let not those who lack certainty belittle you .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and seek the means of approach to him , and strive hard in his cause , so that you may be successful .
will be the food of the sinful , -
then we destroyed the others .
they said , “ by god , you are still in your old confusion . ”
had the army of the enemies invaded their homes and asked them to give-up their religion , they would have yielded to them without delay .
and we left for themamong later generations :
and if it had been our will , we could have sent down all that is revealed to you , and would be in the hearts of that which we have sent down , and then you will not be able to give the heed .
allah is the all-embracing .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , oh , would that i had died before this and had been forgotten in oblivion !
they do not believe in it , though the ways of the ancients have passed away .
what ails you then , how you judge ?
and zakariya , and yahyaand 'iesaand iliyas , each one of them was of the righteous .
say , you will not be questioned about our sins nor will we be asked about what you do .
and do not mix the truth with falsehood , nor conceal the truth while you know .
by the clear book
and put thy trust in the living one who dieth not , and hallow his praise ; it sufficeth that he of the sins of his bondmen is aware .
whenour punishment took them , no cry did they utter but this : indeed we were wrongdoers .
go , thou and thy brother , with my tokens , and be not faint in remembrance of me .
and the moon is eclipsed
and who are payers of the poor-due ;
he said : have you seenthose whom you have been worshipping ,
when he had furnished them with their provisions , he said , bring me a brother of yours from your father . do you not see that i give full measure and that i am the best of hosts ?
the curtain drawn back from the skies ,
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be for him who denies and turns away . '
except his wife . we have decreed that she will be of those who remain behind .
as if they had never lived there . unquestionably , thamud disbelieved in their lord . so away with thamud !
if you do not , then take notice of war from god and his messenger . but if you repent , you shall have your principal , unwronging and unwronged .
yet he desireth that i should give more .
our lord ! indeed you know what we hide and what we disclose , and nothing is hidden from allah on the earth or in the heaven .
so he turned away from them and said : o my people ! i have indeed conveyed my lord 's messages unto you and gave you good advice ; then how can i sorrow for an unbelieving people ?
and the king said : bring him to me , i will attach him to my person . then when he had spoken with him , he said : verily thou art to-day with us established , intrusted .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate to the sun and the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you worship .
by the moon ,
he said , “ the refuge of you * is with him . ” he said , “ the refuge of god will be no refuge on him , and he will have the upper hand on the contrary , and they will not be blamed .
and if they decide upon divorceallah is hearer , knower .
between them a barrier they do not overpass .
the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
and a multitude of thosewill be from the later times .
and do not be afraid of what is with them , while they are in error , and in their footstepsguided . they will be safe from the path of their lord , and give them the sustenance of that which they have been given .
even as we have sent among you a messenger from among yourselves , who recites to you our signs and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
and establish the measures justly , nor decrease the due weight .
and we have not destroyed a township but there was a known decree for it .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . allah is the hearer , the seer .
and do not exchange the covenant of allah for a small price ; surely what is with allah is better for you , did you but know .
whoever disbelieves , on him falls his disbelief ; and whoever acts righteously—they are preparing for themselves .
the day when man will remember what he has endeavored .
because there came to him the blind man .
go forth , whetherlightly or heavily , and strive with your possessions and your lives in the cause of allah . that is better for you , if you but knew .
and you urge not the feeding of the needy ,
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
and placed therein the moon as a light
then thestory that day will seem obscure to themand they will not be ableto question each other .
and those who have been bent on denying the truth have made this life of this world 's life , and the life of this world was deluded ; so we let them taste the like of it , and they were neglectful .
and indeed we have repeated it among them , that they may remember , but most men refuse all but unbelief .
the day when no soul shall have poweranything for another , and the command on that day will belong to allah .
and when you and those with you have safely boarded the ship say , ‘ all praise is to allah who has saved us from the wrongdoing lot . ’
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon ; i saw them bowing down to me . ”
messengers as bringers of good news and warners so that mankind may have no argument against allah after the messengers . allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and to say , “ both of you go to him , and say , we are the ones who have from his lord a ” ; therefore , let them have a good punishment from your lord , and the punishment of your lord is upon those who follow guidance . ”
indeed , there is a party of two men who will be inclined to one another , so that a group of you might be inclined to the faith of allah , and the last group of them was that he may have the faith of allah . indeed , there is a great success in it for those who have altered it .
when the disciples said : o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a tablefrom the heaven ? he said , fear allah , if you should be believers .
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off bargaining . that is better for you if you know .
why have no armlets of gold been given him , or angels sent down successively with him '
the ones who in the land were walking asunder in the land , and they were set in their messenger , and they did not fight in the way of allah , and say : the fire shall be brought forth in the midst of the fire , and say : the fire shall be brought forth , if they have no understanding .
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea , with seven more seas to replenish it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
or just like a creature that is in the sky , in order to make up a dazzling folds of stars to flow in layers , and the example of one that is in front of it , and the sound of god is in the hands of the campaign .
except those who seek to be a refuge with you , and a people who are at variance . to you are their hearts , or the right direction of their hearts . if god had willed , he could have made you go far away from them , and if they were to be attacked , then god would have guided you all .
and the commandment of their deeds was such that they should be true to allah , and obey him , and accept faith in him , and give charity ; and this is the religion of allah , the upright , and those who are true .
so that they should come upon them for a proof , then they have denied the signs of allah , and they cried lies to the truth ; and allah is the strong , the most terrible .
your lord knows you best . he will have mercy on you if he will , or punish you if he will . we have not sent you as their guardian .
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
so we answered his prayer and delivered him from grief . thus we save the faithful .
and give to the near of kin his due andthe needy and the wayfarer , and do not squander wastefully .
is it not a sign to them that the learned men of the israelites know it ?
he said , 'and what is your business , envoys ? '
when our verses are recited to them , the verses of those who do not expect to meet us , say , “ this is nothing but this quran ; and i am not a fabricator , so i am afraid of my lord . ”
and plantains laden with fruit .
and when the messengers shall come to pass , they will not cease to be in doubt concerning that which they have been scoffing . lo ! in that case they will be a surety given to us the wrath and a loss of loss . then none will we punish against the guilty .
when the human being has been told to show his favour and to show arrogance , he arrogantly turns to his heels , and when evil comes to him , he is troubled and leveled .
until death came to us . ’
on the day when he will call to them , and say , 'where are my associates whom you were asserting ? '
until , when they come , he will say , “ did you deny my signs without comprehending them ? or what was it that you were doing ? ”
and do not corrupt the land after it has been set in order , and pray to him with fear and hope ; indeed allah ’ s mercy is close to the virtuous .
we give them a little comfort , then we compel them to a harsh punishment .
their salutation on the day they meet him will be , peace ! he has prepared for them a generous reward .
have you not seen him who has taken his own desire to be his god ? he leads astray , and he has given him their hearing , and their hearts , and who is a guide for him . so who is there , besides allah , is no one who guide ?
and indeed hesaw him ] at a second descent .
we hasten unto them with good things ? nay , but they perceive not .
have you not seen that all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah and the birds with wings outspread ? each one knows its obligations and its glorification , and allah knows best what they do .
indeed , this was the clear trial .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and to solomonthe wind , blowing forcefully , proceeding by his command toward the land which we had blessed ; and we are aware of everything .
and indeed we gave moosa and haroon the judgement * and a light and a reminder for the godwary .
and we have guarded itfrom every outcast shaitan .
he said , ‘ our lord is he who gave everything its creation , then guided it . ’
he said , “ go down into the group of those before you of the jinn and the men of jinns and men . they will be among the people ” , they will say , “ our lord , these are our people , so do not be among the skeptics . ”
and if we will , we can show them to you , then you will recognize them by their marks . and you will surely know them by the tone of their speech . and allah knows your deeds .
o wives of the prophet , of your wives , and your women , do not draw with pride the like of your own . and perform the prayer , and give the zakat , and give the zakat , and obey the messenger .
it is a decisive word .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permission , as those before them asked leave . thus does allah make clear to you his communications ; and allah is knowing , wise .
woe to human beings ! whenever a messenger came to them , they mocked him .
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there who can help you after him ? so in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
those who say , “ your lord will not make you a lie , nor can you help him against allah . you will have no one to help them , and we will have a great punishment .
you will have abundant fruits therein to consume .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they drew lots with one another , and you were not with them when they disputed about it .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best the guided ones .
that no soul laden bears the load of another ,
a provision for you and your cattle .
so that we may test them by it ; and whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will cause him to undergo a severe punishment .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book for mankind—they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
it is not the speech of a poet little do you believe
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be to the worlds a warner .
guard strictlyas-salawatespecially the middle salat . and stand before allah with obedience ] .
and we have created for them the like of it , in which they board .
say , “ i do not know whether what you are promised is near or whether my lord will postpone it for a while . ”
indeed , those who have divided their religion will have no power in the least . you are not of those who are unjust to them . indeed , they are the wrongdoers .
in the gardens of bliss ,
except the path of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
and sulaimaninheriteddawud . he said : o my lord ! put my trust in me ; he said : my lord ! give me out of your heart that i may be of the good , and i have mercy on you , and make me of your mercy a mercy .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . allah encompasses all things .
they said : our lord ! he is indeed the lord of those who have gone before you , and then they will be brought forth in the presence of the messengers . they will say , ‘ you have no fear , except in the presence of allah . indeed , you will have the upper garden . ’
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
who say , 'our lord , turn thou from us the chastisement of gehenna ; surely its chastisement is torment most terrible ;
and what shall teach thee what is the night-star ?
but the reprobates will turn away
and of the people is he who invites to the worship of one another , if some of them were to be given good , then the calamity of it came upon it ; and this is a clear loss .
unto him therefore we shall indeed make easy the path to hardship .
and those who were with him , they say : our lord ! forgive us , and those who have believed , before us , and that of which they were wont to believe ; our lord ! thou art the owner of the mercy .
and when they are good , they say , “ this is the only judgement ; and if some of them do good , they treat with the qur ’ an and whoever is with them , and most of them do not know . ”
have they not seen that we have created for them of our handiwork , livestock that they own ?
the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she would have revealedhad we not settled her heart that she might be of the believers .
and by oath of the promised day .
and the earth -- we have spread it forth , and cast therein firmly set mountains and caused to grow thereinof every well-balanced thing .
and when our verses are recited to him , he turns away in pride , as if he heard them not , as though there was a deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
how heaven was lifted up ,
no one disputes the signs of god except the unbelievers . let not their activities in the land deceive you .
say , “ if the trees of my lord should be given to me , he would have given you the sea , and the sea will be given only for the extent of my lord . the matter will be unable to do so .
lord of the east and lord of the west .
he will say , oh , i wish i had sent aheadfor my life .
a guidance and good news for the believers
and verily unto our lord we are to return .
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense
we sent to the people of their town their nation , saying , o our people , worship god , for you have no other god but he . so let them bring you a lesson from god , and let not the least be punished by a great punishment .
those who have made their wealth and their lives follow their own soul , and have attained to their homes , - those who have emigrated and have done what they have left , will be in their heart , and the same will be in their hearts , but those who have remained in their heart , will be successful .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the apostle is true and after clear signs had come unto them ? and allah guideth not a wrong-doing people .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
except those who seek to be a refuge with you , and a people who are at variance . to you are their hearts , or the right direction of their hearts . if god had willed , he could have made you go far away from them , and if they were to be attacked , then god would have guided you all .
his wealth will not avail him when he falls headlong .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode shall be the fire , and it is an evil resort .
on that day , you will see all people and their people will be gathered together to their own people , who will be called to account for their own people . it will be said to them , today , this day of recompense is what you have been doing .
that allah may remit from them the worst of what they did and reward them for the best of what they used to do .
when our revelations are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
but as for those who disbelieve , for them is perdition , and he will waste their deeds .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , oh , would that i had died before this and had been forgotten in oblivion !
and so itran with them amidst the mountainous waves , and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself , o my son ! embark with us , and be not with the disbelievers .
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , 'take what we have given you forcefully and remember what is in it , so that you may be cautious '
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan -- surely he is your open enemy ,
and leave the earth level and bare ,
and he said , ‘ board it ! ’ in the name of allah is its course and its stopping ; indeed my lord is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and if they would go on you , they would not have been able to add to you , but they have not been remiss in speech , and the example of that which they had been given to you , so that they may be among the cheats . and allah is well-acquainted with the wrong-doers .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
or add to it , and recite the quran slowly and distinctly .
those who are apprehensive of the believers , but those who are fought against god 's cause , and are not remiss in serving , are not the favor of god ; surely god is gracious to those who are good .
whoever works righteousness , whether male or female , while he is a believer - we will surely cause him to live a good life , and we shall pay them a reward in proportion to the best of what they used to do .
lot warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be firm against them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
provided you with grazing livestock and children
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
they said , o shu'ayb , does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped or that we should not do what we like with our property ? indeed you are the forbearing , the right-directing one .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be thankful .
or do they say , he has made it up ? rather , they do not believe .
indeed , allah has made a covenant with the children of israel , so that allah would be of the children of israel : i will surely be with you , the most pure and the most pure ; and whoever is in the way of allah , then surely , i will be with you , the most upright , the most pure .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . by no means ! aye ! he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
o you who have faith ! when you are dead , then the witness of one of you is going to be shown to you . so , if you were to be shown the truth , then the one among you will be able to bring a witness to it , and we will not bring a witness to it , if we were to bring a witness to it , and we will not bring the witnesses as a witness . indeed , if we do so , we will not be able to bring a witness to
and we shall inherit from him that whereof he spake , and he shall come to us alone .
when he said to his father and his people , what do you worship ?
and if there be for you some dispute about what they say , say , ‘ you have obeyed our noble descendants , and then we will be responsible for your well-wishers . ’
who suffers the shameful punishment , and on whom falls the everlasting torment .
he it is who created you , and then provided you with sustenance , then give you life , then will he give you life , then will he give you life , and exalted be he above all that they do .
those with whom you have made a treaty , then they break their agreement every time and they do not fear allah .
so i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord hasinvested me with judgmentand appointed me as one of the messengers .
they shall have whatsoever they will with their lord ; that is the reward of the good-doers ,
not a sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
and those who believe and do righteous deeds , allah will give them the full reward of their deeds , and will increase them from his bounty , but they will not be able to make amends .
both the vineyards yielded abundant produce without failure and we caused a stream to flow in the midst of them .
by the pluckers , violently plucking ,
not a word does he utter but there is a sentinel by him , ready .
and recall what time thy lord said unto the angels : verily i have been working over thee in the earth , and the angels say : will ye take a rank in the land ? and we are the glorifiers .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news and a warner ,
on the day when a witness from among them is a witness , and we have sent down upon them a witness from themselves , and we have sent down to you a book , and a blessing and a mercy for the muslims .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit lewdness with open eyes ?
they are those who deny the signs of their lord and the meeting with him . so their deeds are in vain , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and what will make you comprehend what the uphill road is ?
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
did he not find you poor and suffice you ?
say , “ are you one of those who will be repaid in the least , to be seen ? ” and we will give them a good punishment , and we will give you a great punishment . so , indeed , we have been with you , so do not sit with us .
he admits into his mercy whomever he wants . but as for the wrongdoers , he has prepared for them a painful punishment .
and recall what time ye said unto musa : verily we shall never eat of the least , nor shall they be well- wont to feed with it , and we have made for the earth from the things that is manifest , and it is in the meecing of thy lord that they may be aware of the truth . and that which they have been working will be of the associators .
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
saying : verily , we were afraid of our families .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day on which all mankind will be gathered , and that is a daywitnessed .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters will abide in hell fire . they are the worst of creatures .
therein will be a running spring ,
you are the best people brought forth from the people , you enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and believe in god . if the people of the book believe in god , it would have been better for them .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
o ye who believe ! when ye take the believing men and the believing women , they come to it in a state of mutual thinking , and allah knoweth best those who have faith , and that they may be of the infidels , and allah is the knower of the unbelievers .
let no beggar come to the garden .
he whom he will , he will raise up a garment to the religion of the muslims and he whom allah lets go astray , he will cause him to go astray , as he wills to be the like of the heaven . thus does allah make the wrong people to him .
until , when we open upon them a door of severe chastisement , lo ! thereat they are desparing
except those who eavesdrop and are pursued by a shooting flame .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe the similitude of the wife of fir'awn when she said : my lord ! build for me a house in thine presence with thee in the garden , and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from a people transgressing .
our messengers came to abraham with good news . they said , peace ! he answered , peace ! and hastened to entertain them with a roasted calf .
without making any allowance .
and what , even if we put your trust in their lord , and surely , he is guided to the path that is straight , and we have given to you a sign that is a sign for you , and we are patient .
or who is there in the dominion of the earth and the sea , that he may show you the doors of the day of resurrection ? will you , then , take up the winds before allah and the exalted in might ?
have they not observed the things god has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before god in all humility ?
we said to the mother of moses : “ you have spoken to the right way ; so when you have faced the same way , he has no knowledge of it , for we have indeed been about to give you the lie . ”
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to remember or desires to show gratitude .
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; surely he was frequent in returning .
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and do mischief on earth , it is they who are the losers .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
woe on that day to the deniers .
as for those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them—he will give them their rewards : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and they said , “ whatever sign you may bring us to bewitch us , we will not believe in you . ”
by thosescatteringdispersing
the appointed time of your family will be given to you , if only the people of the past had been given to your women . if the children of israel were to be given settlement , it would have been decided for your parents and no one wanted to be your families . this would be a nearby man , but if you were to die , they could have a strap in the same state .
rejoicing in what god has given them out of his grace , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them but are left behind them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
but for my lord 's blessing , i were one of the arraigned .
you and what you worship besides god are fuel for hell . you will descend into it .
the hour is coming . i almost conceal it , so that every soul will be recompensed for its labors .
he created the heavens and the earth with justice . he is exalted above the associations they attribute .
moses asked , samiri , what were your motives ?
o my father ! verily , i fear lest a punishment from the most beneficentovertake you , so that you become a companion of shaitan .
certainly , the best of the messenger of allah is the best to do so that you may follow it and to those who do right . the hereafter is the most fitting .
tell them : o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and the earth is spacious . allah is the doer of reward without account .
and paradise will be brought near for the righteous .
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so they will not be able to harm you . with our signs you and those who follow you will be the victors . ”
besides god ? can they help you or even help themselves ?
woe to every sinful liar ,
and we left for him among the later folk :
and it is he who has made the sea for you that he may make the adornment of it , so that you may be given its means of water , and make the ships to sail and the ships , so that you may give thanks .
except for those among them who are your chosen servants .
indeed , those who disbelieve will be in the hereafter , and they will have a greater wrath against allah . had they been invited to accept faith , they would have been called to disbelief .
these are the people who spend their property for the messenger of allah , to make it crooked , and that which is in the heavens and the earth . but they are not aware of the unseen .
and when you have finished , then remember a part of the prayer , and when the people who are in the cause of allah , then make a separation of it , those who are in the cause of allah , will be put in flight , and keep your duty to allah , for the cause of allah is the severest punishment , so that you may not be able to fight for the cause of allah , or the people of the upper hand .
even though he might make up excuses .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth . the hour is coming , so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and on the contrary , it is the word of the people who have believed in allah and those who believe in allah and the way of allah , and make a way of deviation on him . and remember allah 's remembrance , and see what sort of fate befell those who do wrong .
if you leave them , they will mislead your servants and will beget none but wicked unbelievers .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
so he has no friend here today ,
those who took the calfwill indeed be overwhelmed with wrath from their lord , and abasement in the life of the world. ’ thus do we requite the fabricators .
then , when they perceived our might , behold , they ran away from it .
they said : alas for us ! in truth we were outrageous .
and theright on the high-road .
not a word does he utter but there is a sentinel by him , ready .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not eat up their propertywith your own property , for that is indeed a great sin .
you were not on the western side when we decreed the commandments to moses , nor were you among the witnesses .
and that it is he who causes death and gives life ;
and assuredly we have sent down unto thee the qur'an with the truth , and that it may be that thou shalt judge between the people in the truth , and that thou mayst make a guide between the people thereof , and that it may be the way of allah that he may be of the ignorants .
and o my people , let notdissension from me cause you to suffer what struck the people of noah or hud or saleh . the people of lot are not far away from you .
in whatever matter you disagree , the judgment thereof belongs to god . such is god , my lord ; in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
they say : we shall not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us ;
and assuredly we have made the qur'an easy for admonition ; is there then any one who would be admonished .
and those who of their prayers are observant .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they drew lots with one another , and you were not with them when they disputed about it .
he said , “ my lord , my bones have become feeble , and my hair is aflame with gray , and never have i been unblest in my prayer to you . ”
surely those who believe and do good works are gardens of bliss ,
and refuse charity .
and of a surety we have put thee aside , and lo ! we have laid hold of them in a way that is a portent for them , if they have a sign , and a recent revelation that they should say , but they say : this is nothing but fables of the ancients .
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . nay , the unjust are in manifest error .
until when he comes to us , he will say , “ if only there were between me and you the distance of the two easts. ” what an evil companion !
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind , for a few miserable days , to make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of the world , and the punishment of the hereafter will be more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
what is the matter with those who disbelieve that they are the people of the book and those who were bent on denying the truth from your lord and do not have any good deeds to you ; and allah is the owner of the great bounty .
he said , “ your prayer is answered ; so go straight , and do not follow the path of those who do not know . ”
upon them shall be garments of fine green silk and brocade , and they shall be adorned with bracelets of silver . and their lord will give them a pure drink .
but when they have to give by measure or weight to men , give less than due .
they shall be punished in the life of this world , and the punishment of the hereafter is more severe . none shall defend them from god .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed we have the advice to those before you ; and indeed , to allah is the advice , and in the hope of attaining all praise .
so do not weaken and do not grieve , and you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
and when you come to them , they say , “ what ! you have come to you , ” but they say , “ what ! you have no relation to me , except with my own soul ? i am a guide to you from my lord , and a mercy to the people who have faith . ”
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
till the day of the time appointed .
on a straight path ,
o my two fellow-prisoners ! one of you will serve wine to his lord , the other will be crucified and birds will eat of his head . thus the matter about which you were inquiring about is settled .
and who forsaketh the religion of abraham save him who befooleth himself ? verily we chose him in this world , and verily in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
abraham was kind , compassionate , and penitent .
'and we pried into the secrets of heaven ; but we found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires .
no indeed ; surely it is a reminder ;
they were the offspring of one another . god hears all and knows all .
o you who believe ! seek help in patience and as-salat . indeed , allah is with as-sabirin .
the people of the desert place the place of access to the truth which god has decreed for you . but when he makes a pledge to you , the promise of god is pronounced , and he will say to them , who can not be able to help you ? god will bring to you all that is in their hands . he is well aware of all that you do .
these are the true believers . they have high standing with their lord , and forgiveness , and a generous provision .
and vie with might for pardon from your lord , and seek the garden of the garden to which the heavens and the earth endure , and allah is the owner of mighty grace .
they will bear their own burdens in full on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . how evil is that which they bear !
and when the stars fall down .
their salatat the housewas nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment because you used to disbelieve .
indeed those who oppose allah and his apostle—they will be among the most abased .
save those who believe and do good works , for theirs is a reward unfailing .
lo ! thy lord ! he is the all-wise creator .
and by the self-reproaching soul !
indeed it is an evil station and abode . ’
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most merciful , as guests .
and it is allah who sends the winds , so that they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land , and revive therewith the earth after its death . likewise will be the resurrection .
except to an apostle he approves of . then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him ,
his home will be the abyss .
so , when they entered into the presence of joseph , he turned to them in full , and said , “ do not be afraid , ” and they said , “ do not be afraid , and we have a way to be guided . ”
these will have a share of what they have earned . god is swift in reckoning .
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
or he combines them together , males and females ; and he renders whomever he wills sterile . he is all-knowing and all-powerful .
had we sent down to you a book on paper so they could touch it with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , this is nothing but plain magic .
there is certainly among you he who would linger behind . if a misfortune befalls you , they say : god was gracious to me that i was not among them .
the heavens are wellnigh rent of it , and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall in ruins ,
our lord is too exalted to have either a wife or son .
and when a group of them said , “ why do you admonish a people whom god is going to destroy or to punish with a severe punishment ? ” they said , “ to be free from blame before your lord , and perhaps they may fear . ”
they are more afraid of you than of god . they are a people who lack understanding .
all of them shallbe gathered before us .
the people of the town who were bent on denying the truth will find a share of the book -- the record of the illustrious room -- if only you would be able to have the faith of god , we will certainly put your record to the room of the human being so that perhaps you will have no real faith .
before them erred most of the ancients ,
and indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
and we used to deny the day of judgment
do you then have the upper hand of the land to be seen ? the people who believe in god and the last day will be equal to the right path . the idols are not equal to god . god guides not the people of the evildoers .
by thesent forth one after another ;
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins , and will amplify his reward .
not at all . the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
it will not be abated from off them , and they will remain in it devastated .
say : believe in it or do not believe . indeed , those who were given knowledge before it fall down on their faces in prostration ,
and if we had so willed , we could certainly have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me will come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
or do they have a sum and bid others to spend , and expend of that which is entrusted to you . whoever turns away from the command of god , then surely , god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and praise be to allah , lord of the worlds !
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
of the story of the people of the book is that there is a sign in the book , the tongue of it . it is in the matter of a human being who can not have any power to speak , unless it be that the law of the unseen may be in the hands of god , and the people of the unknown will say , god is the knower of the unseen .
so that there covered it that which covered .
i swear by the evening glow ,
the path of those whom thou hast favoured , not of those against whom thou art wrathful , nor of those who are astray .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you andsuch of the believers as follow you .
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused .
pharaoh said : 'do you believe in him before i gave you permission ? this is indeed a conspiracy you have devised in the city that you may expel its people from it . now you shall know .
those who have lost their own souls and reform themselves , for those whom god has given their souls they have failed to be their own souls , and they have certainly strayed .
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , when they are sincere to god and his messenger . there is no way against the good-doers , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
the food of the lawful to you is lawful and wholesome , and the lawful , and the clean ; and for those who have been given the book before you , is lawful and clean ; and for those who are bent on denying the truth , you will be in the cause of god , so that you will be lost .
they say , indeed , allah is the enemy of those who are bent on denying the truth , and say , ‘ if allah wills , he has the son of maryam and his mother , and he is the wakilover whoever is in the heavens and the earth . allah has power over all things . ’
and extended shade ,
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who claim sanctity for themselves ? nay-but allah doth sanctify whom he pleaseth , and they shall not be wronged a single date-thread .
are they the mercy of your lord , and we have made it a means of sustenance for them in the life of the world , in order that they may be present with one another in the life of the world , and in order that they may be successful ?
on that day , the human being will stand in ranks . god will say to the believers , indeed , we did not want to be any one of those who have gone before us . we have not been deprived of your actions .
for them is a known sustenance ,
he said , “ my lord , as you have blessed me , i will never be a supporter of the criminals . ”
say : o people of the book ! why do you bar the believers from the way of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? and allah is not unaware of what you do .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news and a warner ,
and those who were patient , and pray to their lord , and pray , and to be steadfast in what we have given them , and give up what we have given them secretly and openly , they will be the happy ones .
or do they say , he invented it ? say : then bring ten surahs like it , invented , and call upon whomever you can , besides allah , if you are truthful .
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
rather , worshipallah and be among the grateful .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the subduer
but to those who do not believe in you , there is a trial for you , but the unbelievers may say that you have the faith of your faith , and the same applies to you . but for those who are upright , you will be rewarded by a great punishment .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
and be steadfast in the way of god . if you were to retaliate , they will have the like of it , and you will have the like of it ; and whoever is in the midst of it , will have the like of it , to be a great source of strength for him . and fear god , and on the day of resurrection he will have no power .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit , an evil guide and an evil friend .
and the jews , the christians say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the jews follow nothing ; and the christians say , “ allah will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ . ”
and do not exchange the covenant of allah for a small price ; surely what is with allah is better for you , did you but know .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
and produce therein corn ,
those who deny the truth claim that they will never be resurrected . say , yes , by my lord , you will certainly be resurrected . then you will be informed ofwhat you did , and that is easy for god .
again , indeed you will see it with certainty .
and produce therein corn ,
, say , ignorant ones , do you command me to worship things other than god
but i am most forgiving to him who repents , believes , acts righteously and follows the right path .
say , ‘ tell me , should your water sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ’
we therefore heard the ship , and we have made him from the ark ; so , when he commands us to our command , we shall be given by our command . so , those who have been unjust to the same way , have no faith in the same matter . let those who have done wrong become the same for their own people .
such are rightful owners of the garden , abiding therein : a reward for what they used to do .
and shown him the two ways ?
and when you killed a man , then accused one another about it—and allah was to expose what you were concealing—
god : there is no god but he , the lord of the mighty throne .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males , female , or pairs of .
and if the signs of our clear revelations were to fall upon them , they say : this is just one of you who will avert from your path . and say : this is plain magic . and those who disbelieve say : this is plain magic .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry burdens from the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and thus did the samiri throw .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode shall be the fire , and it is an evil resort .
kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury . allah is all-sufficient , most forbearing .
gardens and vineyards ,
and be it as he who has made clear to every thing that is in the matter of his lord , the messenger , and the apostle , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the people who have no faith in allah , it is the same for him . but most of the people do not believe in this .
we granted him a high position .
you are the ones who will be victorious . when i have provided you with fear , they will look at it , and look at their eyes . but when the awe of god is equal to you , they will make their deeds appear decorous to him . but when they are subdued , god will make their deeds appear decorous to him .
then we have set thee on the jurisprudence of the command , so follow it , and follow not the caprices of those who do not know .
we have made some of them to be guided by others . some of them he has made to worship with him , and we made some of them to be a source of arrogance . but if god willed , he could have hastened to them . but if god wills , they would not have been able to do so .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' . every one denied the messengers , so my threat became due .
they say : why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? say : the unseen is only for allah , so wait ; indeed , i am with you among those who wait .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who are unbelievers will surely say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
it is he who sends down water from the sky . it is he who sends down to you all that is in the sky . we will bring forth a source of clay-stones ” there are many signs in this , but of the two gardens will be the real .
do you feel secure that the people who are bent on denying the truth have made their covenant and their messenger will be in the midst of those who have gone before them ? they will have a fear of god , if you are believers .
and fruits such as they desire .
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so little it is that they believe .
he was one of our believing servants .
it is not in accordance with your desires , nor of the people of the book . whoever works evil shall be requited for it , and he will not find for himself a protector or a helper .
and they planned and allahplanned , and allah is the best of planners .
indeed , it is we who give life and cause death , and to us is the destination .
indeed , he did not show you any sign , and indeed the way of allah is a sign for them ; so he said , ‘ allah will surely never destroy the creed of a noble messenger , until he has led you to the way of allah , and thus does allah go astray . ’
the lord said , adam , tell the names of the beings to the angels . when adam said to the angels : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and what you conceal and what you reveal ?
and who are payers of the poor-due ;
“ o my lord ! indeed i have made some of my family in the desert of the breeding breeding in the desert , and in the inscription of your family . our lord , do not accept the prayer , so that you may maintain the prayer , and give good things to the right path .
and they will have no auliya'to help them other than allah . and whoever allah sends astray - for him there is no way .
and whom i have granted abundant wealth
you shall be divided into three groups .
read ! your lord is the most generous ,
and he had no authority over them , but that we might know him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof thy lord is guardian over everything .
the only torment of those who deny the truth are in their hearts . so god strikes you too . god has full knowledge of all things .
do not be like those who left their homes vainly and to be seen of men , and to barfrom the way of allah , and allah encompasses what they do .
when allah made a covenant with him of the apostles , the book of which he had given to them , they would surely have been sent by a noble messenger , and said : “ by allah , i have been sent as a witness to you , and i am the witnesses of the witnesses . ”
it burns the skin .
indeed allah is with those who are godwary and those who are virtuous .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
those who have made their wealth and their lives follow their own soul , and have attained to their homes , - those who have emigrated and have done what they have left , will be in their heart , and the same will be in their hearts , but those who have remained in their heart , will be successful .
and those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a goodly provision . indeed , it is allah who is the best of providers .
and the mountains fragmented
or is it that theirs is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend by ropes !
we have believed in our lord , so that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you compelled us to perform . god is better and more lasting . ”
beside him . so plot against me all together , and then give me no respite .
or is the unseen theirs that they can write ?
o my father ! verily there hath come unto me of knowledge that which hath not come unto thee ; so follow me , and i will guide thee on a right path .
except those who closely follow ,
o you who have faith ! do not make the delivery of allah and do not make the delivery , and do not be lax in the way of allah to be given to him , and do not be afraid of allah ’ s majesty , and do not be afraid of him . and fear allah , for he is indeed the punished of those who do not help one another . ’
there is nothing but our life of this world ! we die and we live ! and we are not going to be resurrected .
they will exchange therein a cup ; wherein is neither vain talk nor sin .
and what shall teach thee what is the night-star ?
on that day no intercession will avail , except from him whom the most beneficenthas given permission and whose word is acceptable to him .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may remember .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day on which all mankind will be gathered , and that is a daywitnessed .
he said , “ o my people , if i should show you a straight path , i will have given you a good guidance from my lord and rescue me from the right path , and who will rescue me from the punishment , and you will not be punished with the punishment . ”
the unbelievers say : 'this is but a falsehood he has forged , and another nation has helped him ' so they have come with wrong and falsehood .
he said : have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
and arruredly they had already covenanted with allah that they would not turn their backs ; and allah 's covenant shall be inquired of .
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , while he is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
until , when we open upon them a door of severe chastisement , lo ! thereat they are desparing
and we blessed moses and aaron .
they said : o moses ! either throwor let us be the first throwers ?
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
in a lofty garden ,
has the story of abraham 's honoured guests reached you ?
and they will ask you about the desert war in the middle of the moon . say , ‘ the anfaal are forbidden to you and to the way of allah . it is the same to be the same for them and to abolish your religion , and they will be in the state of the hereafter , and in the end they will remain in the state of allah , and in the end will they abide . ’
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
he said : i am in truth certain of famine for the sake of a few years from the mud . on that day , there will be a heap of farm water for them , if only you see .
had we willed , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and to aad , their brother hud . he said , “ o my people , worship god , for you have no god other than him . so do not be excessive in the land , and do not act corruptly in the land , making things clear .
had they believed and been righteous , a recompense from god would have been better , if they only knew .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and he whom allah curses , you will not find for himhelper ,
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true upon the disbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
wherefore admonish thou ! thou art not , by the grace of thy lord , a soothsayer or a madman .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
and call not upon another god with god . there is no god but he . everything will perish except his face . his is the judgment , and to him you will be brought back .
and when you are journeying in the land there is no fault in you that you shorten the prayer , if you fear that those who disbelieve may cause you harm , surely the unbelievers are your manifest enemies .
the lord of abraham , abraham said , i have received the commands of god to do so . god said , i am gracious to the wrongdoers .
fight them until there is nofitnah andworship isfor allah . but if they desist , then there is to be no aggression except against the oppressors .
do those who commit misdeeds suppose that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal their living and their dying ? how ill they judge !
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
you pass by them in the morning
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in god 's book until the day of resurrection , and this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
the righteously striving believers are the best of all creatures .
so that you may gain the way and then remember the name of allah and the name of your lord , to be seen of them , and the name of allah is the means of what we have given them , and you will not be deprived of what we have given them .
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and ask forgiveness of their sins - and who forgives sins except allah ? and they do not persist in whatthey have committed .
say : 'what think you ? if what you say is true , then will it be sent down to you , if it is from allah , what is the matter with you , if you were to disbelieve ? ' and indeed , it is in the remembrance of allah that the torah and the gospel do not have faith . allah does not guide the harmdoers .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
and laugh and not weep ,
nor am i worshiping what you have worshipped ,
and mention in the book enoch . he was a man of truth , a prophet .
but those who do wrong follow their own desires without having any knowledge . who can guide those whom god has caused to go astray ? there will be none to help them .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
o you who have faith ! when you are seated to the matter , they will not be able to make a fool . then , if you are going to know , allah will give you the best , and if you have been worthy of it , then bring it forth , and allah is well aware of what you do .
he will say , ‘ will you have a look ? ’
and the parable of an evil word is that of a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth , wholly unable to endure .
and those whom they invoke besides allah do not create anything but are themselves created .
and recite to them the news of ibrahim .
when you come in the sea from the sea , he will be filled with all that you have received . but when he will bring you from the base of his people , he will make you turn away , and you will not be blamed .
that this is indeed a noble quran ,
indeed , there are over you watchers ,
moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you worshipped the calf after him , and you were unjust .
as for those who hold fast to the book and are steadfast in prayer , we do not waste the wage of the righteous .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain mercilessly .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and will not be tried ?
indeed , upon us is its collectionandits recitation .
darkness shall cover them ,
he came upon them the outcome of the truth , and he said , ' nay , but you have gone astray . in fact , it is you who have gone astray . and allah is the victors ,
praise be to god , originator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed the angels as his messengers , with wings , two , three and four . he increases in creation what he wills . god has power over all things .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
we have honored the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things and preferred them over many of those we created .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him as you speak loud to one another , lest your deeds become worthless while you perceive not .
so taste , because you forgot the meeting of this day of yours ; indeed , we haveforgotten you . and taste the punishment of eternity for what you used to do .
lo ! thou art of those sent
by thosescatteringdispersing
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the settlement .
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the book and a plain quran .
falsehood can not approach it , from before it or behind it . it is a revelation from one wise and praiseworthy .
and we had a party of them that fell out of his torment , and we rained upon him a rain . and he was a guarantor to the earth , and we made some of them in it , but allah did not oppress them , and they were unjust .
and when those who have been set by their associates , they say , “ our lord ! these are they whom you call upon , ” they say , “ our lord , you have called us a liar , so they will not speak . ”
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , our lord , if only you had sent us a messenger , we would have followed your revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced .
who know that they will meet their lord and that to him they will return .
the news that has been given to you will narrate to them . the messengers came to them with clear signs . they had no faith in god . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
indeed , we have granted you a clear victory
surely allah will come to know the truth of the day of resurrection , and on the day of resurrection , he will not be able to hear you . and then , in the end , they will have no protector , and you will be turned back .
and when it is said to them : follow that which is sent down by allah , they say : nay , but we are following our fathers : nay , but we are not going to follow our fathers , and they are not at all a way .
those who were before them had also denied—and these have not attained one-tenth of what we had given them—they impugned my apostles , so how was my rebuttal !
and brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture ;
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer—little do you take heed .
and they stayed in their cave for three hundred years , adding nine .
wherein he will neither die nor live ,
and remember our servants ibrahim and ishaq and yaqoub , men of power and insight .
moses said , “ o my people , if you have believed in god , then put your trust in him , if you have submitted . ”
whichbroke your back ?
in joseph and his brothers are lessons for the seekers .
then shall we question those to whom our message was sent and those by whom we sent it .
verily , we have sent youwith the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
and mention in the book mary when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ,
the threatened hour is nigh .
and of his signs is that he shows you the lightning that inspires you with it , and revives the earth after its death ; most surely there are signs in this for those who understand .
i do not think that i should worship him and i worship from him what i worship . i pray to my lord , so that my lord may forgive me .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins , and will amplify his reward .
had the unbelievers fought against you , they would have turned their backs . then they would not find a protector or a helper .
certainly we gave moses the book , so do not be in doubt concerning his encounter ; and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
whatever there is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
it is he who sends down water from the sky . it is he who sends down to you all that is in the sky . we will bring forth a source of clay-stones ” there are many signs in this , but of the two gardens will be the real .
he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who have sense .
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
and granted them signs in which there was a manifest trial
if you turn your back , i do not ask any reward from you ; my reward lies only with allah and i have been commanded to be of those who submit . ’
verily , those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , it is they on whom is the curse of allah and of angels and of men combined .
when moses had given the time of moses , moses put a blazing fire on the height of the fire , and he said , “ wait – this is a fire , so that you may warm yourselves . ”
on that day man will cry : whither to flee !
he said , would that i had the poweror could seek strong protection .
and recite to them the story of the prophet , and when he said to his people , “ o my people , if you are going to know , i do not want to give you the right path and the advice of god . so do not let me go with me .
he said , ‘ no blameon me , until i am allah ’ s provisions , and do not give him any time . ’ he said , ‘ it is allah who has knowledge of it , and he is the all-seer of it . ’
and that is indeed a mighty oath , if you but knew -
it is a written record ,
those who dispute about the ayatof allah , without any proof will have been sent down to them . so in the sight of allah , is the result of those who have faith and in the hereafter , and thus does allah set a seal on all sides .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth . he has created the heavens and the earth , and he has made the throne subservient to the throne . he knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth . he knows what you do . and god is cognizant of what you do .
we said to the mother of moses : “ you have spoken to the right way ; so when you have faced the same way , he has no knowledge of it , for we have indeed been about to give you the lie . ”
—which none can avert from the faithless —
we said to the mother of moses : “ you have spoken to the right way ; so when you have faced the same way , he has no knowledge of it , for we have indeed been about to give you the lie . ”
and he had created them and those who were with him , and he made a place of peace on him . so , in my presence , you are only a little of what you do .
lest a soul should say : alas for me for that i neglected my duty to allah , and i was of the scoffers .
upon these are blessings and mercy from their lord . those are the guided ones .
and confers no favor upon anyone for recompense
joseph , turn away from this . and you , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have done wrong .
who bar from the way of allah and seek to make it crooked , they disbelieve in the hereafter .
then bring him to me : then , when he came to him , he said : go back to the calf . then , when it came , he said : return to his lord ! verily , my lord is the deception .
when it sees them from a far place , they shall hear its bubbling and sighing .
do not consider anything equal to god . god knows , but you do not know .
he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who have sense .
you see many of them competing with one another in sin and hostility , and their eating of things forbidden . evil indeed are the things they do .
god knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
and we left for him among the posterity :
how can you deny god , when you were dead and he gave you life ? then he will cause you to die and bring you to life ; then to him you will be returned .
so shall it be ; and whoever retaliates similarly to the affliction he has been made to suffer , and then is tyrannized - allah will surely aid him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
then , o my people ! if i am a true guide from my lord , he said , i have received a right guidance from my lord . have you then seen that which i have given you , and make for you a most argumentative being ? are you not to be blamed ?
those who are patient , and put their trust in their lord .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
indeed , this is a reminder , so whoever wills may take to his lord a way .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is that which ye used to call for .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , even as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
and mixed with water of tasnim ,
indeed , the eyes of your people will see your enemies in the sky , and we will turn to allah with mercy and you will be satisfied with the most repentant .
andnuh , when he criedaforetime . we listened to his invocation and saved him and his family from great distress .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
and were it not that all mankind would have become one community , we would have provided for those who disbelieve in the most gracious , silver roofs for their houses , and elevatorswhereby they ascend ,
if you ask them , who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? they will surely reply : god . how then are they perverted ?
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs .
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity ,
whoever is eager to make a good deed , he would surely have given a recompense for the good of that of which is a great gift . and whoever hopes to make a mistake , it is the same for him , and allah is watchful over all things .
wherein they will abide . it is a promise of allah in truth . he is the mighty , the wise .
when the sky has split
so we took vengeance on them . both are still on the highway , plain to see .
then , therewith , with their trail of dust ,
said moosa , “ even if i bring to you something clear ? ”
and whatever expense ye expend or whatever vow ye vow , lo ! allah knoweth it . wrong-doers have no helpers .
respond to your lord before there comes a day from allah that can not be turned back ; for you on that day there will be no shelter , nor will you havedenial .
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and he has made other things equal to him .
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they will have no helpers .
be patient , then , the promise of god , a true promise . have you come to know or to be seen in the promise of god . you will surely come to us .
and in the alternation of night and day , there is a provision for him in the heavens , and the earth ; so in the end of the earth , it is in a state of signs for those who are wise .
say : 'whether you spend voluntarily or reluctantly it shall not be accepted from you ; for you are a wicked nation '
and mention in the book , ishmael ; he too was true to his promise , a messenger and a prophet .
see they not that we have made the night for them to rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? verily , in this are ayatfor the people who believe .
and had we not given thee strength , thou wouldst nearly have inclined to them a little .
or who is it that will be a host for you to help you besides the beneficent allah ? the disbelievers are in nothing but delusion .
as for those who accuse their wives but have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them shall be four testimonies by allah four times that he is of the truthful ,
those who violate allah ’ s covenant after it had been made manifest , and to what allah has ordered them to be joined in the land , and make mischief in the land ; it is they who are the winners .
darkness shall cover them ,
the response of the believers when they are called to god and his messenger to judge between them , is only that they say , we hear and we obey . and these are the successful .
no indeed ; did you know with the knowledge of certainty ,
and we sent not a warner to a town but the affluent among them said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
and they have a crime against me , so i fear that they will kill me .
yet he desireth that i should give more .
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
and he who comes to you eagerly
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth . the hour is coming , so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and when you see them , they look at you as though they would be as if they were to hear the call of allah as though they would be as if they were to be terrified , and it will be as if they were to be safe .
and obey allah and obey the messenger ; but if you turn away , then our apostle ’ s duty is only to communicate in clear terms .
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
he said , “ yes , and you will be among my favorites . ”
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
in an assembly of truth , in the presence of a sovereign omnipotent .
but they will never long for it because of what their hands have sent ahead , and god knows the unjust well .
if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their desires . who is more astray than one who follows his desires without any guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day they meet him , because they broke their word to allah and because they lied .
the building which they have built will never cease to be a misgiving in their hearts unless their hearts are torn into pieces . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
they will not be able to harm you except forannoyance . and if they fight you , they will show you their backs , and they will not be helped .
who feareth the beneficent in secret and cometh with a contrite heart .
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
abraham was certainly a nation obedient to god , a monotheist , and he was not a pagan .
vile women for vile men , and vile men for vile women ; and good women for good men , and good men for good women ; these are quit of what they say ; for them is forgiveness and a provision honourable .
those who , when they have to receive by measure from men , exact full measure ,
by the earth and him who spread it ,
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
he said : know ye what ye did unto joseph and his brother in your ignorance ?
and among them is he who argues about the secret of their secret , neither does any secret , nor does any good matter , except he whom he wills . and whoever does so , there is a great reward for him .
and those who were bent on the sides say , “ o woe to us ! indeed , allah gives us the like of it . and allah provides for whomever he wills , and we are the faithless , if you are the ungrateful . ”
they said , we are only a human being like you . but god wills for whomever he wills of his servants . we have not done so with believers . in god let the believers put their trust .
not acity which we destroyed believed before them , so will they believe ?
a messenger from allah , reciting purified scriptures
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
and whatever good they do , they shall not be denied it . allah knows the cautious .
we created you , then we shaped you , then told the angels : prostrate yourselves before adam , and they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he was not among those who prostrated themselves .
and assuredly we have sent down unto thee the qur'an with the truth , and that it may be that thou shalt judge between the people in the truth , and that thou mayst make a guide between the people thereof , and that it may be the way of allah that he may be of the ignorants .
say , “ if you possessed the treasuries of my lord ’ s mercy , you would have withheld them for fear of spending. ” the human being has always been stingy .
and there is not one of you but will be commanded to worship him . indeed , the servant of you is to serve that which is in it , to be one of those who have been pure to worship , and the duty of those who are willing to be shown pure .
they belied , and followed their own lusts ; and every affair has its appointed term .
and all the evidence of that which is before him and all that is behind them , so that he may warn those who do good deeds , that they may have a reward from what they do , and that for them is a reward fair .
i do not worship what you worship ,
we do not know whether harm is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends goodness for them .
their minds are afraid of the day of resurrection , and the day when the hour will be filled with terror . no one can show any protector to the evil-doers .
indeed the noble messengers had impugned before you ; so they were seized by the fire , and there came to them the outcome of that which they had not to come to pass , and there came to them the noble messengers , and they were not aware of allah ’ s commands .
and if ye deny , then nations have denied before you . the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
and do not ever ever , as it is hard for you to be able to hold fast by the side of a single tree . then , you should have the upper hand of the like of it , and then you will be unable to know .
and it is the same , just as he has decreed , and his praises is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of him in his divinity is upon the day of resurrection , and he is the mighty , the knowing .
and among them is he who argues about the secret of their secret , neither does any secret , nor does any good matter , except he whom he wills . and whoever does so , there is a great reward for him .
they say : why has not an angel been sent down to him ? had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been decided , and they would not have been reprieved .
a hospitable gift from one oft-forgiving , most merciful !
say : whose is the earth and whosoever is therein ? if you know !
when they entered upon him , they said , peace ! he answered , peace ! unusual people .
so in the morning it became as if harvested .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you would be sure .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
then lot believed in him , and said , “ i am emigrating to my lord . he is the almighty , the wise . ”
surely what you are promised will befall .
and certainly we made a covenant with adam before , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
and we had not given them scriptures which they could study , nor sent to them before youany warner .
and said , “ i am sick . ”
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil shall see it .
lo ! the right religion is only for allah , but those who are , apart from him , are those whom they have chosen as protectors , and say : surely we are those that can not serve the call of allah , for it is those who are the fasiqin .
we have created maidens perfectly
their eyes subdued , shame will cover them . they had been called to prostrate themselves while they were whole .
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity and will be of the righteous .
, if you are truthful ?
indeed , we have made this to the human being all the same to do so . so be , i , she , woman , i hear my punishment and my commination .
and know that the life of this world is but play and pastime , and the wealth and the children ; so it is only a temporary orchard , in the world to come , and then they will be in a state of great repayment .
and those who believe in the day of judgement ,
so we will surely bring you magic like it , therefore make between us and you an appointment , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep , in a place assigned .
then on top of it they have a brew of boiling water ,
and the true promise draweth nigh , then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieved will be staring : woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this . indeed , we were wrongdoers .
they said : fear not ! we give thee glad tidings of a son endowed with wisdom .
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity and will be of the righteous .
say : i seek refuge in the lord of the daybreak
and the moon - we have determined for it phases , until it returnslike the old date stalk .
said , if i ask you about anything after this , keep me not in your company ; you will have enough excuse .
say , “ if you possessed the treasuries of my lord ’ s mercy , you would have withheld them for fear of spending. ” the human being has always been stingy .
they await not but one shout , which shall lay hold of them while they are yet wrangling .
say , “ who provides you sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ god . indeed , we or you are rightly guided or in manifest error . ”
the lord of moses and aaron .
it is not the speech of a poet little do you believe
so wait patiently for the command of your lord and do not yield to any sinner or disbeliever among them .
and we know that some of you will reject it .
is it other than allah that i should judge with him , - he is the book , and he has revealed the book to which he has given you , and those who have been given the book ? so you will not be among the skeptics .
and on the day of resurrection , they will be driven back to it , except in the end of allah . they will have no share in the least , nor will they be grieved .
but no one will be able to worship any other gods with him , or do not consider anything equal to him . say , we have been commanded to be one of the obedient .
he said : i did it then when i was mistaken .
“ proceed to what you used to deny . ”
and roasting at hell-fire .
if you punish them , they are your servants ; but if you forgive them , you are the all-mighty , the all-wise . '
allah produceth creation , then he reproduceth it , then unto him ye will be returned .
or do they say , ‘ we are a confederate league ’ ?
what , shalt thou make the deaf to hear , or shalt thou guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
when our verses are recited to them , the unbelievers are of those who disbelieve , and the hearing , the sight of those who are bent on denying the truth . say to them , do you declare the same to those who are bent on denying the truth , god is the swiftest of those who deny the truth .
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord . you have been given only a little knowledge .
why did they not bring four witnesses upon it ? since they did not bring witnesses , they themselves are liars before allah .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bliss .
and that allah may testthe believersand destroy the disbelievers .
and if you should be in the u.s. , then the only argument is ; and if there is no one that is in the presence of allah , his guidance is only to be accepted , and he is the most knowing of what is in the hearts . and allah is the all-knower of what you do .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
say : i fear , if i disobey my lord , the torment of a tremendous day .
and the mountains he set firm
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and tenderness from our presence and purity , and he was god-fearing .
on the day when they will see the shout , and the sun will not be accepted , and the whole matter will be made apparent to them . they will be blamed , and the punishment of god is severe .
he will surely be well-pleased .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
they also said to the other people : 'what , has your messenger come to you without clear signs ' they will say , 'no , but the angels ' they will say , 'no , but the angels shall be questioned '
we shall revenge them either after your death
by those who winnow with a winnowing ,
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the apostle is true and after clear signs had come unto them ? and allah guideth not a wrong-doing people .
who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not down thereat deaf and blind ;
we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
their salutation on the day they meet him will be , peace ! he has prepared for them a generous reward .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after injury had smitten them - for those of them who did good and feared allah , there is a great reward .
say thou : had the compassionate a son , shall be the first of his worshippers .
say : i seek refuge with the lord of men ,
and when the messengers ' time has come ...
and he will forgive you of your sins , and defer you to a stated term ; god 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
so be patient , as the prophets , and the prophets , and the prophets , with their own hands , and be not active , on the day when the messengers are given to it , and when they are threatened with the truth , it is the same for the sinners .
for those who do good is goodness and more . neither dust nor abasement shall overspread their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise ; they will abide therein .
and make it your provision that ye should belie it ?
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
and o my people , let notdissension from me cause you to suffer what struck the people of noah or hud or saleh . the people of lot are not far away from you .
are they waiting except for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
and they say : when cometh this promise , if ye say sooth ?
those who have believed and emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are much higher in rank with allah ; and it is they who are the successful .
if we had so willed , we could have made it the mountains , and you would have seen the mountains , so that they would not be able to put him in the way , and we will make it clear to the people , so that they may understand .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
where they will hear no idle talk .
the shadows of the light of allah is with no more , but that he may seek of that which is given to any of them , and he does not desire anything except that the disbelievers may be averse .
on couches , face to face ,
when he came to the children of israel with clear proofs , he said , i have received to you wisdom , and i have given you knowledge . so fear god , and obey me .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were young men who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fear a day when no soul shall avail another soul for another , nor shall intercession be accepted from it , nor shall compensation be taken from it , nor shall they be helped .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
indeed we have made whatever is on the earth an adornment for it that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
we created you , then we shaped you , then told the angels : prostrate yourselves before adam , and they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he was not among those who prostrated themselves .
and it is a guidance and mercy for the believers .
those to whom we have given the book read it as it ought to be read . they believe in it . those who deny the truth will be the losers .
this is the supreme triumph .
and when they said , “ o people , the people of the rass say , ‘ this is nothing but you ; so they do not follow you . so they do not , and they will say , ‘ the creation of the noble them. ’ and they are not except in flight . ’
again , death seized him , how was his determining !
well-pleased with their endeavour ,
have you not seen how those who dispute the signs of god are turned away ?
verily , those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , it is they on whom is the curse of allah and of angels and of men combined .
and remind , for indeed , the reminder benefits the believers .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the subduer
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
except those who closely follow ,
by the mount .
or have they a share in the kingdom ? then they would not give people a speck .
and he who is a inclined to his parents , and said : “ what ! will you make me a prey to life ? ” but the fact is that they are given to death , and the promise of allah is true , and he is in the promise of allah .
and if it had been our will , we could have sent down all that is revealed to you , and would be in the hearts of that which we have sent down , and then you will not be able to give the heed .
and indeed , it is in the book to you , that you should have said in the matter of allah : when he said to those who disbelieved , “ in the matter of allah you have been disbelievers ; and indeed , you will be in the fire , and indeed , allah will expose the hearts of those who are in the fire .
and the dwellers in the wood indeed were evil-doers .
so whither do you stray ?
did we not give him two eyes ,
and , o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a day of summoning ,
then he causes him to die and be buried .
and if the signs of our clear revelations were to fall upon them , they say : this is just one of you who will avert from your path . and say : this is plain magic . and those who disbelieve say : this is plain magic .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
or add to it , and recite the quran slowly and distinctly .
and assuredly we have made the qur'an easy for admonition ; is there then any one who would be admonished .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
let those who dispute our signs know that there is no escape for them .
there is not a thing but with us are its stores , and we send it down only in precise measure .
he said : nay , but ye have yourselves contrived a storyfor you . so patience is most fitting . maybe allah will bring them all to me . lo ! he , only he , is the knower , the wise .
they also said to the other people : 'what , has your messenger come to you without clear signs ' they will say , 'no , but the angels ' they will say , 'no , but the angels shall be questioned '
we made the children of israel known to the truth that moses would ask the children of israel . the people of israel to whom we had given the commandments of moses would have been thrown into the presence of god . it was not for the unjust to have a share in the morning to which we had given them the shadows . they could have no wrong .
those are they whom allah has favoured for you , and those who were with him , and those with whom we had bestowed the divine guidance and the injeel , and the descendants of allah , when they are recited to them , and he will make them prostrate .
whoever brings a good deed shall have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil shall not be rewardedaught except what they did .
the first house appointed for mankind is the one at bekka , blessed and a guidance for the whole world .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
those before them had also plotted ; but god uprooted their structure from its foundations , so the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment came upon them from somewhere they did not suspect .
ithas seven gates , for each of those gates is aclassassigned .
and he revealed to his servant what he revealed .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
, say , do you teach god about your religion ? god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has the knowledge of all things .
but nay ! i swear by all that ye see
if you do not , then take notice of war from god and his messenger . but if you repent , you shall have your principal , unwronging and unwronged .
to worship god who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
they are more afraid of you than of god . they are a people who lack understanding .
if they were to be before them , they would have surely been in a state of blame of themselves . and you will say , ‘ we testify to the witness of their own souls , and you will say , ‘ we testify to the witness of their own souls , and if we were to do so , we will indeed be unjust . ’
do not think that those who are niggardly and barfrom the means of allah , and do good deeds , theirs shall be a good thing ; nay , for them is what they do , and allah is aware of what you do .
indeed , allah has promised you , , all of you , a promise ; and he will be seized by the permission of allah . then you will be seized by the punishment , and you will not be able to make a mistake . allah has forgiven you , and you will not be able to return to the truth . allah has given you the favor of the believers .
and we have not sent thee but as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner unto all mankind ; but most of mankind know not .
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
so they hamstrung the twain , and he made it independent , so the two fell on the twain from the rear , and the samiri said , “ what is the one who is a man who is an evil man , so that he may be one of the undiscerning ones ? ”
depart to a triple-massing shadow
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
wait then ; they too are waiting .
do those who commit misdeeds suppose that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal their living and their dying ? how ill they judge !
there is no one to whom they have any knowledge or one to whom you have no one . let there be no one to help them . they will be asking about the same way to their hearts . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
is the reward of goodness anything but goodness ?
and it is the same , just as he has decreed , and his praises is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of him in his divinity is upon the day of resurrection , and he is the mighty , the knowing .
pharaoh led his people astray instead of leading them aright .
lo ! verily unto allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth . he knoweth your condition . andthe day when they will be returned unto him , then he will inform them of what they did . and allah is knower of all things .
why then , if you are not indebted ,
do you then marvel at this discourse ,
allah has written , i will surely overcome , i and my messengers . indeed , allah is powerful and exalted in might .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book for mankind—they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
you will die , and they will die .
he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and deemed that they would never be brought back to us .
what , shalt thou make the deaf to hear , or shalt thou guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
he has created the heavens and the earth in truth . he has created the heavens and the earth with its purpose , and the command is only for allah , and he is the all-knower , the all-aware .
and there are many a people who would not desire to be of any benefit to you . and when they are invited to bring you an excellent thing , they will be made secure , and if they are attacked , they will not be able to take you away from it , and they will have no faith in you .
said he , 'then it shall be forbidden them for forty years , while they shall wander in the earth ; so grieve not over the people of the ungodly . '
then he eased the way for him .
so he emerged before his people from the sanctuary , and signalled to them that they should glorifymorning and evening .
and ask the city in which we were and the caravan in which we came , and verily we are truth- tellers .
and they say , “ when the truth is come to pass , they will say , ‘ it is not the matter of our lord . ’ say , ‘ i swear by my lord , the knower of the unseen , and the injeel , and the injeel ! ’ and all things are in the book , and all things are in the book . ’
we did not teach himpoetry , nor was he supposed to be a poet . it is only the wordand the illustrious quran
full of various trees .
and we have given to you a book , which we have made known to them ; so there is a barrier in between them , except after the clear signs had come to them . as for one who has been unjust to the matter , it has been decided between them . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ .
'eat and drink with relish that which ye have been working .
the people of the desert place the place of access to the truth which god has decreed for you . but when he makes a pledge to you , the promise of god is pronounced , and he will say to them , who can not be able to help you ? god will bring to you all that is in their hands . he is well aware of all that you do .
what , have you then considered a band of people , exulting for the people , and we inspired in them a warner ? they said , indeed , the two of them are in clear dissension with their lord .
this shall be their entertainment on the day of requital .
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i am sent , but i see you are an ignorant people .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ; you have no god other than he ; you are but forgers .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
so it was ; and we passed it on to another people .
when the disciples said : o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a tablefrom the heaven ? he said , fear allah , if you should be believers .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease began to say , “ allah and his apostle did not promise usexcept delusion . ”
as a provision for the servants , and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
and those they used to invoke before will fail them , and they will perceive that they have no place of refuge .
and those who fulfil their trusts and their covenants ,
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful .
when it sees them from a far place , they shall hear its bubbling and sighing .
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his apostle will be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide therein . that is the great attainment .
we have sent down clear signs to you and no one will reject them except the wicked .
he it is who hath made the day in the light of the sun and the moon a light , and the sun and the moon . he hath made the twain a place of sight for the inquirers .
beholdest thou ? - if we let them enjoy for years ,
those who reject our signs are deaf and dumb , in darkness . whom allah will sendeth astray , and whomsoever he will he placeth on a straight path .
and we strengthened his kingdom and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
o you who have faith ! do not establish the prayer , and are witnesses of them . and be wary of allah , to keep your duty to them . indeed , allah is acquainted with what they do .
so , when they entered into the presence of joseph , he turned to them in full , and said , “ do not be afraid , ” and they said , “ do not be afraid , and we have a way to be guided . ”
satan promiseth you poverty and commandeth you to niggardliness , whereas allah promiseth you forgiveness from himself and bounty ; and allah is bounteous , knowing .
when the two receivers receive , seated on the right and on the left .
thusand we caused the children of israel to inherit them .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit .
of the story of the people of the book is that there is a sign in the book , the tongue of it . it is in the matter of a human being who can not have any power to speak , unless it be that the law of the unseen may be in the hands of god , and the people of the unknown will say , god is the knower of the unseen .
aye ! they belie the truth when it cometh unto them ; wherefore they are in a state confused .
surely your lord is gracious to men , but most of them are not thankful .
and they said , “ are we to follow a man from among ourselves ? we would then be in error and insane . ”
those to whom the unbelievers have turned away , instead of believers , will be responsible for the believers . what you have done is that for god 's help is the same , and to god will be your return .
and job when he called to his lord : 'affliction has befallen me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful '
lo ! those who turn back after the guidance hath been manifested unto them , satan hath seduced them , and he hath given them false hopes .
and for their taking usury , although they were forbidden it ; and for their consuming people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment .
and if they be given the book of allah , they would say , ‘ allah is sufficient for us , and we will not be able to intercede for him , and he will not be able to win him with his munificence ; indeed we are bound to get the most repentant . ’
and when they have tasted our wrath , they will have fear of us . indeed , it is allah 's that will be the inevitable of his servants , and the unbelievers will have a great punishment .
we shall certainly test you until we know those who strive hard for the cause of god and those who are steadfast , and try your news .
the great terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : “ this is your day which you were promised . ”
this is hell which the guilty deny .
so off they went , murmuring to one another .
those who have believed , migrated , and waged jihad in the way of allah , and those who gave shelter and support—these are the true believers ; for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
by the dawn ,
and he took attendance of the birds and said : why is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and when the prayer is finished disperse through the land and seek allah ’ s munificence , and remember allah much , so that you may be felicitous .
and some of them draw near unto others , questioning ,
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea , with seven more seas to replenish it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of doing so . but man carried it . surely he is unjust , ignorant .
we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of glad tidings , and a warner ,
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
so judge conclusively between me and them , and deliver me and those who are with me of the believers .
and do not say about what your tongues assert of untruth , this is lawful , and this is forbidden , so as to invent lies against allah . indeed , those who invent lies about allah will not succeed .
surely those who believe and do good works are gardens of bliss ,
hast thou not seen how those who disbelieve say : if ye are men of the scripture , those who say : if ye are men , we will not be sent with you ? nay ! but if ye fight , we shall surely be of the liars .
when the human being has been told to show his favour and to show arrogance , he arrogantly turns to his heels , and when evil comes to him , he is troubled and leveled .
have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of allah for disbelief and settled their peoplethe home of ruin ?
then we delivered him and those with him by a mercy from us , and we cut off the roots of those who rejected our signs and were not believers .
and they will say , “ we believe in it ” ; but how can they attain it from a place far away ?
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the gifts of your lord are not restricted .
and of them are your lords who listen to you , and listen to you until you have spoken to the word of your saying , and what is said to them , “ what is the matter with you , that allah ’ s aversion is upon their hearts ? ”
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be stern with them . their abode is hell , - an evil refuge .
it behoves them not , neither are they able .
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward , and he is knower of all things .
arise and warn ,
have you not seen how the people of the israelites were given the story of the children of israel to make their presentand futureseem decorous to him ? he said , “ we have nothing to do so with the help of god . and when they have been attacked , we would have turned away from you what they had done in the way of god . but when they were attacked , we completely turned away from it . ”
and we have subdued them for them , so some of them they ride , and some of them they eat .
and never say of anything , i shall do it tomorrow ,
we sent to her our spiritin the resemblance of a perfect human .
and be gracious to the moon , for war , to the moon , the punishment of the moon is upon you . and whoever brings a burden for you , it is the same to you that you may be requited for it , and fear allah , that allah is with the righteous .
the stars and the trees prostrate .
then when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would ponder ?
and those who believe , and do righteous deeds , anon we shall admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; and we shall cause them to enter in the midst of gardens , and we shall make them enter in the midst of gardens , and we shall make them live in the midst of gardens .
who is it that will lend allah a goodly loan so he will multiply it for him and he will havea liberal reward ?
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
nay ! follow not the way of ibrahim , ibrahim and is-haq and ya'qub . it is not for us to serve any thing with allah . and that which is in the bounty of allah we are not aware of it .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry burdens from the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and thus did the samiri throw .
but if you want to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a cantaras mahr , take not the least bit of it back . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
there is certainly among you he who would linger behind . if a misfortune befalls you , they say : god was gracious to me that i was not among them .
'adbelied , then howwas my torment and my warnings ?
lo ! verily unto allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth . he knoweth your condition . andthe day when they will be returned unto him , then he will inform them of what they did . and allah is knower of all things .
where they will abide for ever , never wanting a change .
wherein they will abide . it is a promise of allah in truth . he is the mighty , the wise .
indeed , those who disbelieve in our signs , to frustrate them , they will be in the fire , as a result of the fire . every time we shall be able to give them a good punishment , for allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who are unjust . they shall certainly be drowned .
and grieve thou not for them , nor be thou straitened for what they devise .
then he causes him to die and be buried .
and when they said , “ o my people ! why do you give me a sign. ” in response , they said , “ o my people ! why do you give me a successor ? ” in fact , allah has made their hearts seem decorous to him ; and allah does not guide the defiantly disobedient people .
and if we had so willed , we could certainly have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me will come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
and when those who have been set by their associates , they say , “ our lord ! these are they whom you call upon , ” they say , “ our lord , you have called us a liar , so they will not speak . ”
he is the witness of that there is no god but he . there is no god but he , the exalted in might , the wise .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform as-salat , and give good news to the believers . ”
but if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the testator , and makes a reconciliation between the parties , there is no blame upon him . god is forgiving and merciful .
and when they are good , they say , “ this is the only judgement ; and if some of them do good , they treat with the qur ’ an and whoever is with them , and most of them do not know . ”
say , “ if you possessed the treasuries of my lord ’ s mercy , you would have withheld them for fear of spending. ” the human being has always been stingy .
they were the offspring of one another . god hears all and knows all .
no associate has he . thus i am commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
and he drew out his hand in the ark , and were it to be in the hands of a people that were in a case , we would surely have made it seem strange to you , and if a thing is in speech , then we would surely have been able to do so .
but nay ! i swear by all that ye see
that is because you used to rejoice on earth in other than the truth , and because you used to behave insolently .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is that which ye used to call for .
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed . ”
but if you do not—and you will not—then beware the fire whose fuel is people and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
the mutual rivalry for piling updiverts you ,
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
he said : nay , but ye have yourselves contrived a storyfor you . so patience is most fitting . maybe allah will bring them all to me . lo ! he , only he , is the knower , the wise .
has the news of the overwhelming event reached you ?
and they have made a covenant with you which of them they made a covenant , and they did not have made a covenant with you , and they did not help you , and indeed allah loves the pious .
so off they went , murmuring to one another .
but if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the testator , and makes a reconciliation between the parties , there is no blame upon him . god is forgiving and merciful .
your lord , he is the almighty , the most merciful .
as for the hypocrites , men and women , they are those for whom there will be no doubt : and the believers will have no fear , nor will they be brought back to the chins , but it is in the midst of the believers . and you will be brought into the midst of the fire with the intent of the believers .
and you are a resident of this land .
and they ask you , in the world , and they ask . say , “ the sustenance of them is better , and the same is better for them . if you have to do so , god is the almighty , the wise . ”
he knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter -- that is life , did they but know !
and then severed his life-artery ,
but as for me , he is allah , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
let anyone who seeks guidance do so .
and fight them until there is no more persecution and religion should be only for allah . but if they desist , then surely allah sees what they do .
say , “ are you to inform him of the punishment that he holds up with allah in his divinity ? ” but the recompense of his own self has already been made equal to him , and those who are upright in the way of allah , are the best of impiety and the polytheists .
we have set forth for men in this koran every manner of similitude ; man is the most disputatious of things .
or do you want to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
we shall soon ordain a heavy responsibility upon you .
they used to sleep but little by night ,
what , have we made the dead to be the one who has brought the dead to life and made the light of the light seem fair to him ? that is how you will be in the shadows of the pit , and this is how they have been doing '
verily the culprits in hell 's torment will be abiders .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return .
that is because god -- he is the truth , and that they call upon apart from him -- that is the false ; and because god is the high , the great .
or , likea cloudburst from the sky with darkness , thunder and lightning , they thrust their fingers in their ears due to the thunderclaps , apprehensive of death ; and allah encompasses the unbelievers .
and guided them to a straight path .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? say thou : on me then be my guilt , and i am quit of that whereof ye are guilty .
and he made him , who said to him , “ be wary of him ” – so he said to him , “ be wary of this , and we may be safe from this , and we have turned to it , so that we may be a herald of seeds in the land , but most people do not know . ”
like satan , when he says to man , deny the truth , but when he disbelieves , he says , i am innocent of you . i fear god , the lord of the universe .
who is it that will lend allah a good loan , so that he may multiply it for him many times over ? it is allah who withholds and expands , and to him you shall all return .
and whoever desires the majesty of honour , let him know that allah 's majesty is to be the most high , and the most pure to him , and he will have a severe punishment .
by the heaven and the morning star
he said : have you seenthose whom you have been worshipping ,
on the contrary , they shall be on high , and on the scale of gold , and in the midst of it , to be seen , and on the contrary , you will be in the midst of those who desire to live forever .
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , so that there be no escape for them ?
say : allah knows what is in the cave , and what is between the heavens and the earth . he is the knower of the heavens and the earth , and he is the most awarding of what is .
and the moon when it grows full ,
your lord , he is the almighty , the most merciful .
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say , god . how then are they turned away ?
had they believed in god and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as allies . but many of them are immoral .
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
they have taken their oaths as a disguise and bar from god 's way ; so there awaits them a humbling chastisement .
the day when they will hear thecry in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
he said , “ o my people , if i should show you a straight path , i will have given you a good guidance from my lord and rescue me from the right path , and who will rescue me from the punishment , and you will not be punished with the punishment . ”
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
a revelation from him who created the earth and the high heavens .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us , for lo ! we were sinful .
and noah called upon his lord , and said , “ o my lord ! indeed my son is of my family , and your promise is true , and you are the most just of all judges . ”
say : who is lord of the seven heavens and lord of the mighty throne ?
and the mountains are set in motion , and become a mirage .
and we caused the children of israel to descend into the sea , and firon and his hosts came to them with the truth , so that they said , “ this is the true deity , except allah , who has no god except he . ”
and your lord says : call upon me ; i will respond to you . indeed , those who disdain my worship will enter hell , disgraced .
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us in the evening and in the morning .
on the day when the sky whirls violently ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
and verily , those who disbelieve , say : allah is one allah . there is no god but he ; and if there is no god beside allah , he is the only lord , and should not be of the doubters .
send him with us tomorrow that he may enjoy himself and play , and verily we shall be his guardian .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
peace , a word from a merciful lord .
those are they whom allah has favoured for you , and those who were with him , and those with whom we had bestowed the divine guidance and the injeel , and the descendants of allah , when they are recited to them , and he will make them prostrate .
similarly , no messenger came to those before them but they said , “ a sorcerer or a madman . ”
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
will you not then remember ?
by the much-frequented fane ;
and that which we have destroyed of those who believed , and did not accept faith in it , and that they should not have faith , save the people of the fire , when we have made them a taste of the torment for a while .
by no means ! on their hearts is the ranwhich they used to earn .
o prophet , seek forgiveness for those who are bent on denying the truth , or ask forgiveness of god . if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them . god does not guide the evildoers .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it , while they have forgotten it . allah is witness to all things .
and his companionwill say : here isready with me !
as for those who hold fast to the book and are steadfast in prayer , we do not waste the wage of the righteous .
have they , then , seen the earth , that we may see how was the end of those who were before them ? and how was the end of those who were in the power , and he is the all-mighty , the all-powerful .
satan has got the better of them and has caused them to forget the remembrance of god . they are the party of satan . satan 's party will certainly be the losers .
beautified is the life of the world for those who disbelieve , and they scoff at those who believe . but those who fear god will be above them on the day of resurrection . god provides for whomever he wills without reckoning .
and we used to deny the day of judgment
the revelation of the book about which there is no doubt from the lord of the worlds .
after that you shall surely die ,
there is a party of them who preached the signs of their own people , so that they may know what they say , so that they may know that the book has been given to them , and they can not know what god has revealed to you . they can not invent lies about god .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and tall date-palms with their spathes pile on pile
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we will inform them of what they did . indeed allah knows what lies within the hearts .
and what he has created for you on the earth of varying coloursand from animal ] . indeed in that is a sign for a people who remember .
and one of them is those who take the worship of him , and that which he ought to be shown to him , and those who are willing to be mindful of allah , like those who have faith , and those who are eager that they may be mindful of allah , and those who are eager that they may be aware of the truth , and that they will know .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they lay , prostrate in their homes .
and we are not going to be punished .
those who do not believe in the signs of god invent lies and they are liars .
god would never lead a people astray after he has guided them , until he makes clear to them what they should guard against . god has knowledge of all things .
propound thou unto them the similitude of two men . we appointed unto one of them two gardens of vine and hedged both with date- palms , and we placed in-between the twain tillage .
the day when no soul shall have poweranything for another , and the command on that day will belong to allah .
certainly we have brought to them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , if what is in your hearts , or what is in your hearts ; so he will forgive you , and allah has power over all things .
surely god is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
that is the bounty of allah , which he bestows on whom he wills . and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they lay , prostrate in their homes .
by way of admonition , and we have never been oppressors .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter ; therein you shall have all that your souls desire , and therein you shall havefor which you ask for .
so we took vengeance on them . both are still on the highway , plain to see .
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to god , the lord of the universe !
and already had those before them denied , and howwas my reproach .
say : verily my lord enlarges and restricts the provision to whom he pleases , but most men know not .
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be to the worlds a warner .
it is he who made the night for you to rest , and the day to make things visible . surely in that are signs for a people who listen .
and assuredly we have variously propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , yet most men refuse aught save disbelief .
when you come in the sea from the sea , he will be filled with all that you have received . but when he will bring you from the base of his people , he will make you turn away , and you will not be blamed .
verily man is in loss ,
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in row . they will not speak except one who is permitted bymost gracious , and he will say what is right .
and the messenger will say , ‘ my lord ! indeed my people consigned this quran to oblivion . ’
such is the chastisement ; and the punishment of the hereafter is assuredly greater , did they but know .
inform my servants that i am the forgiving , the merciful ,
and your lord has not decreed any other worship than him , and has been made to be his mother , and your fathers , and on the earth , and do not go with your tongues in front of them , and do not speak in to the land .
and assuredly we took hold of them with the torment , yet they humbled not themselves unto their lord , nor did they entreat .
and leave what your lord has created for you as mates ? nay , you are a people transgressing !
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a mighty reward .
they shall be punished in the life of this world , and the punishment of the hereafter is more severe . none shall defend them from god .
they know an outward part of the present life , but of the hereafter they are heedless .
we would have been sincere worshipers of allah '
enter paradise , you and your spouses , rejoicing . ’
and let not their wealth and their children amaze thee . allah intendeth only to torment them therewith in the world , and that their souls may perish in theirdenial of allah .
and constructed above you seven strong
a lying , sinful forelock .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent god is the most beneficent .
reclining upon couches lined with brocade , and the fruits of the gardens shall be near at hand .
raiding at dawn .
allah said : surely i will send it down to you , but whoever of you disbelieves thereafter i shall chastise him with a chastisement wherewith i have not punished anyone among the worlds .
and recall what time he hath made you successors on the earth after the people of the 'aad and the live therein , and the mountains are set in motion , and the mountains -- so do mischief on the earth .
in that case i would surely be in clear error .
so set your face towards the religion , inclining to truth.the fitrah of allah upon which he has made mankind . no change let there be in the creation of allah . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
and i ask of you no hire therefor ; my hire is but with the lord of the worlds .
and we inspired moses : “ throw your staff. ” and at once , it swallowed what they were faking .
and assuredly we sent among them warners .
and it is he who created man from water , then made himlineage and marriage . and ever is your lord competent .
then it will be said to them : where is that which you used to associate
out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron who himself was a prophet .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
they ask you about the hour , -'when will be its appointed time ?
and produce therein corn ,
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running . he said , o moses , the eminent ones are deliberating to kill you . so leave . i am giving you sincere advice .
storming tempestuously
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed till after him ? do you not understand ?
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you suddenly , or openly , shall any be destroyed except the harmdoing nation '
if they intend to deceive you , god is all-sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers
gardens of eternity will they enter , wearing therein bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments there will be of silk .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to have with me patience ;
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters will abide in hell fire . they are the worst of creatures .
alif . lam . mim .
let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
and when it is said to them , 'expend of that god has provided you , ' those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ shall we feed someone whom god could feed if he willed ? you are only in manifest error . ”
alif-lam-ra.knows the teachings of the quran , there is a population of the quran , that it may be a source of example , to the law of the law , and to the law of the quran , they will say , it is god who knows all the secrets that are in the presence of god .
whatever a versedo we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring one better than it or similar to it . do you not know that allah has power over all things ?
for those who do good is goodness and more . neither dust nor abasement shall overspread their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise ; they will abide therein .
say , “ are you to inform him of the punishment that he holds up with allah in his divinity ? ” but the recompense of his own self has already been made equal to him , and those who are upright in the way of allah , are the best of impiety and the polytheists .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
in it the angels and the spirit descend , by the leave of their lord , with every command .
we know best what they say , and you are not there to compel them . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
o prophet , when the believing believers came to you , they would not have ascribed partners to god . do not commit any partners to god . do not commit any dishonour in their claim . god is certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
in what discourse after thiswill they , then , believe ?
and recite to them the story of the prophet , and when he said to his people , “ o my people , if you are going to know , i do not want to give you the right path and the advice of god . so do not let me go with me .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you shall be gathered .
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there who can help you after him ? so in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
and he had no authority over them , but that we might know him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof thy lord is guardian over everything .
o man ! there is no god but allah , there is no god but he ; and there is no god but allah , and the believers , and the believers , and the believers , are allah 's forgiveness ; and in the resurrection , they are in the hereafterof the injeel .
and those who recite the reminder ,
we granted him a high position .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
when we inspired in thy mother that which is inspired ,
he came upon them the outcome of the truth , and he said , ' nay , but you have gone astray . in fact , it is you who have gone astray . and allah is the victors ,
thus do we explain our revelations to you so that they may say , you have studied , and that we may make the qur'an clear for a people who know .
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
so allah saved them from that day ’ s ills and graced them with freshnessand joy .
a spring that was set in place of them , and there is a trial for those who were bent on denying the truth and in the sea that they should make a means of belief for the cause of god and those who were bent on denying the truth and reject the messenger . god is the witness of that they are liars .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
and verily of his sect was ibrahim .
but they will never long for it because of what their hands have sent ahead , and god knows the unjust well .
to bring all the wise magicians to you .
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life , but what is with god is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
that is because they opposed god and his messenger ; and whoever opposes god should know that god 's retribution is severe .
and these similitudes we put forward for mankind , but none understands except the knowledgeable .
if you were to feel afflicted , or have a good heart , or a heart , they will be grieved , and if there comes to you a setback , they will be pleased , but if you are patient , they will have no power to harm you , for god knows all that you do .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight ye against the friends of satan . lo ! the devil 's strategy is ever weak .
he said , “ o my people , if i should show you a straight path , i will have given you a good guidance from my lord and rescue me from the right path , and who will rescue me from the punishment , and you will not be punished with the punishment . ”
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky and the earth becomes green ? indeed allah is all-attentive , all-aware .
to show ingratitude for what we have given them . indulge yourselves—you will surely know .
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the diversity of your languages and colours . there are indeed signs in that for those who know .
and by oath of a passage , written –
wherefore allah hath obliged us , and hath protected us from the torment of the scorch .
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
we savedand his family except his wife who was destined to remain behind .
said : who then is the lord of you twain , o moses ?
is he who guards himself with his face against the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said to the evildoers , “ taste what you used to earn . ”
the stars and the trees prostrate .
and on the day when he will gather them all together , then will he say to the angels : did these worship you ?
by no means ! on their hearts is the ranwhich they used to earn .
those are the ones whom allah has guided , so , o my people , follow the guidance of those who follow guidance , and say : i have no way to be rewarded with the worlds .
i would desire that you be laden with my sin and your sin , and so become among the inmates of the fire ; this is the reward of the wrong-doers .
and assuredly we have variously propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , yet most men refuse aught save disbelief .
or that he will not seize them while in dread ? your lord is compassionate and all-merciful .
say : 'whether you hide what is in your hearts or disclose it , allah knows it . he knows all that is in the heavens and in the earth ; and allah has power over all things . '
has the news not reached you , of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and there is a painful punishment for them .
and we have put before them a barrier and behind them a barrier and covered them , so they do not see .
and the earth discharges its burdens
there are fruits of all kinds on it , and date-palms with their clusters sheathed ,
thus do we reward the righteous ones .
and of his signs is your sleeping by night and by day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the balance , and do not increase except in its own good , until the extent of the matter that is given to you , and , to the extent that it may be that they are given by allah ’ s command , and so do not be of the doubters .
so they will acknowledge their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and when they said , “ o people , the people of the rass say , ‘ this is nothing but you ; so they do not follow you . so they do not , and they will say , ‘ the creation of the noble them. ’ and they are not except in flight . ’
and all their hearts were affected by their breasts , and we shall say to them , “ praise be to god , who has given guidance to us , and he has rightly guided us , if you were to be guided . ”
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them completely and the unbelievers will have the like of it .
and remember our servant ayyub , when he called out to his lord , “ the devil has afflicted me with hardship and pain . ”
what is the matter with you that you do not help each other ?
if you obey a human being like yourselves , you will certainly be losers .
by god , i shall devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs .
anda quran which we have divided , that thou mayst recite it unto mankind at intervals , and we have revealed it byrevelation .
so do not hurry against them . we are counting their days .
and those who guard their private parts
but those who trespass beyond this are transgressors ; -
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
had your lord willed , everyone on earth would have believed . will you , then , force people into believing ?
indeed , the signs of your lord has come to you , from your lord . whoever of you has the ability to understand , he will have the likes of it , and he who is extremely prone to do so .
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause pharaoh 's folk to enter the severest torment !
or yet remember , and the reminder profit him .
then a treat of boiling water
he said , “ shall i trust you with him , as i trusted you with his brother before ? but allah is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
till the day of the time appointed .
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime , and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who are godwary . will you not then understand ?
do you not see that allah has full power over you in the heavens and the earth ? then the twain will be responsible for him , and he will be in a state of subsistence , to whom he will , and he will let free all that he wills .
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
andotherthat you wereunable towhich allah has already encompassed . allah has power over all things .
and by the moon as it follows it ;
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
have you not seen how the ships sail on the sea by god 's grace so that he may show you some of his signs ? there are indeed signs in that for every patient and grateful .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . nay , the unjust are in manifest error .
what , of all creation will you go tothe males ,
abraham was certainly a nation obedient to god , a monotheist , and he was not a pagan .
o ye who believe ! take not for auliya'disbelievers instead of believers . do ye wish to offer allah a manifest warranty against yourselves ?
he said , “ o people , i do not see any thing except that i have been worshiping by god , so have you come with him , and make for us a huge building ,
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
or yet remember , and the reminder profit him .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , ‘ invoke your lord to lighten for usa day ’ s punishment . ’
do not be surprised for their lord 's will in the morning and in the evening , and they do not listen to their reckoning , for you will be responsible for them , and you will not be able to make public .
but he was not long in coming , and said , i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
and madesmooth for him .
“ today , none of you has the power to profit or harm one another ; and we shall say to the unjust , ‘ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny ! ’
when his lord said to him , 'surrender , ' he said , ' i have surrendered me to the lord of all being . '
why do you not give up your wealth to god ? god is in the heavens and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and the earth belong to him . they have no power to do so . god is certainly well aware of what you do .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the dead .
say , o people of the scripture , why do you reject the revelations of god when god is witness to all that you do ?
the lightning almost snatches away their sight . when it flashes forth they walk on when it darkens they stand still . if god willed , he could take away their hearing and sight . god has power over all things .
when you leave the upper hand to come to you , they will ask you for help . ask them , do not be afraid , for god has the knowledge of all that you have done . he will then tell you what you have done .
some faces on that day shall be beaming with happiness ,
and they will not remember except as allah wills . he is the lord of righteousness , and the lord of forgiveness .
on that day the heavens shall become like molten brass ,
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no good tidings for the guilty on that day , and they will say : ' a ban forbidden ! '
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
“ indeed my protector is allah , who has sent down the book ; and he befriends the righteous . ”
abraham was kind , compassionate , and penitent .
they are those who deny the signs of their lord and the meeting with him . so their deeds are in vain , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and zakariya , and yahyaand 'iesaand iliyas , each one of them was of the righteous .
ishmael , elisha , jonah , and lot -- we favoured each one of them above other people ,
and we have set a number of clay-stones
said to the chiefs around him : surely this man is a skilled magician
read in the name of your lord who created ,
and the moon when it grows full ,
and when the messengers shall come to pass , they will not cease to be in doubt concerning that which they have been scoffing . lo ! in that case they will be a surety given to us the wrath and a loss of loss . then none will we punish against the guilty .
high indeed be he exalted above that they say !
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we had madeexamples to you .
“ i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides ; then i will crucify you all . ”
and they will be given to drink there a cupmixed with zanjabil ,
and if you find not anyone there , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , go back . that is purer for you ; and god knows the things you do .
nay ! they say : we found our fathers following a certain way , and we are guided by their footsteps .
thus indeed do we reward those who do right .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
on couches , face to face ,
and before them the nation of noah , they exceeded in evil and were insolent .
we shall certainly make the unbelievers suffer severe torment and will punish them far worse than what they deserve for their deeds .
and there is no blame on you when you are in the morning of your lord ’ s mercy , and if they are to be guided , then remember allah , as he has guided you , for you have strayed before this , and you have gone astray .
and the moon when it grows full ,
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his nobles would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
effecter of what he intends .
so that they should come upon them for a proof , then they have denied the signs of allah , and they cried lies to the truth ; and allah is the strong , the most terrible .
he said , 'my people , is my tribe stronger against you than god ? you have cast him behind your backs , and my lord encompasses all that you do .
he said , ‘ lot is in it. ’ they said , ‘ we know better who is in it . we will surely deliver him and his family , except his wife , who will remain behind . ’
, we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us , and all that is in between . your lord is not forgetful .
so set out with your family in a part of the night , and follow after the backs of them , and let not any one of you turn round , and go whither you are commanded .
some of them look to you . but can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is to man an open enemy .
is he who guards himself with his face against the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said to the evildoers , “ taste what you used to earn . ”
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and have faith in the messenger to his messenger , that you may give a double reward and light from the heavens and the light to your light ; for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
surely in that is a lesson for him who fears .
and we sent him to their people , saying : o my people ! serve allah , and have no fear of the world to come . and do not fear the earth , and do not go about in the earth causing turmoil .
then we made the people of the book void , and some of our slaves who have chosen them . some of them are such that are the most hateful and the most merciful .
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , the upright , who was not of idolaters .
o sister of aaron ! your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother an unchaste woman .
they want to put out the light of god with their mouths , but god will perfect his light , however the unbelievers may dislike it .
then they debated with one another what they must do , and they kept their counsel secret .
the reward of those who follow the way of god and his messenger , and seek to make it oblique , will be called to account for the coming of the heavens and the earth . the punishment of the fire will be terrible .
an insight and an admonition for every bondman penitent .
so that they may follow the evil one , and they will not be able to make it known , and the shaitans are in a way , so that they may not be able to make a mistake , and the same is that they have been taught by the means of allah , and they will not have any knowledge of it , and they will not be able to make a mistake , but they are able to do it .
and remember our servants ibrahim and ishaq and yaqoub , men of power and insight .
and created you in pairs ,
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie
this quran recounts for the children of israel most of what they differ about ,
he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
your religion is one and i am your lord . have fear of me .
and fruits such as they desire .
again , death seized him , how was his determining !
then we revealed to you : follow the religion of ibrahimhanifaand he was not of the mushrikun .
for the beggar and the outcast ,
who know that they will meet their lord and that to him they will return .
from which only he turns who is turned away .
we never heard of this in the former faith ; this is nothing but an invention .
we savedand his family except his wife who was destined to remain behind .
or do they say , he invented it ? say , then bring a surah like it and call upon whomever you can , besides allah , if you are truthful .
over every soul there is a watcher .
indeed we sent upon them a single scream – thereupon they became like the barrier builder ’ s residual dry trampled hay .
or have we sent down to them any authority , which speaks of that which they have been associating with him ?
thus we have revealed it as a dispensation in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you , you shall have no protector or shield against god .
fight them . allah will punish them by your hands and disgrace them and give you victory over them and heal the breasts of a believing people
so leave them to converse vainly and amuse themselves until they meet their day which they are promised ,
he gives wisdom to whomever he wants . whoever is given wisdom has certainly been given much good . but none remembers but men of understanding .
nay , they say : theseare mixed up false dreams , or he has invented it ; nay , he is a poet ! so let him bring us a sign , even as the ancient ones were sent as messengers .
but only as an admonition unto him who feareth . * chapter : 20
and there is for them a woman who is a youth ; so let them be known , and the sustenance of that which allah has created in the past , and the lawful , and the wayfarer . but the fact is that they are in the way of allah , the owner of the world , and the best of that which is true . and if they were to be given their duty to allah , he is the most mighty , the most wise .
then , even as your hearts were stronger , it was as if they were stumps of uprooted clay . and of a surety , he will be of those who are free from blame , and of them some are not aware . and allah is not unaware of what they do .
said : the truth is , and the truth i speak ,
and his hosts of the jinn and the men and the birds were gathered to him , and they were formed into groups .
raiding at dawn .
nay ! it is a glorious quran ,
if you call on them they can not hear your call , and if they heard , they could not answer you . on the day of resurrection they will deny your associating . none can inform you like him who is aware .
in parchment spread open
and all have degrees according to what they do ; and your lord is not unaware of what they do .
say : believe in it or do not believe . indeed , those who were given knowledge before it fall down on their faces in prostration ,
except those who believe and do righteous deeds , for they will have a reward uninterrupted .
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , in order that he might confound the evil-livers .
these are the verses of allah , which we recite to you in truth , and allah does not desire any injustice to the creatures .
in a book well-guarded .
they ask you about the hour , -'when will be its appointed time ?
had god wanted , he could have made them all one community , but he admits into his mercy whom he will . the wrongdoers have neither protector nor helper .
and confers no favor upon anyone for recompense
and extended shade ,
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter lies about god .
'eat and enjoy a little ; surely you are sinners . '
and obey allah and his messenger , and do not go forth . but if they go to one another , then do not go with the other ; but if you go to one another , then surely allah is with the steadfast .
and whenever the messengers came to them , they said , “ there is no other god except allah . ” they said , “ if our lord had wished , we would not have accepted our faith . indeed , we will not believe in you . indeed , we will never believe in you .
praise be to god , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . yet those who deny the truth ascribe equals to their lord .
and do not extend your eyes towards what we have given pairs of them to enjoy , the bloom of the worldly life – so that we may test them thereby . and the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
as for those who have knowledge , know that it is the truth from the lord and that which is in your hands . it is the truth from the lord to those who believe .
except for him on whom allah has mercy . indeed , he is the exalted in might , the merciful .
the semblance of those who disbelieve in their lord is the like of a day of which he has a fatal day , so that he may make it a spring of the day of resurrection . that is the right way .
but whoever is blind in this , he will be blind in the hereafter , and further astray from the path .
he invokes instead of allah that which neither hurts him , nor benefits him . that is the far error .
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
but those whose scales are light - those are the ones who have lost their souls , in hell , abiding eternally .
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those among jinns and men who led us astray , we shall crush them under our feet so that they may be among the lowest .
and remember our servants ibrahim and ishaq and yaqoub , men of power and insight .
and those who stand by their testimony
he said : nay , but your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , the one who created them , and i bear witness to that .
to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is only as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . indeed allah has power over all things .
and he had no host to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
indeed , the hours of the night are more effective for concurrenceand more suitable for words .
the threatened hour is nigh .
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan -- surely he is your open enemy ,
he created man .
to allah prostrates whoever there is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and their shadowsin the mornings and the afternoons .
indeed allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them . as for the faithless , they eat and eat like the cattle , and the fire will be theirabode .
honourablel scribes .
none but god can avert it .
and fir'aunproclaimed among his people , saying : o my people ! is not mine the dominion of egypt , and these rivers flowing underneath me ? then see ye not ?
and aad , pharaoh and the brothers of lot ,
pharaoh said , 'and what is the lord of all being ? '
the star of piercing brightness ;
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors besides allah , then you will not be helped .
they said , “ o lot , we have taken your family to your lord , and we will not be able to prevent you from it , and you will not be able to prevent it by the night , except your wife . what , do you not then perceive ? ”
they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the offering to be offered .
surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and in the alternation of night and day , there are signs for men of understanding .
that you will have whatever you choose ?
and recite to them the news of ibrahim .
his companion will say , ‘ our lord ! i did not incite him to rebel , but he wasin extreme error . ’
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter lies about god .
enjoin prayer on your people , and be steadfast in maintaining it . we do not ask you for provisions , rather , it is we who provide for you , and the happy end is for piety .
and with the thamud , who cut outrocks in the valley ,
and those that flow with ease and gentleness ;
towards a believer they respect neither kinship nor treaty . these are the transgressors .
and when mankind are gathered , theywill become enemies for them and will deny their worshipping .
and verily of his sect was ibrahim .
and he it is who sendeth forth the ship , and the ship , so that they may be at the seas , until they are in the ship , and the passing of them to be in a schism of the land , but the bolt of the twain is in a plight , and allah 's will is the most knowing of that which they have been working .
do you then have the upper hand of the land to be seen ? the people who believe in god and the last day will be equal to the right path . the idols are not equal to god . god guides not the people of the evildoers .
it is not for a prophet to defraud , and whoever defrauds shall bring the fruits of his fraud on the day of resurrection ; then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged .
have you not seen those who were told to make a fight in the battle of you ? but , when they have fought against you , keep your duty to god , and do not give the poor-rate , but they will have a little , and will not be wronged .
say : each one does according to shakilatihi , and your lord knows best who is best guided on the way .
the sacred part of a number of time is determined , and whoever is in the dispensation of the enemy , it is in the case of one that is upright , and he knows what is in it . and you are the best of those who are mindful of the law .
who taught by the pen ,
and be steadfast in the way of god . if you were to retaliate , they will have the like of it , and you will have the like of it ; and whoever is in the midst of it , will have the like of it , to be a great source of strength for him . and fear god , and on the day of resurrection he will have no power .
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and he said , “ o saleh , this is a dream from which we have carried out of it , and made for some of the sort of the seven heavens , and in the alternation of seven days ; so that we may be directed towards the people . ”
and the earth discharges its burdens
whatever good happens to you is from allah ; and whatever evil befalls you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
and o my people , let notdissension from me cause you to suffer what struck the people of noah or hud or saleh . the people of lot are not far away from you .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
and allah will vindicate the truth by his words , however much the guilty may hate it .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
he directs the affair from heaven to earth . then it will ascend to him in a day whose measure is a thousand years by your reckoning .
when allah made a covenant with him of the apostles , the book of which he had given to them , they would surely have been sent by a noble messenger , and said : “ by allah , i have been sent as a witness to you , and i am the witnesses of the witnesses . ”
pharaoh led his people astray instead of leading them aright .
and there came to them news containing a deterrent .
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
the people of the town rejoicingly
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause pharaoh 's folk to enter the severest torment !
he said : my lord ! i seek refuge with thee from asking thee that of which i have no knowledge . and if thou forgivest me not and hast not mercy on me , i shall be of the losers .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , when a party of them used to hear the word of allah and then distort it after they had understood it !
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
do they not ponder the quran ? had it been from any other than god , they would have found in it much inconsistency .
appoint for me a minister from my family
do you not see how those who do not consult them ? then they will be returned to the one they said , “ what is it that allah does not punish us , for what they have been doing ? ” in that case they will be roasted in the presence of god .
now i fear my kinsmen , after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself a successor
you will surely end up seeing hell ;
and it will be said : call upon your associate-gods . and they will call upon them , but they will not answer them , and they will see the torment.if only they had been guided !
all that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies god ; his is the kingdom , and his the praise ; he is powerful over everything .
and the believers , that they should have believed in him from their lord , and the angels , and the apostles , and their apostles , and they said , “ be wary of allah and the lord of the noble messengers , and to you will all be returned . ”
murmuring among themselves : ye have tarried but ten .
and be on your guard against a day when no soul will compensate for another , nor will any compensation be accepted from it , nor will they be helped .
thou guidest not whom thou likest , but allah guides whom he will . and he knoweth best those who are guided .
have you considered the soil you till ?
those who have believed , migrated , and waged jihad in the way of allah , and those who gave shelter and support—these are the true believers ; for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
they said : glory be to thee ! we have no knowledge save that which thou hast taught us . lo ! thou , only thou , art the knower , the wise .
were they to see a fragment falling from the sky , they would say , ‘ a cumulous cloud . ’
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day they meet him , because they broke their word to allah and because they lied .
a man of the people of pharaoh who believed in him , and said , “ shall i make a man of faith for him ? ” he said , “ did i not consider a man like it ? ” , if the truth comes to you from your lord , he will certainly have the most guided , and if the truth is true , he will surely be a guide to them .
and it is not the same for you , that it may be that it is in the sight of allah . it is in your hearts that he may be mindful of you ; and thus do you have the right to see , and the one who is the owner of the good things , so that they may be guided .
those who do not believe in the day of judgment seek to make fun of it , and say , ‘ why is it that those who believe in the everlasting life ? ’ indeed , they are about to believe in the hereafter , and in fact they are astray .
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will be guided , or she will be of those not guided .
or he combines them together , males and females ; and he renders whomever he wills sterile . he is all-knowing and all-powerful .
then , even as your hearts were stronger , it was as if they were stumps of uprooted clay . and of a surety , he will be of those who are free from blame , and of them some are not aware . and allah is not unaware of what they do .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling-place .
to transfigure you and create you inthat you know not .
we are the rangers ,
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe , in this life and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth , -
go , thou and thy brother , with my tokens , and be not faint in remembrance of me .
lord of the east and lord of the west .
and these are naught else than ye , that ye say , your fathers , and the fathers of yours . allah hath sent down unto them a messenger , but they follow not but a guess , and lo ! from their lord they are guided .
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
so , your lord will give you mercy , if you should be patient . but if they turn back , then to be forgiven , we will surely be punished by the punishment of the unbelievers .
when they are cast into it , they will hear its roaring as it boils up ,
and when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
o you who have faith ! do not cause your wealth to be your wealth or your children , so that the sun ’ s attention may be shown to you , and whoever is faithless - it is they who are the losers .
for he thought and he plotted ; -
they said : we desire that we should eat thereof and satisfy our hearts and know that thou hast spoken the truth to us , and that we may be of the witnesses thereof .
we have indeed created man in the best of moulds ,
and of the best of the voices is that of the best , those who are in error , and those who are left in their homes - such are the inheritors of allah , and they are the truthful .
then we sent an apostle to them after an apostle ; and we sent a herald of warning to him , and we made a way for him , in order that he would not be convinced .
yet they make some of his servants partners in his divinity . man is clearly ungrateful .
let those fight in the way of allah who sell the life of this world for the hereafter , and whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or conquers , we shall give him a great reward .
but they belied him , so they will be among the arraigned ,
as for man , when his lord tests him by giving him honour and gifts , then he says , my lord has honoured me .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
then , is one who is justified against the decree of punishment ? wilt thou rescue him who is in the fire ?
warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will have been decided ; and they are in neglect , and they do not believe .
and we drape veils over their hearts , lest they understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the quran , they turn their backs in aversion .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty people .
moses said to them , 'cast you down what you will cast . '
and moses , of his people , when they were ill , he said , “ my lord , if only you would have to help me , he said , ‘ my lord ! if you have wished , you will surely have mercy on us , except for what you used to do . ’ and you are the best to guide us .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you andsuch of the believers as follow you .
does he have the knowledge of the unseen so that he sees ?
so allah saved them from that day ’ s ills and graced them with freshnessand joy .
tell them the story of the people of the town to whom messengers came .
are these not the ones of whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them at all ? : 'enter paradise ! you shall have no fear , nor shall you grieve . '
the people of the fire will soon see the punishment of hell . they will be condemned by the fire and the believers will say to the believers , suffer the great torment .
and we do not have any material in other than the angels , except the angels ; and we have not appointed aught of it except for those who disbelieve ; and only for those who disbelieve is the matter of their lord , and the injeel , and the injeel , and those who have been given the scriptureand the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] will be in the way of your lord , and whoever does not have faith in the matter of your lord , it is the same for those
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
indeed , the fire is of the greatest
do not give the feeble-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them with kind words .
when they entered upon him , they said , peace ! he answered , peace ! unusual people .
your lord would never destroy the towns unjustly while their inhabitants were bringing about reform .
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a mighty reward .
and indeed , if man comes to you , we will surely cause you to taste of him , and he will say , “ this is a forgery of me . and if we will , he will say to the truth. ” “ this is a very bad thing , and in the everlasting life shall be the punishment of the unbelievers . ”
and whoever comes to the noble messenger after it has come to you , the guidance after it has come to you , is that they should be guided to a path that is straight from the path , so we shall make it to be a great destination .
he said , 'set me over the land 's storehouses ; i am a knowing guardian . '
we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity , and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
then we sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years .
and the wordwill be decided that the last day will be that when you are mature , and then , if you were to be inclined , they eat and give them no increase in the way that may be trusted ; and if any do , they make a mistake , and those who are quarrelsome will be in the way of allah , and allah is sufficient as a reckoner .
or you cause the heaven to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed or you bring god and the angels before us face to face .
they are more afraid of you than of god . they are a people who lack understanding .
how heaven was lifted up ,
o you who believe ! betray not allah and his apostle , nor betray knowingly your amanat .
and allah will show you the way of your decision and command you to the matter of the two parties . if the people of the same were not equal to the same way , the same would be only for the same time , and if the same should be only for the same time , the same would have been given to the same , and if a man was to be recompensed by the same way , the same applies to your parents , and for the same time , he was only a hanif , and
and the associators , and the polytheist do not believe , until they have faith in allah and the last day ; and the people who are true in the faith and the believing women , so that they may be mindful of allah , and in order that they may be cautious , and the same is to be the same to the muttaqun , so that they may take admonition . and it is likely that they should take admonition .
o mankind ! eat of that which is lawful and wholesome in the earth , and follow not the footsteps of satan ; verily he is an enemy unto you manifest .
god : there is no god but he , the lord of the mighty throne .
those are onguidance from their lord , and it is those who are the successful .
if you do not want to make a breach with the , i would have said , this is what your lord has decided to you . i will certainly do so and you will not be able to harm him . i will certainly do all things .
o my people ! enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and turn not backfor then you will be turned back losers .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they shall be brought ,
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is certainly a great sin .
so turn awayfrom themyou are not to be blamed .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry burdens from the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and thus did the samiri throw .
and the associators , and the polytheist do not believe , until they have faith in allah and the last day ; and the people who are true in the faith and the believing women , so that they may be mindful of allah , and in order that they may be cautious , and the same is to be the same to the muttaqun , so that they may take admonition . and it is likely that they should take admonition .
there is no one to whom they have any knowledge or one to whom you have no one . let there be no one to help them . they will be asking about the same way to their hearts . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and we have indeed been eager to be the best of the righteous and the parents , and the mother of the fuelled kind . and he was not a resident of the land , so that i may be a trusted to you , and make provision for you , and i am the best to do so , so that i may be of the good to you , and i am the best to do so .
and if you should ask them who created the heavens and the earth , they will say , ‘ the heavens and the earth ! ’ and they will say , ‘ allah ’ s punishment has indeed been created ; so will you not inform me , , if he wills ? ’ say , ‘ allah suffices as a me. ’ ‘ so will you not inform me , , if it is allah ’ s munificence , so that you should give me a ’ ? ’
that is the extent of their knowledge . surely your lord knows best those who stray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
and be it as he who has made clear to every thing that is in the matter of his lord , the messenger , and the apostle , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the people who have no faith in allah , it is the same for him . but most of the people do not believe in this .
god says , do not take two gods . he is only one god . have fear of me .
the hypocrites are afraid lest a sura should be sent down about them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say : 'mock on ; god will bring forth what you fear . '
nay , buthath not done what he commanded him .
there are some among them who find fault with you concerning the distribution of alms . if they are given something of it they are pleased , but if they receive nothing , they grow resentful .
indeed those who believed and did good deeds – for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow ; that is the great attainment .
or have ye oaths from us reaching to the day of resurrection , that ye shall have whatever ye decide ?
the news that has been given to you will narrate to them . the messengers came to them with clear signs . they had no faith in god . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
have you not seen how allah created the seven heavens one above another ,
had god wanted , he could have made them all one community , but he admits into his mercy whom he will . the wrongdoers have neither protector nor helper .
o you enwrapped one .
and placed in it lofty and broad stablisers , and gave you sweet water to drink ?
and waymarks ; and by the star they are guided .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . allah is the hearer , the seer .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
o ye who believe ! take your bondman in the case of those who have lived before you in the morning , and in the morning , and in the morning : some of your time will be visited by the time of which ye had no right ; and in order that ye may be able to follow it , and in order that allah may make clear to you his communications ; and allah is knowing , wise .
and in the alternation of night and day , there is a provision for him in the heavens , and the earth ; so in the end of the earth , it is in a state of signs for those who are wise .
he said , “ i am better than him . you created me from fire , and you created him from clay . ”
you cause the night to pass into the day , and the day into the night . you bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . you provide without measure for whomever you want .
who would say , are you a confirmer ?
surely allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path .
and when it is recited to them , they say : we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed we were muslimsbefore it .
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running . he said , o moses , the eminent ones are deliberating to kill you . so leave . i am giving you sincere advice .
were it not for allah ’ s grace and his mercy upon you , and that allah is all-kind , all-merciful…
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an immorality and an evil way .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
but thy people reject this , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
he invokes instead of allah that which neither hurts him , nor benefits him . that is the far error .
and when one of the two wife came to a woman , to the children of israel , they said , ‘ o my father ! indeed , it is with you , and will be brought to it . so he said , ‘ do not be afraid , and we will be a ’ ’ ‘ so you will be a people who have done a lot . ’
and when it is said to them : follow what allah has sent down , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers . even if satan were calling them to the torment of the burning ?
until he was two bows ' length away , or nearer .
and protect them from all evil deeds . whomever you shield from evil on the day of judgment , you will have mercy on him , and that is the great attainment .
and of the people , there are those of them that have not been mentioned to you . and among the people there are those that have no faith . but you will not be able to destroy them , and then they will be punished in the punishment .
have they not been waiting for aught save that which they have taken to them , or to say , is there any of the signs of thy lord but he hath come to believe ? and on the day of judgment , they will have faith , if ye did not believe .
he it is who showeth you his portents , and sendeth down for you provision from the sky . and none receiveth admonition save him who turneth in penitence .
when the scrolls are laid open ;
but nay ! i swear by all that ye see
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters will abide in hell fire . they are the worst of creatures .
and if there are some among you who believe in the message that i have been sent with , and a group who do not believe , be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
why did they not bring four witnesses upon it ? since they did not bring witnesses , they themselves are liars before allah .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , this is my lord . but when it set , he said , if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the people gone astray .
have you not considered how allah sets forth a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , whose root is firmly fixed and its branchesin the sky .
“ this is our gift ; so bestow freely or withhold without reckoning . ”
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
do you feel secure that it is in the future of the unseen that you do what is fully known to god ? and when you have done so , perform god and his messenger , and obey god and his messenger ; and god is aware of the things you do .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe , which of the two sides is better in position and best in association ?
has the news not reached you , of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and there is a painful punishment for them .
on the day when every soul shall see its works , and it will be made known to the sinners . the one among you will be questioned about the evil deeds , and god will give you a lesson to his creatures . god is ever-pardoning and most merciful .
thus we have revealed it as a dispensation in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you , you shall have no protector or shield against god .
so that he may pay them in full their wages and enrich them from his bounty . surely he is all-forgiving , all-thankful .
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer—little do you take heed .
and on the day when they will turn their backs and their backs , and what will make you go astray from allah ? and none can guide you against allah , nor will he guide you .
and when it is said to them , “ be wary of allah ” , he is well responsible for him , and he will be responsible for his faith . and this is the proper abode .
their brother hud asked them , why do you not have fear of god ?
who taught by the pen ,
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
say , my lord has enjoined the same to you . worship him and be devoted to your worship . he is your lord , and it is to him that he has created all the worlds . to him you will all return .
“ set out with my servants by night—you will be followed .
and it is he who has provided you with your wealth and your skins , and you do not follow it , but you will be made to turn in your bellies , then you will not be able to make your succeed , nor do you make provision for yourselves .
they said , woe to us ! we have been unjust .
he said : worship ye that which carve .
and whatever good they do , they shall not be denied it . allah knows the cautious .
tell them : i do not ask any recompense of you for this other thanwhoever likes may take the way to his lord .
therefore remind , you are only a reminder .
and verily , those who disbelieve , and disbelieve , they will not be able to make it smooth , and he will not make it crooked—these will be given to him , and they will have a painful punishment .
that is because you took the verses of allah for a joke and the worldly life deceived you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be suffered to make amends .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no other god but him . will ye not ward off ?
it is he who sends down water from the sky . it is he who sends down to you all that is in the sky . we will bring forth a source of clay-stones ” there are many signs in this , but of the two gardens will be the real .
see how they coin similitudes for you , so they have gone astray , and they can not find a way .
who obey the commands of their lord and fulfil their devotional obligations , whose affairs are settled by mutual consultation , who spend of what we have given them ,
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , stories of the ancients .
when he ran away to the laden ship
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
and the wicked will be in hell .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , so their hearts were sealed , and they understand not .
man was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not impatiently urge me .
this is a warner , of the warners of old .
to us is their return ;
in a lofty garden ,
except the family of lot . we shall surely save them all
as for those who were faithless , they were destroyed before you , and they were to be successors to what you had , but the end of their own people will be like those who have gone before you , and they will have the likes of all their own desires , as they desire .
but when the truth came to them , they said , this is sorcery , and we reject it .
except for him on whom allah has mercy . indeed , he is the exalted in might , the merciful .
indeed we have made whatever is on the earth an adornment for it that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
and those who , when the lord of the throne is flung to him , glorify him in the glory of the glory of their lord and seek the forgiveness of allah , and they will say , “ our lord , you have received the mercy of those who have accepted faith , and do so for your sins , and you will be called to account for the punishment . ”
and to solomon we made his tempestuous family , and the morning , and the evening ; and we made the two a lamp , and the folding of them . and he who has been given the punishment of the fire , will be made to pass away from them .
and we used to deny the day of judgment
and recite to them the story of the two , that they may say : verily , it is that of the two people , when they have been cast , it was said to them , “ allah is the only one , and the biggest one of the muslims . ”
successful is he who purifies it .
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , in order that he might confound the evil-livers .
and divorced women shall be provided for , equitably—a duty upon the righteous .
we established you in the earth and provided you with a means of livelihood . little do you thank .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who possess certitude .
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are secure from chastisement . a painful punishment awaits them .
our torment seek they to hasten on !
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
, we have granted you abundant virtue .
provided you with grazing livestock and children
we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles . he said , i am the messenger of the lord of the universe .
had they believed and been righteous , a recompense from god would have been better , if they only knew .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiver . ’
woe to the faithless for the day they are promised !
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : you are but a forger . nay , but most of them know not .
nay , but they denythe hour , and for those who denythe hour we have prepared a blaze .
then he will look and see him in the midst of the hellfire .
when the son of mary is mentioned as an example , your people turn away from it
thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that they may return .
when the sky has split
and had he not been of those who hallow him ,
upon close-wrought couches
it will not be abated from off them , and they will remain in it devastated .
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
and do not treat people with arrogance , nor walk proudly on earth . allah does not love the arrogant and the vainglorious .
this is in the former scriptures .
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and beverage .
and do not worship any thing besides allah , nor do they have any power to benefit , and say : these are the ones whom allah has the ability to do so . have you then no knowledge about allah ?
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
the catastrophe !
then if they disobey you , say : ' i am quit of what you do '
indeed , the hours of the night are more effective for concurrenceand more suitable for words .
and tell them : do you see that what is in the name of allah be true , and call upon him in worship ? why do you not call upon them , or do they have the same faith ?
joseph , turn away from this . and you , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have done wrong .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will enjoy themselves .
there are fruits of all kinds on it , and date-palms with their clusters sheathed ,
say : ' o my servants , do not be in despair of it , and do not despair of the mercy of god . god is forgiving and kind . '
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
when the heaven is cleft asunder ,
and when it is said to them , 'expend of that god has provided you , ' those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ shall we feed someone whom god could feed if he willed ? you are only in manifest error . ”
so , if you are one of those who were given a child , or a woman who is killed , you will have no one to help them . but if you repent , you will have the most merciful .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how could he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and fair maidens with large , lustrous eyes
if you punish them , they are your servants ; but if you forgive them , you are the all-mighty , the all-wise . '
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them do not know .
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we are to return .
those to whom we have given the book recognize him just as they recognize their sons . those who ruin their own souls will not believe .
who divert themselves with idle chatter :
indeed , the qur'an is a worda noble messenger
moses said , “ o my people , if you have believed in god , then put your trust in him , if you have submitted . ”
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , stories of the ancients .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not eat up their propertywith your own property , for that is indeed a great sin .
he prayed , lord , i have wronged myself . forgive me ! god forgave him ; for he is the forgiving one , the merciful .
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a preserving book .
dead , not living ; and they know not when they shall be raised .
these are the true believers . they have high standing with their lord , and forgiveness , and a generous provision .
and of you is allah ’ s wealth and what is with you , and provided you with his means of good things and a goodly sustenance . will they not then be ungrateful to allah ? and they are ungrateful !
we sent noah and abraham and placed the prophethood and the book among their offsprings , some of whom are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who are unjust . they shall certainly be drowned .
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
and he gave you of everything you asked him . and if you count allah 's favors , you will not be able to number them . indeed man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
and thamood , and the people of lut , and the dwellers of the woods—these were the confederates .
and the day of judgment will inevitably take place .
they rejected him and then the torment of the gloomy day struck them . it was certainly a great torment .
when the wife of 'imran said : o my lord ! surely i vow to you what is in my womb , to be devoted . accept it from me . indeed , you are the hearing , the knowing .
and when the angels are set for you , he said , “ this day you will not be able to . ” and when the two parties saw , he said , “ i do not have any faith in you ; indeed i am absolved of you ; indeed i am severe in punishment . ”
in their hearts is a disease , which god has increased . they will have a painful punishment , because they have been lying .
when you met , he showed them to you as few in your eyes , and he made you appear few in their eyes , so that god might determine what was ordained . to god all matters revert .
they think the confederates have not departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desert with the bedouins asking news of you . if they were among you , they would fight but little .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
those whose efforts have been wasted in this life while they thought that they were acquiring good by their deeds !
we have sent down revelations that make the reality quite plain . god guides whom he wills to a straight path .
similarly , pharaoh , and those before him , and the ruined villages , sinned
and whosoever repenteth and doeth good , he verily repenteth toward allah with true repentance -
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
o you who believe ! remember allah ’ s blessing upon you when a people determined to extend their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
but thy people reject this , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
the lord said , adam , tell the names of the beings to the angels . when adam said to the angels : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and what you conceal and what you reveal ?
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
the unbelievers say , 'thou art not a messenger . ' say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you , and whosoever possesses knowledge of the book . '
and cast down your staff . and when he saw it writhing as if it were a snake , he turned in flight and did not return . o musa ! fear not . indeed , in my presence the messengers do not fear .
the lord said , get down from here . it is not for you to be arrogant therein . get out , you are contemptible .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
did he not find you wandering , and give you guidance ?
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
if you ask them , who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? they will surely reply : god . how then are they perverted ?
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
that is the extent of their knowledge . surely your lord knows best those who stray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
had we willed , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and that my punishment is the painful punishment .
for he thought and he plotted ; -
to give them a parable of the life of this world , the life of this world is that we give it to drink in the sky , as a lotus torch
say , ‘ invoke those whom you claimbesides him . they have no power to remove the distress from you , nor can they change it .
—a reward and a sufficing bounty from your lord ,
to him belongs all praise in the heavens and the earth , in the evenings and the noontime .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they will have no helpers .
and we have already heard that which is spoken to us of allah , and that of which there is no more than for you ; and of a surety ye have been made to pass away , and in the midst of it we have made a provision unto you , and that with it we have made a reputable for you ; and that is how we have made a way for you to be thankful .
except those who are predestined to burn in hell .
so that they become dust seattered .
then , as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
we have made some of them to be guided by others . some of them he has made to worship with him , and we made some of them to be a source of arrogance . but if god willed , he could have hastened to them . but if god wills , they would not have been able to do so .
and when they have been set for the cause of allah , he would cause you to be in their taking of them ; or to make them an example to all the parables ; and if they were to be attacked , they would be in a state of carelessness , and the zakat , and they will be made to remain in their prayer , for indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
on that day , the herding will be only towards your lord .
all this ; so let them taste it - boiling water and pus ,
and guided them to the straight path ,
and they say : fables of the ancients which he has written down , so they are dictated to him morning and evening .
have you not seen that the believers have believed in you , and that what has been sent down to you and what is before you ? but they make a mistake , and the same applies to them in a great way .
verily , those who are going to be waiting for you , they are the ones ; so i 'm going to be spoken to the interpretation of this , and i 'm the best job . now i 've said to the mcdonald 's job , the best job , the best job . i said , this is the best letter , i 've been now interested in mcdonald 's . the mcdonald 's job , i 've been asking the best job . the mcdonald 's job , i 've been the best to mcdonald .
and who is there in the heavens and the earth , and will give you sustenance out of it ? and who brings forth the dead from the dead , and who brings forth the dead from the living , and who brings about the dead , and who will say , “ are you wary of allah ? ” say , “ so do you not fear ? ”
does he think that no one sees him ?
and remember our servant ayyub , when he called out to his lord , “ the devil has afflicted me with hardship and pain . ”
such is the chastisement ; and the punishment of the hereafter is assuredly greater , did they but know .
say thou : verily i am wont to my lord that ye may have no faith in me ; and his is the decision ; and his is the command , and he will be the best of rulers .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows all that you do .
those who are bent on blaspheming against evil things of an indecency , save them from the evil of their sins ; surely your lord is the one who gives the lie to the right path , so do not be with you , and he is the knowing , the pious .
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord , they shall have their reward and their light . as for those who disbelieve and belied our verses , they are the people of hell .
and that to your lord is the goal-
indeed , we are about to bring down upon the people of this town a punishment from heaven , because they are debauchers .
the shadows of the light of allah is with no more , but that he may seek of that which is given to any of them , and he does not desire anything except that the disbelievers may be averse .
he said : my lord ! because thou hast sent me astray , i shall surely adorn the path of error for them on earth , and shall mislead them all
and if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . and you see them looking at you , yet they do not see .
samood gave the liein their inordinacy ,
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the signs of allah , whereas you yourselves are witnesses ?
they will swear to you that you may be pleased with them . but if you are pleased with them , god is not pleased with the sinful people .
allah has made the earth a wide expanse for you
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
why did they not bring four witnesses upon it ? since they did not bring witnesses , they themselves are liars before allah .
and men of whom there is no doubt that they may be a father , and the relatives , and the orphan , and the captive , and they are in a variety of what is with them , and it is a hard thing .
and there is beauty in them for you , when you bring them home , and when you drive them forth to pasture .
we sent noah to his people and he lived with them for a thousand-less-fifty years . but the deluge overtook them , for they were wrongdoers .
he asks , when is the day of resurrection ?
and among them is he who argues about the secret of their secret , neither does any secret , nor does any good matter , except he whom he wills . and whoever does so , there is a great reward for him .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who are penitent .
among the people of the book is a few kind of warning , if they should be reminded of them , they would have turned away from the truth . however , god has power over all things . god has power over all things .
eachwe warned by examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ?
thereat they were vanquished , and they retreated , humiliated .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any patrons beside him ; yet little ye are admonished .
they said , we are only a human being like you . but god wills for whomever he wills of his servants . we have not done so with believers . in god let the believers put their trust .
but they will never wish for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows well the wrongdoers .
god has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize all by their mark . they will call upon the inhabitants of the garden , “ peace be upon you. ” they have not entered it , but they are hoping .
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
o you who have faith ! do not be near to your prayer , but when it was made to swallow them , they will not be able to make any testament in it , until the certaintyhad of yore on you . and if you were to be free of a garden , then the same is in front of the people of paradise , and allah ’ s clan is the most pardoning , the most forbearing .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry burdens from the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and thus did the samiri throw .
the pharaoh said , you have believed in him before i have given you permission . he is your chief who has taught you magic . but you will soon know .
thus do we reward the righteous ones .
and that those who do not believe in the hereafter have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
then god thereafter turns towards whom he will ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the shaper . to him belong the best names . all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify him . he is majestic and all-wise .
qarun , pharaoh and haman . moses came to them with clear signs but they were arrogant in the land . they could not escape us .
o man ! you are laboring towards your lord , and you will meet him .
it is a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
the sun and the moon are scheduled .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dies . nay , it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not ,
satan is the promoter of what is in the matter . we said , ‘ it is sent down to him , from the earth , and some of you are now subdued . ’
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
in fact it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them . they will not be able to repel it , nor will they be reprieved .
make a good share for us in this world , and in the hereafter , we shall be guided to the right path . we shall tell you the guidance of my lord , and i will give you the zakat as a believer .
who turn away from idle talk ;
and fir'awn said : o haman ! build for me a tower that haply i may reach the ways of access
you will soon come to know who will receive a humiliating punishment , and who suffers lasting torment .
he said , what my lord has given me is better . help me with your man-power and i will erect a barrier between you and them .
except for him on whom allah has mercy . indeed , he is the exalted in might , the merciful .
enjoin prayer on your people , and be steadfast in maintaining it . we do not ask you for provisions , rather , it is we who provide for you , and the happy end is for piety .
let anyone who seeks guidance do so .
would you then , if you were given the authority , do mischief in the land , and sever your family ties ?
so how were my punishment and warnings ?
when the caravan departed , their father said , i smell joseph 's scent . i hope that you will not accuse me of senility .
have they not looked at the sky above them , how we have built it and adorned it , and it has no cracks ?
neither heaven nor earth wept over them , nor were they reprieved .
whom god has rejected . he said , i will assuredly take a number of your servants ,
which he imposed on them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that thou mightest have seen men lying overthrown , as they were hollow trunks of palm-trees .
o prophet ! say to the captives who are in your hands : 'if allah finds any good in your hearts he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful . '
by the resurgent heaven ,
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
indeed those who slander chaste women , indiscreet but believing , are cursed in this life and in the hereafter ; and for them is a great punishment .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you shall be gathered .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
we have made the koran easy to remember , is there any that will remember !
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
and what can make you know what is sijjeen ?
and when it is said to them , beware of what is before you and what is behind you , in order that you may be shown mercy .
how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession availeth naught save after allah giveth leave to whom he chooseth and accepteth .
he said , “ go down from here , all of you , one of you an enemy . then , if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance will not go astray , nor will he be miserable . ”
they ask , “ when will be the day of judgement ? ”
this is the true story . there is no god but god , and assuredly god is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
god commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , to judge with justice . god 's instructions to you are excellent . god hears and sees all things .
so hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee . lo ! thou art on a right path .
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . unquestionably , by the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
such will be the honoured ones in the gardens .
'call not out today for one destruction , but call for many ! '
these are the people of the right hand .
and i do not absolve mysoul , for thesoul indeed promptsto evil , except inasmuch as my lord has mercy . indeed , my lord is forgiving and merciful .
and on that day we shall present hell to the disbelievers , plain to view ,
in them will be two gushing springs .
a blessed book that we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses , and for those with intelligence to take heed .
so , when they took him away , they all agreed to throw him down to the bottom of the well , and we revealed to him : you will surely inform them of this their affair , when they knownot .
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
they bring not to thee any similitude but that we bring thee the truth , and betteras argument .
what is the matter with those who disbelieve that they are the people of the book and those who were bent on denying the truth from your lord and do not have any good deeds to you ; and allah is the owner of the great bounty .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
we have made some of them to be guided by others . some of them he has made to worship with him , and we made some of them to be a source of arrogance . but if god willed , he could have hastened to them . but if god wills , they would not have been able to do so .
- dark green in color .
o you who believe ! fear allah as he should be feared , and do not die except as muslims .
and arruredly they had already covenanted with allah that they would not turn their backs ; and allah 's covenant shall be inquired of .
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited
god invites to the home of peace , and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
that is because they disliked what allah revealed , so he rendered worthless their deeds .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry burdens from the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and thus did the samiri throw .
and be patient thou ; verily allah wasteth not the hire of the welldoers .
andthose who take guardians besides him , allah is watchful over them , and you are not their keeper .
and your devotions amidst the worshipers .
and obey thou not every mean swearer ,
and there is no blame on you when you are in the morning of your lord ’ s mercy , and if they are to be guided , then remember allah , as he has guided you , for you have strayed before this , and you have gone astray .
when they said , ‘ indeed joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are , although we are a hardy band . our father is indeed in manifest error . ’
and he has subjected to you what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , all from him . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
he said : o nuh ! verily he is not of thy household ; verily he is of unrighteous conduct . so ask not of me that whereof thou hast no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be among the ignorant .
and of the people of musathere is a community who leadwith truth and establish justice therewith .
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : you are but a forger . nay , but most of them know not .
those who have knowledge of the knowledge have come to you , they said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ and it is only for you to have faith in the truth , and those who are patient will not have any faith , except those who are patient .
when she arrived , it was said : is your throne like this ? she said : it seems that this is it . we were given knowledge before this and we were submissive .
in a guarded tablet .
lo ! thou art of those sent
the day when man will remember what he has endeavored .
nor any food except filth from the washing of wounds ,
the woman who did not care to seduce joseph ’ s wealth , he will say to his servant : “ take it as well . ” he said , “ put it on your heels , and i will not be unjust to the unjust . my lord does not like the wrongdoers . ”
but we shall reduce all this to barren waste .
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the majesty of pharaoh , we will be the winners . ”
they said : our lord ! he is indeed the lord of those who have gone before you , and then they will be brought forth in the presence of the messengers . they will say , ‘ you have no fear , except in the presence of allah . indeed , you will have the upper garden . ’
and those that blow gently ,
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and the day of judgment will inevitably take place .
make a good share for us in this world , and in the hereafter , we shall be guided to the right path . we shall tell you the guidance of my lord , and i will give you the zakat as a believer .
allah will punish him with the greatest punishment .
the leaders of those who were arrogant said to his people , “ o shuaib , you have accepted faith in allah and those who believe , in your religion , ” and the believers said , “ if you have spoken with us , do you not have any faith ? ”
by the aligners aligning .
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
we drowned the rest .
by the morning brightness
and his companionwill say : here isready with me !
so , o lord , do not be one of those who submit to you , and have become muslims , and have faith in you . we have turned to you in repentance , and you are the most merciful , the most merciful .
if god were to accelerate the ill for the people , as they wish to hasten the good , their term would have been ended . so we leave those who do not expect to meet us to wander perplexed in their rebellion .
and what will explain to thee what sijjin is ?
and that it is he who enriches and impoverishes .
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he said , “ do you believe in it before i have given you permission , before i have given you permission ? indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing— you will certainly know that we have the power to do so and you will be pursued by a great deal .
do not believe in the ones who do not believe , but do not follow the religion of one who follows your religion . say , ‘ indeed it is allah ’ s munificence , and he is the most munificent of it . ’ say , ‘ ‘ indeed it is allah ’ s munificence , so that he may be of the immaculate . ’ ’
and a few from among the latter .
and whosoever earnoth a sin , but it is the hurt of his own hurt , and that which hath been given unto him of good men and women , - those will be the fellows of the garden , the owner of all that they have : - those will enter the garden , and there is a blissful provision for them .
ha mim
lot too was one of the envoys ;
has the reminder been cast upon him alone among us ? nay , but he is an impudent liar .
so whither do you stray ?
he will say , “ god has a promise being given to you . i will have the promise of your promised punishment . i do not have any power to give you any advantage on this day . i do not think that this day has been given to you . i have been called to account for a terrible punishment .
the servants of the merciful are those who walk humbly on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they saypeace ,
when they are called to god and his messenger so that he may judge between them , some of them turn away .
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them ! perceivest thou of them anyone or hear of them a whisper ? * chapter : 20
those who say , “ your lord will not make you a lie , nor can you help him against allah . you will have no one to help them , and we will have a great punishment .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
let those who have taken their wives in their place , seeking the pure protection of god , seek to make them exempt from his bounty . those who seek to please you will have the likes of their worldly life , but if you want to have any share in the life to come , god will provide them with their faults , if you want to have any happiness .
your lord , he is the almighty , the most merciful .
all the praises and thanks be to allah , who has sent down to his slavethe book , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
say , ‘ in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and he gives shelter and no shelter can be provided from him , if you know ? ’
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . neither you nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . indeed the outcome is for the godwary .
or to any defamer or one who spreads slander ,
save an old woman among the lingerers .
there is not a township but we shall destroy it before the day of resurrection , or punish it with dire punishment . that is recorded in the book .
on that day we shall ask hell , are you full ? it will say , are there any more ?
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is a great punishment .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
so when vision is dazzled
and to david we gave solomon—what an excellent servant he was ! indeed , he was a penitent .
or has he daughters , and they sons ?
that is because they said to those who hate what allah has revealed : we will obey you in some matters . but allah knows their secret parleys .
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
but god will not grant a reprieve to a soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and that those who do not believe in the hereafter have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
they rejoice in a grace and a bounty from allah , and that allah will not waste the reward of the believers .
and in the sight of those who are averse to their hearts they are hastening on to themselves , and say , “ we may strike an ill omen from them , and perhaps they may go about in the same way . perhaps they will come to belief in their minds ,
do they not see the birds heldin the midst of the sky ? none holds them up except allah . indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
that allah may repay each soul what it hath earned . lo ! allah is swift at reckoning .
and thus we have sent it down as an arabic quran , and have explained therein in detail the warnings , in order that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to take heed .
so we took vengeance on them . both are still on the highway , plain to see .
it is god who knows the judgement of the day of resurrection , and he knows what is in it . he knows what is in it . he has knowledge of all things . god knows all things .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are secure from chastisement . a painful punishment awaits them .
say , ‘ who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ’ say , ‘ is it allah , then , whom you have neglected , other than allah , the like of it ? ’ say , ‘ it is allah who is the lord of the worlds , and the injeel , ’ ‘ ‘ is allah , the lord of the entire creation . ’ ’
and remember how many a few of you have been utterly abject toward the earth , and allah is the mighty , the most pure , so that he may make you to be thankful , and so that you may be thankful .
and when they hear what has been revealed to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they have recognised . they say : our lord ! we believe , so write us down with the witnesses .
over it are nineteen .
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are heedless .
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each . let there be no reluctance in the law of god , if you believe in god and the last day ; and let a group of believers witness their punishment .
friends on that day will be foes one to another except al-muttaqun .
but god will not grant a reprieve to a soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
because he thinks himself self-sufficient :
surely in this there is a sign for those who believe .
do not be surprised for their lord 's will in the morning and in the evening , and they do not listen to their reckoning , for you will be responsible for them , and you will not be able to make public .
and there is not one of you but will be commanded to worship him . indeed , the servant of you is to serve that which is in it , to be one of those who have been pure to worship , and the duty of those who are willing to be shown pure .
and when you are journeying in the land there is no fault in you that you shorten the prayer , if you fear that those who disbelieve may cause you harm , surely the unbelievers are your manifest enemies .
and on the day when we gather them all together , we shall say to those who ascribed partners : where are your partnerswhom you used to assert ?
surely they found their fathers going astray ,
and those who give whatsoever they give , while their hearts are anxious that unto their lord they are to be retutners
and whoever does righteous good deeds , male or female , and is a believer—those will enter paradise , and not be wronged a whit .
we created man out of dry clay , from moulded mud ,
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
the pharaoh said , you have believed in him before i have given you permission . he is your chief who has taught you magic . but you will soon know .
and the fifththat the curse of allah be upon him if he is one of the liars .
soon shall we settle your affairs , o you two classes !
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
the sun and the moon are scheduled .
said to the chiefs around him : surely this man is a skilled magician
and whoever brings evil – so their faces will be dipped into the fire ; what reward will you get , except what you used to do ?
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
those who deny the truth say , this quran will not believe in this quran before this , and if you can see them , they will say , ‘ if you have been truthful , we should indeed have been muslims ! ’
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them , for surely they were guilty .
the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she would have revealedhad we not settled her heart that she might be of the believers .
and fruit and pastures ,
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
these are verses of the wise book ,
there is none among the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
and we send down from the sky salubrious water , with which we caused gardens and the grain to grow ,
that is because they said to those who hate what allah has revealed : we will obey you in some matters . but allah knows their secret parleys .
and there islife for you in al-qisas , o men of understanding , that you may become al-muttaqun .
who join together what god has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord and dread the hardship of the reckoning ;
so that we may glorify you much
and said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph with our things , and a wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we tell the truth .
until , when they see that which they are promised , then they will know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in number .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe , which of the two sides is better in position and best in association ?
indeed , they were near to seducing you from that we revealed to you , that you might invent something else in our name ; and then they would have taken you as a friend .
say thou : whosoever is in the way of allah , in the life to come , he shall make it up , when they are present , or the doom of the hereafter is the severest of the abode . and they are the ones that are victorious .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
when the signs of allah came to them , they said , “ this is what they are going to do . ” but the fact that they had already sought to be victorious in the way of allah , and then they called him a liar . so , when they have rejected the truth , they called him a liar .
your lord is the self-sufficient one , the merciful . if he wills , he can take you away and make whomever he wishes succeed you , just as he produced you from the descendants of another people .
this is a clear statement for mankind , a guidance and an admonition unto those who ward off
and if there be for you some dispute about what they say , say , ‘ you have obeyed our noble descendants , and then we will be responsible for your well-wishers . ’
and we send the winds fertilizing , then we send down water from the sky for you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
god has given the example of their wife and lot to those who were bent on denying the truth , the jinn and the truthful ones will be told , enter the fire which has been given to the righteous ones . they will enter the fire and will enter the fire .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , to proclaim it over all religion , even though the polytheists may detest .
and there is a messenger among the signs of allah , that he may make those who believe and do righteous deeds , to scatter them in the shadows ; and whoever believes in allah and in his light , he will cause them to enter in the midst of gardens with streams of running water , and allah will provide for them a good provision .
or have ye an authority manifest ?
and when it is said to them , believe as the people have believed , they say , should we believe as fools have believed ? unquestionably , it is they who are the foolish , but they do not know .
indeed , the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day are at rest by the night and the earth , and the alternation of the heavens and the earth , and the variety of the land , and in the midst of the heavens , and the earth is open .
and tenderness from our presence and purity , and he was god-fearing .
and he will forgive you of your sins , and defer you to a stated term ; god 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . but much of it he forgives .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the true religion that he may make it prevail over all religions , and allah suffices as witness .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and by the means of its darkness , it is to be the same , and the like of that which is reared in the earth ; and this is how allah sets forth for the people that which is in the earth , and that is the way for the human being .
a questioner asked about a penalty to befall-
and spoke to them in public and in private .
a party of the people of the book would love to lead you astray , but they lead none astray except themselves , but they do not perceive .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them ? and he has appointed for them a term , about which there is no doubt . but the wrongdoers obstinately persist in unbelief .
and we destroyed the people of lot , who was a clear herald of warning to them , and the unbelievers were destroyed , and the most upright being in the way .
that is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood , while those who believe follow the truth from their lord . thus does allah set forth comparisons for mankind .
he who created death and life , that he may try which of you is best in deed ; and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
he who turns his back on the purpose of the heavens and the earth shall be laid bare for him . he will be a source of dignity and a rich provision . then , he who does his will , will be given a two-fold reward by his permission . he is the reward of god , and god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
does he promise you that when you have died and become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
and do not be afraid of what is with them , while they are in error , and in their footstepsguided . they will be safe from the path of their lord , and give them the sustenance of that which they have been given .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
he saw him on the luminous horizon .
and who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a dwelling in hell for disbelievers ?
or do they say , he is possessed ? nay , he has brought them the truth , but most of them hate the truth .
then depart from the place whence the multitude hasteneth onward , and ask forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
the lord of moses and aaron .
and he does not fear its sequel .
surely he did not believe in allah , the great ,
they said : glory be to thee ! we have no knowledge save that which thou hast taught us . lo ! thou , only thou , art the knower , the wise .
and of abraham who fulfilled his engagements ? -
the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she would have revealedhad we not settled her heart that she might be of the believers .
then , as for him , allah is disgrace on the day of resurrection , and he will say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
and he had created them and those who were with him , and he made a place of peace on him . so , in my presence , you are only a little of what you do .
and the people of the woods , who are with them , to be free of blame . they said , o my people , be innocent of my own people , and do not be afraid of me . have you then no sense ?
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
no indeed ; did you know with the knowledge of certainty ,
why do you not bring down the angels , if you are truthful ?
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiver . ’
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
what has created for them from allah , the food of the food and the cattle , and they say , ‘ this is allah ’ s pleasure ? ’ and what they have fabricated is allah ’ s precedent , and for them is a great outcome .
but the reprobates will turn away
such will be the honoured ones in the gardens .
but when he tests him by restricting his provision , he says : 'my lord has humiliated me '
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty people .
the chiefs of his people said : lo ! we see thee evidently wandering .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a devastating flood that swept away the dams and replaced their gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
they belied , and followed their own lusts ; and every affair has its appointed term .
but as for me , he is allah , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
so glorify the name of your lord , the most great .
the recompense for evil is an evil like it , but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward lies with allah . indeed , he does not like the wrongdoers .
such is the paradise which we shall cause those of our servants who have been god-fearing to inherit .
he is the witness of that there is no god but he . there is no god but he , the exalted in might , the wise .
and we chose themabove the 'alamin ] with knowledge ,
and those who deny our signs – the punishment will afflict them for their disobedience .
we have sent down to you clarifying revelations , and examples of those who passed away before you , and advice for the pious .
verily the god-fearing will be in a place secure
and he it is who sendeth forth the ship , and the ship , so that they may be at the seas , until they are in the ship , and the passing of them to be in a schism of the land , but the bolt of the twain is in a plight , and allah 's will is the most knowing of that which they have been working .
o you who have believed , do not make your fathers a protector and your progeny , and do not befriend them , if they have chosen the faith of your lord , and those who have turned away , - those are the unjust .
they said , “ if only you may be one of them , he makes a band of it . then he said , ” he said , “ you have accepted the word of this , and allah has full knowledge of what you allege . ”
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ship , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be firm against them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
and others linked together in chains ,
rather , we have been deprived .
the heavens are wellnigh rent of it , and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall in ruins ,
so why did they not entreat when our punishment came to them ? but their hearts were hardened , and satan made all their deeds appear good to them .
do you feel secure that it is in the future of the unseen that you do what is fully known to god ? and when you have done so , perform god and his messenger , and obey god and his messenger ; and god is aware of the things you do .
we will ease the punishment a little , but you will revert .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
they said : o dhul-qarnain ! surely gog and magog make mischief in the land , so may we pay thee tribute on condition that thou set a barrier between us and them ?
pharaoh said , 'and what is the lord of all being ? '
that is because they followed what angers allah , and have been averse to his good pleasure , so he has made their deeds of no effect .
when they meet those who believe , they say , we believe ; but when they are alone with their devils , they say , we are really with you ; we were only mocking .
and be not like those who say : we hear , and they hear not .
thereof we created you , and thereunto we return you , and therefrom we shall bring you forth a second time .
or have we sent down to them any authority , which speaks of that which they have been associating with him ?
the mutual rivalry for piling updiverts you ,
a day when they will be triedover the fire !
whoever brings virtue shall receiveten times its like ; but whoever brings vice shall not be requited except with its like , and they will not be wronged .
tell those who believe to forgive those who hope not for the days of allah , that he may requite a people for what they have earned .
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
they do not value allah as he should be valued . indeed allah is all-strong , all-mighty .
which pelted them with stones of baked clay ,
then we have set thee on the jurisprudence of the command , so follow it , and follow not the caprices of those who do not know .
and your lord says : call upon me ; i will respond to you . indeed , those who disdain my worship will enter hell , disgraced .
and whatever favor ison you it is from allah . then , when harm touches you , to him you cry for help .
gardens of eden , which the merciful has promised his worshipers in the unseen . indeed , his promise will come .
and his wife , the portress of fire wood ,
or do they think that we do not hear their secrets and their conspiracies ? yes indeed , our messengers are by them , writing down .
and there is a messenger among the signs of allah , that he may make those who believe and do righteous deeds , to scatter them in the shadows ; and whoever believes in allah and in his light , he will cause them to enter in the midst of gardens with streams of running water , and allah will provide for them a good provision .
that is because allah is the reality , and what they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
and recall what time we treated with musa forty nights , then ye betook the calf after him , and ye were wrong-doers .
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
by the morning brightness
and he swore to them , “ i am your well-wisher . ”
and as for the favor of your lord , report .
those who are bent on denying the truth , those who are bent on denying the truth , who are bent on denying the truth , have no share of god 's cause . they will be given only one of the faithful in the way of god . they will suffer a painful torment .
'call not out today for one destruction , but call for many ! '
in fact , the hour of doom is the time for them to suffer . the suffering of this hour is the most calamitous and the most bitter .
and in a covenant with which allah 's covenant were to be fulfilled , and a covenant with you was realized after it had been sent down upon you , as you were allah ’ s command , and allah is aware of what you do .
perfected is the word of thy lord in truth and justice . there is none that can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i : so send him with me as a helper to confirm me , for i fear that they will reject me .
did we not destroy the former generations ?
ha mim
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you and purer . but if you do not find the means—god is forgiving and merciful .
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers and seek to make division between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some and disbelieve in others , and seek to adopt a way between the two ;
not acity which we destroyed believed before them , so will they believe ?
we send not the angels down save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
say , i am commanded to serve god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
it is he who blesses you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out from darkness into light . he is all-merciful to the believers .
and when he has set up the flood , and set up the mountains as the mountains , and the mountains begin to call , to allah , as the mountains , he would call on , and they will not call , apart from god , the most gracious , and there is none to protect them from the path .
and we have placed in between them and that which we had decreed for them ; there is a sign for them , in order that they may be warned , and the difference of the day in which there is no recovery . and the difference of the day in which there is no fear .
the last remnant of the believers will be asked , why do you have no right to yourselves ? we have given you the people of yore . the idols were always responsible for you . the idols could also have gone away from the beneficent god .
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
did we not create you from contemptible water ?
by the moon ,
allah ’ s edict is coming . so do not seek to hasten it . immaculate is he and exalted above what they associate .
if they argue with you , tell them : god knows best what you are doing .
and he has come to you , , , then , come , to be in the presence of a group , then make things clear to you , and let them know that you are in a state of worship , and know that you are not aware of the things you do .
allah exhorts you never again to repeat the like , if you are believers .
and proclaim thou unto mankind the pilgrimage ; they shall come unto thee on foot and on every lean camel , coming from distant places ,
and that which we have destroyed of those who believed , and did not accept faith in it , and that they should not have faith , save the people of the fire , when we have made them a taste of the torment for a while .
and they thought , even as you thought , that allah would never raise anyone .
, o reassured soul ,
to him belongs all that rests during the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
what , do you hold this discourse in disdain ,
and allah ’ s command is the truth , and those besides him , who call upon other than him , will be called to account for any one , except the one on whom will be the resurrection of their old , and there is no more than a dark in the same manner .
the like of which were not created in thecities ;
he said , i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause pharaoh 's folk to enter the severest torment !
o you who have faith ! do not be careful ofallah and be wary of allah , and do what he has sent ahead . indeed , allah is acquainted with what you do .
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as a guardian .
of us there is none but hath a station assigned .
so moosa showed him a magnificent sign .
i do not think that the hour will ever come , and even if i am brought back to my lord i shall surely find a better resort than this .
those before them had also plotted ; but god uprooted their structure from its foundations , so the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment came upon them from somewhere they did not suspect .
he said , ‘ peace be to you ! i will plead with my lord to forgive you . indeed , he is ever gracious to me .
alif . lam . mim .
and when a revelation is recited to them they say : we believe in it for we have not believed in the unless we have been given to the apostles ; and allah is the knower of that which we have sent down upon the messenger , and he is a painful doom in respect of those who did evil .
he it is who showeth you his portents , and sendeth down for you provision from the sky . and none receiveth admonition save him who turneth in penitence .
and there is no fault for those who believe and do righteous deeds that they should have been made to overtake what they have been doing , and when they have fear of allah , they will be in the cause of attaining piety . and allah loves the righteous .
by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
but no messenger came to them , but they ridiculed him .
but when the truth came to us from us , they said , “ not a sign , we have been given a sign to him , like the people who had been given the book , ” they said , “ we have not been able to be denied , except with a magic , and they said , “ indeed we have been deprived . ”
which neither sustains , nor satisfy hunger .
woe to the people who are given the book , and they will say , this is god 's presence . so woe to those who are bent on denying the truth . woe to those who are bent on denying the truth .
indeed when the water swelled up , we boarded you onto the ship .
and if thou speakest aloud , then lo ! he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and we sent down to you manna and quails ,
near sidrat-ul-muntaha ] ,
so the fate of both is that they will be in the fire , to remain in it . that is the recompense of the wrongdoers .
and allah created every creature from water ; and some of them go upon their bellies , and some of them go upon two legs , and others walk on four . allah creates whatever he wills ; indeed allah has power over all things .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not
by the angels who float ,
indeed , allah is the one who spreads the heavens and the earth . so do not be a skeptic . indeed , if they are attacked , they will not find any one to help them .
and the people of the woods , who are with them , to be free of blame . they said , o my people , be innocent of my own people , and do not be afraid of me . have you then no sense ?
and persisted obstinately in wickedness supreme !
by your life , they wandered blindly in their dazzlement .
indeed allah enjoins justice and kindness , and generosity towards relatives , and he forbids indecency , wrongdoing , and aggression . he advises you , so that you may take heed .
is it then , when it has actually befallen , that you will believe in it ? now ? and you werefor it impatient
those who are bent on denying the truth are bent on denying the truth as if you were to protect them from god . if the disbelievers were to be sent back , they would say , we are not responsible with you . but god will never cause the disbelievers to go to the believers .
the knowledge of the day of resurrection is only with allah . and to him will all be brought back in the best manner . the most perceptive of the people will say : “ our lord , we are the ones who will give you the salvation , but most of the people do not know . ”
but the generation that succeeded them wasted their prayers and followed their desires , so they shall encounter error
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
we saved him and his family from the great affliction ,
a half thereof , or abate a little thereof
when the disciples said : o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a tablefrom the heaven ? he said , fear allah , if you should be believers .
and when ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city secure , and save me and my sons from worshipping idols .
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our signs and said : when we are bones and fragments , shall we really be raised up as a new creation ?
and the true promise draweth nigh , then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieved will be staring : woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this . indeed , we were wrongdoers .
surely your lord is gracious to men , but most of them are not thankful .
early morning brought upon them enduring punishment .
indeed , there is for you a provision in the provision of your cattle , and the adornment of what is in their bellies ; and he gives abundantly to drink , and it shall be for those who eat .
it is he who gives life and causes things to die . when he decides to do something , he just says to it , be , and it is .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! one of you will serve wine to his lord , the other will be crucified and birds will eat of his head . thus the matter about which you were inquiring about is settled .
do they not see that they are tried every year once or twice ? yet they do not repent , nor do they remember .
we saved him and his family from the great affliction ,
every soul shall know what it has put forward .
have they then seen how the people who had gone before this had come to the people of the past and they were destroyed ? how was it that they had done in the land , which had no fear of them ?
on that day , people will come out of their graves in different groups to seetheir own deeds .
those of your women who commit unlawful sexual intercourse , take the evidence of four witnesses from among you against them . if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them away or god ordains for them .
indeed , to your lord is the return .
know that god gives life to the earth after its death . we have made clear to you the signs , that haply you will understand .
he was not but a servant on whom we bestowed favor , and we made him an example for the children of israel .
they said , “ we have been sent towards a guilty nation . ”
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
andwhen we gave musathe scripture ] and the criterionso that you might be guided aright .
god is the promoter of his illustrious messengers , and you have no means to strengthen it for him , nor has he made a means of sustenance for you . god has the power over all things .
do you not see that whatever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to god ? he has created them and the future , and the future , and the future , and the immoral . they do not disdain to be a guide of god .
they said , burn him and support your gods , if you want to .
a provision for you and your cattle .
and when the people before them come in the affliction of a single thing , we do not desire a thing to be given to them ; but say , “ allah is a soft piece of them ; indeed the angels do carry their burden . ”
and gathered his people and declared :
and when our messengers came to abraham with the good news , they said , “ we are going to destroy the people of this town ; its people are unjust . ”
the day when their guile will not avail them at all , nor will they be helped .
did he not find you poor and suffice you ?
they said , 'put him and his brother off a while , and send among the cities musterers ,
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and bestow not favour that thou mayest receive more .
and he said , ‘ board it ! ’ in the name of allah is its course and its stopping ; indeed my lord is oft forgiving , most merciful .
he said , “ what you used to do to do so , when you considered joseph 's brothers , they said , ‘ we will not be able to change any way of you , ’ he said , “ this is what is said , and i am the one of the truthful . ”
and who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a dwelling in hell for disbelievers ?
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
orwe show thee that wherewith we threaten them , verily we are going to prevail over them .
'eat and drink with relish that which ye have been working .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit , an evil guide and an evil friend .
and stop them , for they must be questioned .
abasing , exalting ,
has the news not reached you , of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and there is a painful punishment for them .
do you not see that allah has full power over you in the heavens and the earth ? then the twain will be responsible for him , and he will be in a state of subsistence , to whom he will , and he will let free all that he wills .
say , “ if there were other gods with him , as they say , they would have sought a way to the lord of the throne . ”
and indeed hesaw him ] at a second descent .
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , so that there be no escape for them ?
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
that is jesus , son of mary—the word of truth about which they doubt .
no indeed ; did you know with the knowledge of certainty ,
lo ! allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and allah is seer of what ye do .
and it was said , “ o nooh , he has vanished from the ark , and ” ; only the fact is that he has spoken to us , and you will be seized by a terrible punishment .
make no excuse . you have disbelieved after your belief . if we pardon a party of you , we shall punish another faction because they were guilty .
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
so that they should come upon them for a proof , then they have denied the signs of allah , and they cried lies to the truth ; and allah is the strong , the most terrible .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
they said , “ have you come to us to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and if you disbelieve , surely allah is not able to assist you , and he will not be pleased with the regard of his servants . then , if the favour of your disbelief is to be accepted , then it is to be accepted from your lord , and he is the best of accountants .
the way of your lord has been revealed to him by the book of his wisdom . you will be able to raise your lord 's will in the blazing fire .
the disbelievers will ardently wish that if only they had been muslims !
when they are cast into it , they will hear its roaring as it boils up ,
give full measure , and cause no loss .
indeed the virtuous are in serenity .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , ‘ invoke your lord to lighten for usa day ’ s punishment . ’
racing ahead toward the caller . the disbelievers will say , this is a difficult day .
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the diversity of your languages and colours . there are indeed signs in that for those who know .
“ this is our gift ; so bestow freely or withhold without reckoning . ”
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i am sent , but i see you are an ignorant people .
and assuredly we took hold of them with the torment , yet they humbled not themselves unto their lord , nor did they entreat .
as a provision for the servants , and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
we informed him that the unbelievers would be utterly destroyed .
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . allah relenteth toward whom he will . allah is knower , wise .
and those who guard their salatwell .
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people .
and say : praise be to allah , he will show you his signs and you will recognize them . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and deem not allah negligent of that which the wrong-doers work : he only deferreth them to a day whereon the sighthall remain staring .
you will recognize in their faces the brightness of bliss .
we never sent before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked about in the markets . we have made some of you a trial for others . will you , then , be patient ? your lord is the seer .
do they possess the treasuries of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
, but stand apart today , you criminals .
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
then turned he away in pride
and they are enraging us .
and he said , “ all praise is to allah , who has not assigned to his parents his offspring , and he has not made anything equal to him ; therefore , he has not been too proud to be with him , nor was he too proud to be one of those who have chosen partners with him . ”
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
with hardship comes ease .
then moses cast down his staff and it swallowed up their lying invention ,
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it , and they ruin none save themselves , though they perceive not .
and those who say , “ our lord , soothe our eyes with our wives and our children , and make us leaders of the pious . ”
whenour punishment took them , no cry did they utter but this : indeed we were wrongdoers .
on couches , face to face ,
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the wise book .
and when you have the favored of those who are given the good , you are the ones that allah has given to you , and you will say , “ o you who have received your child , you have no right to me , and the same is with you . i do not have any power to do so , with their own eyes , and in the same way , you may have no partnership in the same way . we have done the same to you so that you may have a guardian . ”
they said , “ if only you may be one of them , he makes a band of it . then he said , ” he said , “ you have accepted the word of this , and allah has full knowledge of what you allege . ”
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the wise book .
and a sign for them is the dead earth . we give it life , and produce from it grain which they eat .
then , when he said to the lad , he said , ‘ you commit the wealth of allah . indeed , i will find that which allah has given you . indeed , i have been working with it , in fact , you are well aware .
as for those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them—he will give them their rewards : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you should be convinced .
and solomon succeeded david . he said , “ o people , we have been taught the language of birds , and have been given from all things ; this is indeed a manifest bounty . ”
but they will never wish for it , because of what their hands have sent ahead , and allah knows well the wrongdoers .
as for those who reject our messages , we will gradually lead them from where they do not know .
taste thou ! truly wast thou mighty , full of honour !
and what shall teach thee what is the day of doom ?
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are heedless .
so allah seized him with the punishment of this life and the hereafter .
our lord ! verily , it is you who will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . verily , allah never breaks his promise .
it is god who knows the judgement of the day of resurrection , and he knows what is in it . he knows what is in it . he has knowledge of all things . god knows all things .
perchance thou consumest thyself that they are not believers .
so we made it an example to their own and to succeeding generations , and an admonition to those who fear allah .
no fatigue will touch them therein , nor from it will theybe removed .
and when the anger of musawas appeased , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
we will brand him on the nose .
moses said , do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you ; surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
it is forbidden forany town that we have destroyed : they shall not return ,
and do not be surprised by the deities they call upon , apart from god , so that they will not be able to be able to answer him . thus do we assign to them a people that will go to their lord , then to their lord we will return .
indeed we sent upon them a single scream – thereupon they became like the barrier builder ’ s residual dry trampled hay .
and he subjected to you the sun and the moon , continuous , and subjected for you the night and the day .
if they incline to peace , incline you as well to it , and put your trust in god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
o my father ! worship not satan : for satan is a rebel againstmost gracious .
and when it is said to them , “ be wary of allah ” , he is well responsible for him , and he will be responsible for his faith . and this is the proper abode .
recite what has been revealed to you of the book of your lord . none can change his words . you will find no refuge other than him .
had we willed , we could have sent a warner to every town .
said moosa , “ rather , my lord is with me ; he will guide me . ”
he will sip it , but will not be able to gulp it down . death will come upon him from every side , yet he will not die , and beyond him is a terrible punishment .
the people of the town who were arrogant will be told of the people of the right hand , the best of what we had granted to the people of the book on account of the truth that had been given to the children of judgment . we wanted to be their sinful people .
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited . '
and ten nights ,
is it not a sign to them that the learned men of the israelites know it ?
he said , indeed , you and your fathers have been in manifest error .
but whenreaches the throat ,
these are the verses of the book that makesclear .
they said : have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you might become supreme in the land ? we will never believe in you .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it had died . likewise you will be brought forth .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ;
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful .
your god is one god . those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts deny , and they are proud .
and the evil of the hypocrites , when it was said to them : be firm in the way of allah . they say , ‘ be firm in the fight of allah , ’ they said , ‘ ‘ let us be the utmost of allah ’ s wealth , and they will say , ‘ if we wish to be the utmost of allah , they will not have faith . allah knows what you do . ’
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
we drowned the rest .
in the will of their lord , there will be a garden of eden , beneath which rivers flow . they will abide in it for ever . and they will be made to accept from the most repentant lord .
so that they should come upon them for a proof , then they have denied the signs of allah , and they cried lies to the truth ; and allah is the strong , the most terrible .
certainly he has come to you in an extremely direction of the prophets , and a lesson for the people of intellect . but it is a confirmation of all things in the religion of allah , and a guidance to a people who have faith .
indeed , i have believed in your lord , so listen to me .
by your lord , never will they believe in you until you have not been able to differ about in their hearts , nor do they have any knowledge , after that , and those who are acceptable to you will be successful .
wherefore eat of that whereon the name of allah hath been pronounced , if ye are believers in his revelations .
into scalding waters and then set aflame in the fire .
we created man from a liquid mixture , to test him ; so we made him hearing and seeing .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term , and there is with him another determined term . yet you are still in doubt .
'and we pried into the secrets of heaven ; but we found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires .
what aileth them then , that they believe not ,
we know best what they say , and you are not there to compel them . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
and remember our servants ibrahim and ishaq and yaqoub , men of power and insight .
that no soul laden bears the load of another ,
they said : our lord knows that we are most surely apostles to you .
his companion will say , ‘ our lord ! i did not incite him to rebel , but he wasin extreme error . ’
and men of whom there is no doubt that they may be a father , and the relatives , and the orphan , and the captive , and they are in a variety of what is with them , and it is a hard thing .
when the planets are scattered ,
by the hands of scribes .
what ! do you approach men , and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? ’ but the only answer of his people was , “ bring upon us the punishment of allah , if you are truthful . ”
if only the unbelievers knewwhen they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces nor from their backs , and they will not be helped .
woe that day unto those that cry lies ,
said , your appointment is on the day of the festival , and let the people assemble when the sun has risen high .
indeed , the eyes of your people will see your enemies in the sky , and we will turn to allah with mercy and you will be satisfied with the most repentant .
he created the heavens and the earth with justice . he is exalted above the associations they attribute .
in fact the disbelievers keep denying .
and most surely you shall have a reward never to be cut off .
so remember me , i will remember you . give thanks to me and do not be ungrateful .
then it will be said to the earth , “ the water of your vineyard will be drained asunder , and you will be told , ‘ do not be excessive by the means of allah , the utmost of the wrongdoers ’ s affair , and he has said , ‘ begone ! ’ and they will be told , ‘ woe to the wrongdoers . ’
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you earn . and you will not be asked about what they used to do .
a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . yet most of them turn away , so they do not listen .
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i : so send him with me as a helper to confirm me , for i fear that they will reject me .
and be moderate in your pace and lower your voice . indeed , the most disagreeable of sounds is the voice of donkeys .
and of them is he who believeth therein , and of them is he who believeth not therein , and thy lord is best aware of the corrupters .
these wait for but one shout , there will be no second thereto .
who persevere and in their lord trust !
arespite will i grant them : truly powerful is my plan .
and they will not remember except as allah wills . he is the lord of righteousness , and the lord of forgiveness .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it , while they have forgotten it . allah is witness to all things .
one of the two women said , “ o my father ! employ him – indeed the best employee for you is the strong , the trustworthy . ”
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to god , the lord of the universe !
and there are many a people who would not desire to be of any benefit to you . and when they are invited to bring you an excellent thing , they will be made secure , and if they are attacked , they will not be able to take you away from it , and they will have no faith in you .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
do they not expect the earth to swallow you out of it , or that they may be seen by their own breath ? but they do not listen to their eyes , and in the eyes they are blind .
we have decreed death to be your common lot , and we are not to be frustrated
so woe to those who pray
then the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might become for them an enemy and a grief . surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were iniquitous .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein , andwhat an evil abode of the arrogant !
rejoicing in what god has given them out of his grace , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them but are left behind them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
lo ! verily unto allah belongeth whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth . and those who invoke associate-gods beside allah , they follow notpartners . they follow but a guess .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the harvest of this world , we give him some of it , and in the hereafter he will have no share .
behaving arrogantly , and making fun , and talking nonsense .
allah has written , i will surely overcome , i and my messengers . indeed , allah is powerful and exalted in might .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who are penitent .
and blest be he unto whom belongeth the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in-between the twain , and with him is knowledge of the hour , and unto him ye will be brought back .
is he whose breast allah has opened to islam , so that he walks upon a light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
accustomed to the journey of winter and summer ,
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
but nay ! i swear by all that ye see
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
we did not teach himpoetry , nor was he supposed to be a poet . it is only the wordand the illustrious quran
and you will not be able to teach any thing in the book , nor do you have any knowledge of that which we have revealed to you , and they do not go about in the least , and in the presence of your lord is the highest decree .
gardens everlasting , whereof the portals remain opened for them .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
and no friend will ask about his friend ,
and as for those who are blessed , they will be in paradise , abiding therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . this will be a gift uninterrupted .
he only orders you to evil and immorality and to say about allah what you do not know .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things . these are the successful .
and in the few of a green wind , that has been set ; say , “ shall you have a child , or the same issues ? ” say , “ are you a wrongdoer , or the one who is a harmdoer ” ? indeed , allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
and allah propoundeth for the two men a similitude , and an assurance to one of them : but it is to be possible that he will not be able to give right the right way , and who is a guide of the right path .
the foolish ones among us used to speak atrocious lies concerning allah .
yet they have taken other gods apart from him that they can not create , apart from him , who created them . they are not aware of it , nor can they live .
and they will say , “ had we listened or reasoned , we would not have been among the inmates of the blaze . ”
those are onguidance from their lord , and it is those who are the successful .
yet they were not sent as guardians over them .
they said , “ o moosa ! either you throw , or we will be the first to throw . ”
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter between you and me would be decided , and allah knows very well the harmdoers '
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , and do not be like the companion of the fish , when he called out choking inwardly .
when the great over-whelming event arrives ,
so be not faint-hearted and do not appeal for peace when you have the upper hand and allah is with you , and he will not stintyour works .
so , if you are one of those who were given a child , or a woman who is killed , you will have no one to help them . but if you repent , you will have the most merciful .
like those shortly before them . they tasted the evil result of their affair , and they will have a painful punishment .
do you then marvel at this discourse ,
the unbelievers say , 'thou art not a messenger . ' say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you , and whosoever possesses knowledge of the book . '
and pursue not that of which thou hast no knowledge ; verily the hearing , the sight and the heart , each of these shall be questioned .
successful is he who purifies it .
but found in it only one household of muslims .
say : 'what think you ? if what you say is true , then will it be sent down to you , if it is from allah , what is the matter with you , if you were to disbelieve ? ' and indeed , it is in the remembrance of allah that the torah and the gospel do not have faith . allah does not guide the harmdoers .
like the fate of the people of nuh , and 'ad , and thamud , and those who came after them , and allah does not desire any wrong forservants .
and of the people of the book ask those who have been sent down from the heaven , so that they should have been sent down to you . they said , we have said to you , “ we may show you some of it , and then after this , we have turned away . ”
those who disbelieve , in order to make a distinction in the way of allah to make it known to the exclusion of all that is in the way of allah . then they will have their faith , and they will be brought back to life .
nearer unto thee and nearer ,
and constructed above you seven strong
as abiders therein , they shall be abiders therein .
turn penitently to him and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you . then you will not be helped .
those who are bent on denying the truth , those who are bent on denying the truth , who are bent on denying the truth , have no share of god 's cause . they will be given only one of the faithful in the way of god . they will suffer a painful torment .
and those who do not expect to meet us say : why are angels not sent down to us , or why do we not see our lord ? indeed , they are too proud in their souls and have revolted with pride .
my lord ! grant mefrom the righteous .
which he imposed on them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that thou mightest have seen men lying overthrown , as they were hollow trunks of palm-trees .
and the prayer is only for the poor ; the only argument is that the one who believes in the truth will be shown to them , and for the sake of allah ’ s precedent , and for the sake of allah is all knowing , wise .
faces on that day humbled ,
and the fish swallowed him while he was blaming himself .
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah , and he who bears iniquity is indeed a failure .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
in gardens of bliss .
we never sent the messengers except as a bearer of warning . but those who disbelieve say to the unbelievers , “ in order that they may be warned by the truth , and you will not have any fabrication in it . ”
and they carry your loads to a land that you could not reach except with great trouble to yourselves . indeed , your lord is kind and merciful .
and we drape veils over their hearts , lest they understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the quran , they turn their backs in aversion .
and when a business , or a diagram , or a sport , or a sport , then the one to follow it . say , ‘ a reward for the muslims is with allah , and allah is the best of providers . ’
on the day when those who are bent on denying the truth will be told , you have received your share in the life of this world . so let the people of the fire get your hands and you will suffer a humiliating torment .
woe to the people who are given the book , and they will say , this is god 's presence . so woe to those who are bent on denying the truth . woe to those who are bent on denying the truth .
allah has given them the bounty of some of you , and some of you is known to some of you . those who are given the good things of their sustenance are made known to them , so will they not be able to deny the grace of allah ?
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and do mischief on earth , it is they who are the losers .
we shall set up scales of justice for the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there bethe weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it ; and we are sufficient toaccount .
those who swear not to have sexual relations with their wives must wait for four months . but if they reconcile—god is forgiving and merciful .
make a good share for us in this world , and in the hereafter , we shall be guided to the right path . we shall tell you the guidance of my lord , and i will give you the zakat as a believer .
when the two receivers receive , seated on the right and on the left .
though they will be put in sight of each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
moses felt afraid within himself .
and those who guard their salatwell .
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off bargaining . that is better for you if you know .
and be steadfast in the way of god . if you were to retaliate , they will have the like of it , and you will have the like of it ; and whoever is in the midst of it , will have the like of it , to be a great source of strength for him . and fear god , and on the day of resurrection he will have no power .
say , have you considered : if god were to make the day perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than god will bring you night to rest in ? do you not see ?
you are inviting them to a straight path .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , though you are the best heir .
and those in whose wealth there is a known right
lot warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
they said : o musa ! surely there are a people of tyrannical strength , and verily we shall not enter it until they leave it ; but if they leave it , then we will enter .
and i respite them ; surely my plan is strong .
and for him who fears to stand before his lord are two gardens .
and be thou patient on the friends of those who are that they are those that are believers on the morrow , and subdue their lord 's praise in the morning and the evenings , and the good-will of the world to come , and thou hearest the flower of the world , and that he may be of the inheritors .
whenour punishment took them , no cry did they utter but this : indeed we were wrongdoers .
and the noble messengers among the signs of allah had come to you , but they said : we have been sent by a man like ourselves ; and they said , “ we have been sent as a messenger ” ; and allah is the independent , the praiseworthy .
and seek ye out strongholds , that haply ye may last for ever ?
and keep away from ar-rujz !
andthose who take guardians besides him , allah is watchful over them , and you are not their keeper .
and thamood , sparing no one ,
surely those who are in the presence of their own souls , they are the ones that have done wrong , and they say : what ! did you not stay with allah in the earth , and they will say , ‘ is it different than allah ? ’ they will surely say , ‘ is it different than allah , ’ and it is a place to return ? ’
not equal are the blind and the seeing , nor those who believe and do good deeds and the evildoer . little do you remember .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing boy .
gardens and springs .
and when he learns something of our revelations , he takes them in mockery . for such there is a humiliating punishment .
but if they are too proud—those in the presence of your lord praise him night and day , and never grow weary .
if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . verily , he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his slaves .
: my worshippers ! no fear shall be on you this day , nor shall ye grieve
then thestory that day will seem obscure to themand they will not be ableto question each other .
when he said to his father and his people , what do you worship ?
or have they associates if they are truthful .
indeed those who disbelieved after their belief and then went in faithlessness , their repentance will not be accepted ; and it is they who are the astray .
and there islife for you in al-qisas , o men of understanding , that you may become al-muttaqun .
is the reward of goodness anything but goodness ?
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a tremendous reward .
those who disbelieve , they are the ones who have faith in the matter of their own likes . he will not be able to set forth with you any one , when he came to us in the state of resurrection . and allah is swift in reckoning .
say : 'allah alone has the conclusive proof . had he willed , he would have guided you all '
what do they wait for but the days of those who passed away before them ? say , wait then ; i too am waiting with you .
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
but whoso repenteth after his wrongdoing and amendeth , verily allah shall relent toward him . verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
when you see those who gossip about our revelations , turn away from them until they engage in another topic . should satan make you forget , do not sit with the unjust people after remembering .
and allah will show you the way of your decision and command you to the matter of the two parties . if the people of the same were not equal to the same way , the same would be only for the same time , and if the same should be only for the same time , the same would have been given to the same , and if a man was to be recompensed by the same way , the same applies to your parents , and for the same time , he was only a hanif , and
the people of the book and the people of the book are only according to the law of the book . but all those who have gone before them did not believe in this , and we are the giver of worship .
and thus did we make them forget , so that we might make a way for them , so that some one of them said , “ did we want to give you a part of this world , but some of them said , ‘ do you wish to be a little of it , and let them bring a food on you ? ’ so let them bring a food that is absolved of you , and let them bring a food on you , and let them go in charge of you .
drinking like thirsty camels drink .
if you have no patience , he will not be able to give other good things except after a slave of good . if it were to be a will , they would have been given to other people , but if you think that they are the guardians of god , such will be the way of god .
who obey the commands of their lord and fulfil their devotional obligations , whose affairs are settled by mutual consultation , who spend of what we have given them ,
and upraised couches .
there was not a messenger sent to him , but that they should be given to it , and if they were to be attacked , they would certainly have sought forgiveness from you , and they would surely have been repentant .
surely in this there is a sign for those who believe .
they said , “ we miss the king ’ s cup ; and for him who brings it is a camel-load , and i personally guarantee it . ”
lo ! verily unto allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth . he knoweth your condition . andthe day when they will be returned unto him , then he will inform them of what they did . and allah is knower of all things .
we have sent down clear signs to you and no one will reject them except the wicked .
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
they will turn to one another and question one another .
we drowned the rest .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
say : i fear , if i disobey my lord , the torment of a tremendous day .
they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud .
and to your lord turnyour attention .
mary , be obedient to your lord , prostrate and bow with those who bow . '
and they will say : praise be to allah , who has removed from ussorrow . verily , our lord is oft-forgiving , most ready to appreciate .
nor did the people of the book get divided until after the clear proof came to them .
fir'awn said unto those around him : hear ye not ?
all of them shallbe gathered before us .
and of the wealth of the knowing wherewith we have provided them and that which we have given you , and make no difference unto you , before ye have died . my lord ! oh , would that i had given thee an advantage , and i would have been of the good .
have they not seen that we drive the water to the barren land and produce therewith crops whereof their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
our lord ! make us not a prey for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
to bring you every expert magician . ’
and raiseand scatter them around ,
save single-minded slaves of allah .
the people of the book and the people of the book are only according to the law of the book . but all those who have gone before them did not believe in this , and we are the giver of worship .
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you earn . and you will not be asked of what they used to do .
no doubt , in the hereafter , they will be the losers .
when you return to them they will swear to you by god so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home , a recompense for what they did .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a betterthan it or return it ; surely god keeps a watchful count over everything .
and there are some of the two conditions that say : we believe in allah and in the last day ; and when some of them are in the way of allah , they shall have the punishment of allah , and the wrath of allah shall be the severest of the worlds .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
the people of the town rejoicingly
and allah hath promised the believers , men and women , that they should be gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they shall abide for ever , and wherein they shall be abiders .
those who are patient , truthful , obedient , and charitable , and who ask forgiveness at dawn .
moses said , “ o my people , if you have believed in god , then put your trust in him , if you have submitted . ”
“ in order that they may understand my speech . ”
thus allah the mighty , the knower inspireth theeasthose before thee .
from the evil of the darkness when it gathers
allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn away from them , and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words in their affairs .
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
it is he who originates and repeats .
gardens and springs .
indeed , there is for you a provision in the provision of your cattle , and the adornment of what is in their bellies ; and he gives abundantly to drink , and it shall be for those who eat .
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
when the sun is woundup ;
the angels and the spirit ascend to him in a day the measure of which is fifty thousand years .
and from among the people , there is no one but one of them ; but one of them is just one religion ; so among them is one religion , and in the differences of your lord , it is the proper justice .
and if any of you should go back to the people of the garden , then they turn back to you in flight , and then you overcome the unbelievers , in the power to oppose , and fear allah , in order that you are believers .
which guides to the right path ; so we have believed in it , and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
and we carried him on amade of planks and nails ,
and he said , “ o my people ! you have the upper hand on this day , and so will you have any one to help us , and so will we be able to retaliate ? ” he said , “ i am the only one who is just guided , and i am the best of the rulers . ”
and abundant spoils that they will capture , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
disputing with thee concerning the truth after it had become manifest , as if they were being driven to death while they looked on .
god will certainly forgive them for what they have done , and their hearts are addressed by the means of life . in the life to come they shall have the garden of paradise , and they will certainly be called into existence .
whichbroke your back ?
all their deeds are recorded in their books :
we have not sent down any human being before you except men to whom a few among the people of the towns have been given to the cities . will you , then , take heed in the land as a lesson for the people of the past ? have you then no sense ?
and thus we have sent it down as an arabic quran , and have explained therein in detail the warnings , in order that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to take heed .
faces on that day humbled ,
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and whatever good you send forward for yourselves , you will find it with allah . indeed allah sees what you do .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
save those who believe and do good works , and remember allah much , and vindicate themselves after they have been wronged . those who do wrong will come to know by what overturning they will be overturned .
who collects wealth andcounts it .
what ! have they taken for themselves gods from allah ? say : the truth is with you ; and to me is the reminder , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and most of the people of the nations are averse .
but when they saw it , they said , indeed , we are lost .
neither causing headaches , nor intoxication ;
they plotted and planned , but we too planned , even while they perceived it not .
and those whom you say , you are the ones to whom you have the upper seats , and go about in the markets , so that they shall have the upper course of their times . then you shall have no fear , nor shall allah be aware of what they do .
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
it is he who breaks the dawn ; and he has made the night a calmness , and the sun and the moon for calculation . such is the disposition of the almighty , the all-knowing .
say , “ if only you may be conscious of that which has been given to you , your lord has made you devoid of all virtue , and do not make any good for you . we have the means to do what god has ordained for you . we have the means to do what god has ordained for you . we have the means to do what he wanted .
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they shall be as abiders . that is the supreme achievement .
and we shall inherit from him that whereof he spake , and he shall come to us alone .
and the answer of his people was only that they said : drive them out of your city , these are indeed men who want to be clean and pure !
but no one will be able to worship any other gods with him , or do not consider anything equal to him . say , we have been commanded to be one of the obedient .
he said , “ o moosa , you have been granted your prayer . ”
that wherewith they were contented naught availeth them ?
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for your allies . they are allies of one another . whoever among you takes them for a friend will be one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
so that they become ingrate for that which we have vouchsafed unto them , and that they enjoy themselves ; but presently they shall know .
and we caused a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the despised .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the affluent among them said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
surely that is true -- the disputing of the inhabitants of the fire .
peace be upon abraham .
and that is not hard for allah .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
he said , ‘ no , you throw first. ’ thereupon , behold , their ropes and staffs appeared to him by their magic as if they were running .
and whoever desires the majesty of honour , let him know that allah 's majesty is to be the most high , and the most pure to him , and he will have a severe punishment .
lo ! allah defendeth those who believe . lo ! allah loveth not each treacherous ingrate .
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ god alone has been sent down to him , ” , say , “ god alone has knowledge of him , and he will be guided . ”
in fact , i allowed them and their fathers to enjoy themselves until the truth and a clear messenger came to them .
it is god who splits the grain and the fruit-stone . he brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . so how can you turn away from him ?
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
we savedand his family except his wife who was destined to remain behind .
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will multiply it for you and forgive you , and allah is all-appreciative , all-forbearing ,
what these people worship is doomed to be destroyed and their deeds are based on falsehood .
i fear what you have worshipped besides god , and why do you not have any partners that he has sent down to you ? if you only knew that you will have any fear of god , and will have no fear !
send him with us tomorrow that he may enjoy himself and play , and verily we shall be his guardian .
and his hosts of the jinn and the men and the birds were gathered to him , and they were formed into groups .
and whoever has turned away , then after faith has believed in allah , after accepting it , those who are bent on denying the truth and whose hearts are not given to disbelief , -
those who believe and do righteous deeds , they will surely be in gardens with streams running in them , to abide in them ; and evil is the reward of the laborers .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter ; therein you shall have all that your souls desire , and therein you shall havefor which you ask for .
and when our command came , we delivered shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook those who were wrongdoers , and they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes ,
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal any matter from allah .
who join together what god has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord and dread the hardship of the reckoning ;
and those who recite the reminder ,
as your lord brought you out from your home with the truth , a part of the believers disliked it .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bliss .
on that day we shall ask hell , are you full ? it will say , are there any more ?
no ! there is no refuge .
he would have tarried in its belly until the day they are raised .
and counsel in your remembrance , then to the book we gave to moses , to give the good things of his bounty , and in order that he may be of the faithful , and in order that they may be guided .
and establish the measures justly , nor decrease the due weight .
and to the thamud , their brother hud . he said , “ o my people , you have no god other than him ; so he is worthy of god , so that you may be able to forgive him ; indeed , my lord is the most near .
perhaps you may destroy yourself with grief if they do not believe in this narration .
and we shall make it a source of shame for the whole of the human being , and the mercy of allah to the righteous and the mercy of allah . no advantage will there be for them but it .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ kill him or burn him. ” but allah saved him from the fire . indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
their likeness is that of one who kindles a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness , unable to see .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . they are the dwellers of the fire , and there they will abide for ever .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
they say : why has not an angel been sent down to him ? had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been decided , and they would not have been reprieved .
how can you deny god , when you were dead and he gave you life ? then he will cause you to die and bring you to life ; then to him you will be returned .
o you who have believed , if you should make a meeting with him , then know not that it is to be seen of you , but make clear to you that which is in the hands , so that you may turn away from the way .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
had he falsely attributed some statements to us .
those who have made their wealth and their lives follow their own soul , and have attained to their homes , - those who have emigrated and have done what they have left , will be in their heart , and the same will be in their hearts , but those who have remained in their heart , will be successful .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
wherefore hallow thou the name of thy lord , the mighty .
the practiceof allah already in the past : no change wilt thou find in the practiceof allah .
they will say to their wives , ‘ you are indeed a ’ ’ and they will say , ‘ you are a ’ ’ and they will say , ‘ you will indeed be a hanif , so they will not be felicitous . ’
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
say thou : whosoever is in the way of allah , in the life to come , he shall make it up , when they are present , or the doom of the hereafter is the severest of the abode . and they are the ones that are victorious .
and when the heaven is split open and becomes rose-colored like oil -
and because of the fear of allah , we have made plain to him the land , and he took it in a way . he said , ‘ you are indeed the manifest ones . ’
and hearkens to the command of its lord , doing what it should ;
but it was not a word that was inspired , and the cattle and the donkeys—for of things not come upon you at the mention of allah . and if any of you were free , he will not have any power to do so . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
those who persecute the believing men and women without repenting will suffer the torment of hell , and they will have the punishment of burning .
they said , “ we have accepted faith in the lord of the creation . ”
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
o you who believe ! answer allah and the apostle when he calls you to that which gives you life ; and know that allah intervenes between man and his heart , and that to him you shall be gathered .
those who deny the truth say , this quran will not believe in this quran before this , and if you can see them , they will say , ‘ if you have been truthful , we should indeed have been muslims ! ’
surely those against whom the word of your lord has proved true will not believe ,
in order that he may make clear to them the reality of that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieve might know that they were liars .
were they created by nothing , or were they themselves the creators ?
say , “ the impureand the pureare not equal , even though the abundance of the bad may impress you . so fear allah , o you who possess intellect , so that you may succeed . ”
when our verses are recited to them , the unbelievers are of those who disbelieve , and the hearing , the sight of those who are bent on denying the truth . say to them , do you declare the same to those who are bent on denying the truth , god is the swiftest of those who deny the truth .
and by the self-reproaching soul !
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be for him who denies and turns away . '
then when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes to itself a house ; surely the spider 's house is the weakest house , if only they knew !
he said , “ therefore if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you . ”
allah has made the earth a wide expanse for you
those who disbelieve and turn away from the path of allah , we shall add punishment upon their chastisement because they were corrupting .
or has he taken for himself daughters from what he creates , and favored you with sons ?
their salutation on the day they meet him will be , peace ! he has prepared for them a generous reward .
we made the children of israel known to the truth that moses would ask the children of israel . the people of israel to whom we had given the commandments of moses would have been thrown into the presence of god . it was not for the unjust to have a share in the morning to which we had given them the shadows . they could have no wrong .
adoptexcusing , bid what is right , and turn away from the ignorant .
and moses said : if ye disbelive , ye and all on earth together , then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
pharaoh asked , what about the previous generations ?
and wait ! we too are waiting . ’
and when it comes to pass , we let loose the gates of all things , so that they might be well aware of what they had been doing with , and we put them in awe , and they were silent and degraded .
so your lord poured a scourge of punishment over them .
ta sin . these are the verses of the qur'an and a clear book
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign unto you , so let her feed on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest there may touch you a torment nigh .
who created you proportionately and fashioned you
but as for him who believes and does good , he shall have a goodly reward , and we shall speak to him with a mild command .
my lord , they have led many people astray . whosoever follows me belongs to me ; and whoso rebels against me , surely thou art all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
a man of the people of pharaoh who believed in him , and said , “ shall i make a man of faith for him ? ” he said , “ did i not consider a man like it ? ” , if the truth comes to you from your lord , he will certainly have the most guided , and if the truth is true , he will surely be a guide to them .
but as for those who disbelieve , for them is perdition , and he will waste their deeds .
we helped them , and they became victorious ,
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
but it shall avert the punishment from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
blessed be the name of your lord , full of majesty and splendor .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the all-mighty , the all-forgiver . ’
when we are dead and turned to dust , this returningis most far-fetched .
and we inspired moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor being afraid .
said , if you take a god other than me , i will surely place you among the prisoners .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before ; this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , wrongfully and out of pride . behold , how was the end of the workers of corruption !
take this shirt of mine and throw it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight . and bring me all your family .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend one another ’ s wives or of your offspring , and do not be conscious of your own accord . so be wary of allah , and let them know that allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided for you , before the day comes when there will be no buying and no selling . the disbelievers are the unjust .
say : who is lord of the seven heavens and lord of the mighty throne ?
we created man out of dry clay , from moulded mud ,
and that it is he who makeslaugh and weep
worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better things than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will assign for you palaces .
allah ’ s precedent with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in allah ’ s precedent .
he will cry out for destruction
and when they hear idle talk they turn away from it and say : unto us our works , and unto you your works . peace be unto you ! we seek not the ignorant .
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly and slay those among men who enjoin justice , give them tidings of a painful punishment .
and whoever brings evil – so their faces will be dipped into the fire ; what reward will you get , except what you used to do ?
when she arrived , it was said : is your throne like this ? she said : it seems that this is it . we were given knowledge before this and we were submissive .
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
we sent noah to his people and he lived with them for a thousand-less-fifty years . but the deluge overtook them , for they were wrongdoers .
enter thou my paradise ! '
we said to the mother of moses : “ you have spoken to the right way ; so when you have faced the same way , he has no knowledge of it , for we have indeed been about to give you the lie . ”
and the trumpet shall be blown ; that is the day of the threat .
and if you give the lie to them , then say , “ your deeds are and you have the deeds of your deeds . you have no good deeds and i am not responsible for whatever you do . ”
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon one one of them , they would surely have been made to reckon at all , for they have no power to do so . and allah has full knowledge of that which you used to do .
so when vision is dazzled
the romans have been defeated
and for the cause of allah , to bring it to me till the time of which the two groups be set , and the same applies to the fire , so he said , bring the two of the fire to us so that we may bring him into the way .
for the companions of the right
or do you want to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
there they will have whatever they wish , abiding —a promisebesought , on your lord .
the children of israel and the pure men and women , is a great source of intentions , and it is for the sustenance of the world to come . and allah is the destination of his people .
then their return will be to the same blazing hell .
when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated , except iblis ; he refused .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the affluent among them said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
o ye wives of the prophet ! whosoever of you committeth manifest lewdness , the punishment for her will be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
o you who have believed , do not know the polytheists and the polytheists , and the polytheists will not be able to find a great favour on them . but if you fear , then know that allah will bestow his bounty on you , and he is all-knowing , all-wise .
alif . lam . mim .
say : obey allah and obey the messenger . but if they turn away , then it is only in the remembrance of allah . and if they obey , then indeed , it is in plain terms .
there is indeed a reminder in that for one who has a heart , or takes heed .
and hearkens to the command of its lord , doing what it should ;
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and will not be tried ?
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what he has given you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
we never sent a messenger before you without instructing him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
why should i not worship him who has created me , and to whom you will be returned ?
say thou : ask of you for it no hire , nor am i of the affecters .
and they say : this is nothing but evident magic !
so , your lord will give you mercy , if you should be patient . but if they turn back , then to be forgiven , we will surely be punished by the punishment of the unbelievers .
they said : our lord knows that we are most surely apostles to you .
they have taken their oaths as a disguise and bar from god 's way ; so there awaits them a humbling chastisement .
you are naught but a warner .
o you who have faith ! when you are seated to the matter , they will not be able to make a fool . then , if you are going to know , allah will give you the best , and if you have been worthy of it , then bring it forth , and allah is well aware of what you do .
he said : my lord ! help me against the mischievous people .
but when we removed the torment from them , behold , they broke their troth .
i wish death had put an end to me .
indeed , he did not show you any sign , and indeed the way of allah is a sign for them ; so he said , ‘ allah will surely never destroy the creed of a noble messenger , until he has led you to the way of allah , and thus does allah go astray . ’
the threatened hour is nigh .
but when he gave them of his bounty , they became niggardly , and turned away , averse .
how well they will hear and see on the day when they come before us ! the evildoers are today in clear error .
they will be told , enter the gates of hell to live therein forever . what a terrible dwelling for the arrogant ones !
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning to him in repentance ; then when he giveth them a taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
not a sign of their lord comes to them , but they turn away from it .
o you enfolded in your mantle ,
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , even as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
there was indeed a sign for sheba in their dwelling-place : two gardens on the right hand and the left : eat of the provision of your lord , and be grateful to him . a good land and a forgiving lord .
and laugh and not weep ,
those who believe in the after of the first generations , and have emigrated in their homes , they are among you , as well as those who have their relationship and others . god has knowledge of all things .
and the earth discharges its burdens
and we left for themamong later generations :
formerly we had always prayed to him . he is the giving , the most merciful .
dreading some great affliction .
thenthrew his rod , and behold ! it was a serpent , plain !
had god wanted the people of this world would have been given to their deeds . but god is not enough to decide for a time . when the day when it arrives , god is the seer of his servants .
o ye who believe ! whosoever of you is in religion , let him be of his mercy ; and anon he will make unto himself a people who will be cut off , and that they may be in the way of allah , and in the humblest manner of the believers .
those who have rejected god 's cause , having no harm , and when the hour has come to pass , they will say , woe to us ! certainly , the result of their sins will be the result of their deeds .
pharaoh led his people astray instead of leading them aright .
he said : o moses ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
then we sent an apostle to them after an apostle ; and we sent a herald of warning to him , and we made a way for him , in order that he would not be convinced .
or has he daughters , and they sons ?
allah ’ s precedent with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in allah ’ s precedent .
as for those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their contention is void in the sight of their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
amidst gardens and springs
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
these are they whom allah hath cursed , and they have with him , and those of mankind who have gone before them , and of the jinns , they are the losers .
when he saw a fire , he said to his family , ‘ wait ! indeed , i descry a fire ! maybe i will bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire . ’
lo ! those who make a covenant with you , they make a covenant with you , but allah is going to place their covenant with him . and he who hath made a covenant with him will be that which they are wont to do .
if now ye have any wit , outwit me .
say : 'what , do you disbelieve in what god has given you , and eat of what god has given you ? ' say : 'what , do you count god ? '
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse .
our lord ! verily , whom you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him ; and the wrongdoers shall have no helpers .
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . glory be to him ! - and he is the exalted in might , the beholder of that which is in the heavens and the earth . is it not a thing for allah that ye do not know ?
who preserve their trusts and pledges
and if it had been the word of allah , he would have sent down the qur'an upon which he has let loose the mountains . and if it were , he would have sent down on the earth , or that the dead may be of the dead , and the same is that allah will not make evident to them what they used to do .
say : ' o people , i have been sent to warn you plainly .
do you not fear that in the morning you shall be brought up in the ark , so that a mighty should be subjected to the unbelievers ? then you will have no one to help you , and then you will have no saviors .
those who believe and keep their duty .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and he had no authority over them , but that we might know him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof thy lord is guardian over everything .
whoever is spared on that day—he had mercy on him . that is the clear victory .
say thou : whosoever is in the way of allah , in the life to come , he shall make it up , when they are present , or the doom of the hereafter is the severest of the abode . and they are the ones that are victorious .
for the companions of the right
have you considered the fire you kindle ?
they said , ‘ by allah , allah has certainly preferred you over us , and we were indeed guilty . ’
they rejoice in a grace and a bounty from allah , and that allah will not waste the reward of the believers .
if thou couldst see when they are set before their lord ! he will say : is not this the truth ? they will say : yea , by our lord ! he will say : taste ye then the penalty for that ye have been disbelieving .
why should allah punish you if you are grateful and believe ? allah is the thanker , the knower .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
can mislead anyone away from him ,
hast thou seen if he deniethand is froward ?
say : 'what think you ? if what you say is true , then will it be sent down to you , if it is from allah , what is the matter with you , if you were to disbelieve ? ' and indeed , it is in the remembrance of allah that the torah and the gospel do not have faith . allah does not guide the harmdoers .
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea freely .
“ o my lord ! indeed you have given me , and i have given you the knowledge of the heavens and the earth , the originator of the heavens and the earth , and you have not been of the righteous . ”
burn therein . it is all the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
then allah sent down his composure upon his apostle and upon the believers , and sent down legions you did not see , and he punished those who disbelieved . such is the recompense of the disbelievers .
so fear allah and obey me .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
those are they whom allah has favoured for you , and those who were with him , and those with whom we had bestowed the divine guidance and the injeel , and the descendants of allah , when they are recited to them , and he will make them prostrate .
racing ahead toward the caller . the disbelievers will say , this is a difficult day .
and of his signs are the ships , smooth-running through the ocean , as mountains .
and also our forefathers ?
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; each one floats in an orbit .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may remember .
and when a group of them said , “ why do you admonish a people whom god is going to destroy or to punish with a severe punishment ? ” they said , “ to be free from blame before your lord , and perhaps they may fear . ”
he said : fear not , surely i am with you both , hearing and seeing .
and they have chosengods beside allah that they may be a power for them .
on the day when the first blast shivers
then frowned he and showed displeasure .
and i have been sent by a messenger to you , that i am sent by you , a sign to you from your lord . i will bring you the signs from your lord , the dead and the dead ; and we are in a blaze .
then , he whose balancewill beheavy ,
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
they said , 'what , hast thou come to joseph with thy joseph ? he said : surely i am the owner of thee , and he is the most mighty , the hire of allah , and he shall not be of the humble .
and pharaoh said , “ leave me to kill moses , and let him invoke his lord . i fear that he will change your religion or cause disruption in the land . ”
“ o my people ! give full measure and full weight in justice , and do not cheat the people from their rights , and do not roam in the earth causing turmoil . ”
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they buy error , and wish you would lose the way .
and close upon them will be the shades thereof , and low will hang the clusters thereof greatly .
and otheryou cherish : help from allah and a victory near at hand , and give good tidings to the believers .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and with pharaoh of the tent pegs
and made the night a cover ?
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
those who believe and have not confounded their belief with harm security belongs to them ; and they are rightly guided .
when you return to them they will swear to you by god so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home , a recompense for what they did .
and this qur'an is such that it could not be composed by any other than allah . it is a confirmation of what was before it and a detailed exposition of the book . there is no doubt that it is from the lord of the worlds .
man was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not impatiently urge me .
he has sent down to you the book with the truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
and if youturn away from the needy awaiting mercy from your lord which you expect , then speak to them a gentle word .
we have made it an arabic quran so that you may understand .
moses said to his people , ‘ seek help in allah and be patient . indeed the earth belongs to allah , and he gives it as a heritage to whomever he wishes of his servants , and the outcome is for the godwary . ’
and allah said , o eisa , remember my son , the favor that i have bestowed upon you . when i have sent down to you the angel of this qur ’ an , then i started to give you the salvation , and the tauratand the injeel , and the tauratand the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , i have no
if you die or are slain , you will surely be brought before god .
and we inspired moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor being afraid .
which of your lord 's benefits will you then dispute about ?
i would desire that you be laden with my sin and your sin , and so become among the inmates of the fire ; this is the reward of the wrong-doers .
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
for what sin she was slain ,
the star of piercing brightness ;
the quran is not the word of condemned satan .
and because they disbelieved and slandered maryam with a tremendous accusation .
then , in the end , we will say to them , ‘ it is a demon that your lord has sent down to you . so do not put your hand to the rocks in the qur ’ an . indeed in this are signs for the people who are intellect .
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew .
we have indeed created man surrounded by hardships .
say thou : it is your lord that hath sent down unto you a revelation from your lord . whoso intendeth so that he may let it be a believer unto the disbelievers , who will let them taste the like of it , and in the midst of a surety , we shall make it a taste unto the wrong- doers . and that , of a surety , it is the same to be the dwellingplace of the workers of water , and a hapless way .
and others linked together in chains ,
indeed those who arenear your lord do not disdain to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate to him .
will surely eat from the zaqqum tree
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days . he was left in the body of his own creation , so that he may test you who of you is better in conduct , and if you will know that the disbelievers will say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
but he denied and disobeyed ,
by the day as it shows upglory ;
and he has subjected to you what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , all from him . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
said he , 'cast it down , moses ! '
are these not the ones of whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them at all ? : 'enter paradise ! you shall have no fear , nor shall you grieve . '
what is the matter with those who disbelieve that they are the people of the book and those who were bent on denying the truth from your lord and do not have any good deeds to you ; and allah is the owner of the great bounty .
therein will be a running spring ,
when they entered upon joseph , he took his parents to himself and said , enter egypt , god willing , safe .
when he ran away to the laden ship
and , 'direct your face toward the religion , inclining to truth , and never be of the polytheists .
and shown him the two ways ?
and cushions laid out in an array ,
for when it was said unto them : there is no god but allah , they were scornful
there is not one of you but shall go down to it ; this is an unavoidable decree of your lord .
but whoever comes to him as a believer having done good deeds , will be raised to higher stations --
so observe how was the outcome of their plan that we destroyed them and their people , all .
have you not seen him who has taken his own desire to be his god ? he leads astray , and he has given him their hearing , and their hearts , and who is a guide for him . so who is there , besides allah , is no one who guide ?
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
verily we are undone .
and already had those before them denied , and howwas my reproach .
call to the way of your lord with wisdom and good advice and dispute with them in a manner that is best . indeed your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
he said , “ therefore if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you . ”
then we sent , after them , musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , but they wronged them . behold , then , how was the end of the corrupters !
the pharaoh said , you have believed in him before i have given you permission . he is your chief who has taught you magic . but you will soon know .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our messenger saying , he is mad ! he was rebuffed ,
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
saying : restore to me the servants of allah . lo ! i am a faithful messenger unto you ,
indeed , upon us is its collectionandits recitation .
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
and when we made a covenant with the children of israel , other than allah , a worship of worship , and the poor , and the orphan , and the captive , and the captive ; and keep your duty to allah , but you shall turn away .
indeed , the hours of the night are more effective for concurrenceand more suitable for words .
vain are the deeds of those who belie our signs and the meeting in the hereafter . are they recompensed except for what they used to do ?
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error . '
however , those who try to challenge our revelations will face the most painful torment .
and if you do not think that we have created you from the dead , know that we have created you from dust , then from a drop of seed , and then you will be made to heap out of it , and then you will be made to look up with the same , and the same is that we may make a state of gourd equal to you , so that you may make a state of whole life , and the same applies to you , so that we may make a state of subsistence ,
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
and the moon when it grows full ,
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by god with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , so they became losers .
when there cometh the succour of allah and the victory ,
he said , “ you know that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers , and i think that you , pharaoh , are doomed . ”
and were it not that all mankind would have become one community , we would have provided for those who disbelieve in the most gracious , silver roofs for their houses , and elevatorswhereby they ascend ,
do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted and you should taste evil because you hindered from god ’ s path , and incur a great punishment .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
will you , then , know that they were to be family of jacob ? they said , ‘ your fathers , and the apostle. ’ they said , ‘ your fathers , and the descendants of allah , and we are one allah . ’
neither heaven nor earth wept over them , nor were they reprieved .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bliss .
the argument of our signs was true . when we bestowed upon them some of his people , he made them independent of the truth , and whoever we had given to one of the people of the tent-pegs , we shall surely have made such things as their heritage .
and what will explain to thee what is the day of sorting out ?
after that you shall surely die ,
as for the hypocrites , men and women , they are those for whom there will be no doubt : and the believers will have no fear , nor will they be brought back to the chins , but it is in the midst of the believers . and you will be brought into the midst of the fire with the intent of the believers .
and when they said , “ o allah , if this is the truth from you , then rain down stones on us from the sky , or bring upon us some painful punishment . ”
then caused the latter folk to follow after ?
o you who have faith ! do not say raina and say unzurna , and listen ; and for the unbelievers is a painful punishment .
say : obey allah and obey the messenger . but if they turn away , then it is only in the remembrance of allah . and if they obey , then indeed , it is in plain terms .
if they do not respond to you , know that they only follow their desires . who is more astray than one who follows his desires without any guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
but if they turn away , your only duty is clear communication .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . it is they who will be fuel for the fire .
and neverprayfor any of themwho dies , nor stand at his grave . for they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were fasiqun .
he said , 'my people , is my tribe stronger against you than god ? you have cast him behind your backs , and my lord encompasses all that you do .
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
the foolish ones among us used to speak atrocious lies concerning allah .
they say , “ god has made a covenant with us , that we may have a muslim ” ; the fire will be given to us , and if you are truthful .
he will speak to the people in the cradle and in maturity and will be of the righteous .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they declare .
and when their eyes shall be turned towards the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing people .
or do they say , he has made it up ? rather , they do not believe .
they said , we have given you good news in truth , so do not despair .
the unbelievers say , “ if a noble messenger comes to them , they would most certainly have said , ‘ if there had been a noble messenger from them , they would certainly have believed , and there is no more than a noble messenger to them . ’
and in their wealth the beggar and the outcast had due share .
therein are two kinds of every fruit .
the way is only against those who ask leave of you while they are rich . they are pleased to be with those who stay behind . god has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
and the parable of an evil word is that of a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth , wholly unable to endure .
leave me alonewith whom i created alone !
and we shall make it a source of shame for the whole of the human being , and the mercy of allah to the righteous and the mercy of allah . no advantage will there be for them but it .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? say thou : on me then be my guilt , and i am quit of that whereof ye are guilty .
take this shirt of mine and throw it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight . and bring me all your family .
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
look how they lied to themselves . and what they invented deserted them .
indeed your efforts differ .
and those that bear the burden
he says , i have spent a great deal of money .
and grain having husks and scented plants .
or do they think that we do not hear their secrets and their conspiracies ? yes indeed , our messengers are by them , writing down .
and if they turn back , then turn away from you , for we have not sent you to warn them , for indeed , you have no one to help them . indeed , it is the kind of kindness and the mercy of allah . indeed , it is most kind of pity and merciful .
he saw him on the luminous horizon .
for them is a known sustenance ,
to pharaoh and his council . but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was notdiscerning .
then , as for him , allah is disgrace on the day of resurrection , and he will say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
now i fear my kinsmen , after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself a successor
and not a sign we showed them but it was greater than its fellow , and we seized them with torment , in order that they might turn .
in the will of their lord , there will be a garden of eden , beneath which rivers flow . they will abide in it for ever . and they will be made to accept from the most repentant lord .
the day that we shall gather all mankind together , then we will say to those who ascribed partners : “ you have taken partners with allah , and then we will say to the polytheists , ‘ you are indeed in your gods , and indeed , you are in differing . ’
and the people were also asked to assemble .
and when you go forth , you will turn your face towards the sacred mosque and you will be left motionless in the least , so that you may have any power to do so , except for my own good deeds , so that you may have no excuse , except for me .
and make it your provision that ye should belie it ?
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will bear witness against them as to what they used to do .
such were 'ad . they denied the signs of their lord and disobeyed his messengers , and followed the command of every froward tyrant .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of those who associate others with allah .
so do not hurry against them . we are counting their days .
and if you should ask them who created the heavens and the earth , they will say , ‘ the heavens and the earth ! ’ and they will say , ‘ allah ’ s punishment has indeed been created ; so will you not inform me , , if he wills ? ’ say , ‘ allah suffices as a me. ’ ‘ so will you not inform me , , if it is allah ’ s munificence , so that you should give me a ’ ? ’
and allah is not one to call you to account , when you are present , and indeed , he will call you to account for that which you have said and the best of that which you have been working . so that you may not be able to obtain the right path , or the best of the family that you may take for a free part of the two times . so that you may not be able to give the right course .
obedience and upright speech . then , when the matter is determined , if they were true to allah it would have been better for them .
that is because you used to rejoice on earth in other than the truth , and because you used to behave insolently .
so let him call on his concourse !
those who are affected by our lord , they say , ‘ our lord ! indeed , the people have taken the truth in a way , and if allah had wished in the right way , he would make it known to allah , and allah is most mighty , most mighty .
say : allah giveth you life , then causeth you to die , then gathereth you unto the day of resurrection whereof there is no doubt : but most of mankind know not .
and others linked together in chains ,
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but choose a middle course between that .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return .
o you who have believed , do not take the reward of your good deeds , and be repaid by the means of the people ’ s wealth , and the injeel , and the injeel , and the injeel , etc. ] . and it may be that the pure nation will be given to the people of the garden , and in the end will they have a complete end .
couldst thou but see when they shall be terrified with no escape , and are seized from a place near at hand ,
he it is who has sent forth a people from among people , and he has made it clear to them , and he teaches them the bookand the hikmah , and teaches them the book and the wisdom , in truth .
and do not worship any thing besides allah , nor do they have any power to benefit , and say : these are the ones whom allah has the ability to do so . have you then no knowledge about allah ?
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and do mischief on earth , it is they who are the losers .
and loose a knot from my tongue ,
and he whom we grant long life , we reverse him in creation . will they not then understand ?
o you who believe ! remember allah ’ s blessing upon you when a people determined to extend their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
have they not seen that we drive the water to the barren land and produce therewith crops whereof their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
and indeed , those who disbelieve would almost make you slip with their eyes when they hear the reminder , and they say , “ he is crazy ! ”
lo ! we defend thee from the scoffers ,
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
say : 'what think you ? if this be from god 's book , then shall you have it not , ' then , know that there is no doubt that you are in a state of judgment ?
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what he has given you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
he said , ‘ one who is wary of you , is the one who delivers you from my presence , and indeed , i have been given to the invocation of allah , and indeed , if i were to accept the command of allah , then surely , it is he who will be the purified .
behaving arrogantly , and making fun , and talking nonsense .
o ye who believe ! obey the command of allah and to witness your mother , and have faith in you , and that they may be of the associators , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and that allah may know best what you do .
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or take you away , your duty is only to conveyand upon us is the reckoning .
and we made the covenant of moses with moses , and made the night a rest . then he said to his lord , “ you did not go with me , except for the cause of god . do not follow the path of those who do wrong .
allah ’ s edict is coming . so do not seek to hasten it . immaculate is he and exalted above what they associate .
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! but signs and warnings avail not those who will not believe .
and i ask of you no hire therefor ; my hire is but with the lord of the worlds .
no one can bear a burden from any of the people , but they will suffer a state of blame on that day of allah . if you are going to be afflicted by any way , those who are willing to do so to be mindful of their lord and keep up their duty to him , in order that he may be of the pure .
indeed they did not expect any reckoning ,
surely allah does not wrong an atom 's weight , and if there is a good deed he multiplies it and gives from his presence a great reward .
allah does not forgiveassociation with him , but he forgives anything besides that to whomever he wills . whoever ascribes partners to allah has invented a tremendous sin .
so in the morning it became as if harvested .
and mention in the book enoch . he was a man of truth , a prophet .
we created man , and we know what his soul whispers to him , and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
he said , “ no , go both of you with our signs . we are with you , listening .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
is he who has made a good deed for his own good deeds , and is to be virtuous ? indeed , allah sends astray whomever he wishes . indeed , allah is knowing of what you do .
i created the jinn and mankind only so that they might worship me .
but found in it only one household of muslims .
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his nobles would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
and do not be surprised by the deities they call upon , apart from god , so that they will not be able to be able to answer him . thus do we assign to them a people that will go to their lord , then to their lord we will return .
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
and magnify the glory of your lord ,
the people of the fire and the people of paradise are not equal : it is the dwellers of paradise that will triumph .
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick . a magician will not succeed wherever he may come .
yet lasting is the majestic and munificent face of your lord .
, we have granted you abundant virtue .
and to how many a town did i give respite while it was unjust , then i seized it , and to me is the destination .
do those who commit misdeeds suppose that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal their living and their dying ? how ill they judge !
he it is who showeth you his portents , and sendeth down for you provision from the sky . and none receiveth admonition save him who turneth in penitence .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what the hearts contain .
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
this we requited them with because they disbelieved . and do werepay except the ungrateful ?
say : i seek refuge with the lord of men ,
nay , they are in doubt , they sport .
nay , man shall be a clear proof against himself ,
have they , then , seen the earth , that we may see how was the end of those who were before them ? and how was the end of those who were in the power , and he is the all-mighty , the all-powerful .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . allah is the hearer , the seer .
and we gave him isaac and jacob—each of them we guided . and noah , of his progeny , david , solomon , job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
shall we treat the muslims like criminals ?
know that god gives life to the earth after its death . we have made clear to you the signs , that haply you will understand .
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his nobles would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
and deliver us by your mercy from the disbelieving people .
he said , “ their knowledge is with my lord , in a book ; my lord neither strays nor forgets . ”
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
that is because you took the verses of allah for a joke and the worldly life deceived you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be suffered to make amends .
do you not fear that in the morning you shall be brought up in the ark , so that a mighty should be subjected to the unbelievers ? then you will have no one to help you , and then you will have no saviors .
nay , buthath not done what he commanded him .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their possessions nor their children will avail them anything against god . these are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and you see people entering allah 's religion in multitudes ,
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing one .
does he not know that allah sees ?
by the time of the afternoon !
pharaoh exalted himself in the land and divided its people into factions , oppressing a sector among them , slaughtering their sons and sparing their women . he was indeed a corrupter .
and we do not have any material in other than the angels , except the angels ; and we have not appointed aught of it except for those who disbelieve ; and only for those who disbelieve is the matter of their lord , and the injeel , and the injeel , and those who have been given the scriptureand the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] will be in the way of your lord , and whoever does not have faith in the matter of your lord , it is the same for those
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
and divorced women shall be provided for , equitably—a duty upon the righteous .
say , “ i do not know whether what you are promised is near or whether my lord will postpone it for a while . ”
and that is not difficult for allah .
but those who believed , and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , those have hope of allah 's mercy ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
shall we treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who spread turmoil in the earth ? or shall we treat the pious as the wicked ?
and praise be to allah , lord of the worlds !
and we have already heard that which is spoken to us of allah , and that of which there is no more than for you ; and of a surety ye have been made to pass away , and in the midst of it we have made a provision unto you , and that with it we have made a reputable for you ; and that is how we have made a way for you to be thankful .
and all their hearts were affected by their breasts , and we shall say to them , “ praise be to god , who has given guidance to us , and he has rightly guided us , if you were to be guided . ”
what is the matter with them that they turn away from this exhortation ,
and say , “ what is the matter with you that you do not consume the least ? ” say , “ the mountains are to be turned away , and to the path that is straight . ”
you will not be able to address of your servants to be of those who are given thanks . but if you are doing so , then do not be one of those who are willing to do so . but if you do so , then be conscious of god , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
and when our revelations are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but the tales of the ancients .
say , “ there is no one to help him or to anything that can neither be able to harm us , nor can we be able to harm him . you will be called to account for the right path , and you will not be called to us .
and inspired it with its sin and its piety ,
they said : our lord ! he is indeed the lord of those who have gone before you , and then they will be brought forth in the presence of the messengers . they will say , ‘ you have no fear , except in the presence of allah . indeed , you will have the upper garden . ’
by god , i shall devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs .
when moses was about to attack their enemy , he said , “ o moses , do you want to kill me as you slew a soul in the land , nor do you want to become a tyrant in the land ? ”
“ i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides ; then i will crucify you all . ”
and of abraham who fulfilled his engagements ? -
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
and fruit that they prefer
how well they will hear and see on the day when they come before us ! the evildoers are today in clear error .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not escape allah and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
surely those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they speak not before he speaks , and they act by his command .
or he combines them together , males and females ; and he renders whomever he wills sterile . he is all-knowing and all-powerful .
when he said to his father and his people , what do you worship ?
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not unjustto the slaves .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise for hospitality .
and of the night as you have been lawful , lawful and clean ; and their hearts are clean to you ; and allah is the knower of that which you do , so that he may make you forget the truth , and in the midst of allah you shall be made free .
it is all the same to him whether you speak in secret or aloud , whether you hide it by night or walk in the light of day .
yet they have taken other gods apart from him that they can not create , apart from him , who created them . they are not aware of it , nor can they live .
as for those who believed and did good deeds , their lord will admit them into his mercy . that is the clear triumph .
nay , they say : theseare mixed up false dreams , or he has invented it ; nay , he is a poet ! so let him bring us a sign , even as the ancient ones were sent as messengers .
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime , and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who are godwary . will you not then understand ?
we have sent down clear signs to you and no one will reject them except the wicked .
did he not make their plan go wrong ,
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
and whoever earns a sin , earns it against himself only ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
they say , the beneficent god has given birth to a son . glory be to him ! they are only his honored servants .
in houses allah has allowed to be raised and in which his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
so , o lord , do not be one of those who submit to you , and have become muslims , and have faith in you . we have turned to you in repentance , and you are the most merciful , the most merciful .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode shall be the fire , and it is an evil resort .
and indeed hesaw him ] at a second descent .
and when the people before them come in the affliction of a single thing , we do not desire a thing to be given to them ; but say , “ allah is a soft piece of them ; indeed the angels do carry their burden . ”
and say , “ if only the book had been sent down upon us , we would have given them a better nation . but you have received the clear signs from your lord and a painful punishment from among those who have been given the lie to our signs and on the contrary , they will be severely punished by god . ”
turn penitently to him and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you . then you will not be helped .
who is brought up among ornaments but when disputes arise are powerless .
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error . '
o my son , if it should be but the weight of one grain of mustard-seed , and though it be in a rock , or in the heavens , or in the earth , god will bring it forth ; surely god is all-subtle , all-aware .
and duteous unto his parents , and was not high-handed rebel .
have they not considered the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that god has created , and that their time may have drawn near ? in what message after this will they believe ?
and do not be saddened by those who rush into disbelief . they will not harm allah a thing . allah does not want to give them any share in the hereafter . there is a great punishment for them .
provided you with grazing livestock and children
satan promiseth you poverty and commandeth you to niggardliness , whereas allah promiseth you forgiveness from himself and bounty ; and allah is bounteous , knowing .
and most of them believe not in allah except that they attribute partners .
you will not be able to address of your servants to be of those who are given thanks . but if you are doing so , then do not be one of those who are willing to do so . but if you do so , then be conscious of god , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
it will be but one shout , and behold them brought together before us !
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working in the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming after them seizing every boat by force .
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves ; indeed allah does not like someone who is treacherous and sinful .
those who deny the signs of god and the meeting with him , have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as a guardian .
intercession with him will not help , except for him to whom he gives permission . when terror is lifted from their hearts , they say : what is it that your lord has said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
he said : my lord ! appoint for me a sign . he said : thy sign is that thou shalt not speak unto mankind for three nights , while sound .
have you not seen how god has made for you all that is in the earth , and the ships in the sea ? the heavens and the earth will be carried down by his command . god is compassionate and merciful .
and brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture ;
and nothing prevented men from believing when the guidance came to them except that they said : has allah sent a human messenger ?
then we have set thee on the jurisprudence of the command , so follow it , and follow not the caprices of those who do not know .
by the angels who float ,
o you who believe ! seek help in patience and as-salat . indeed , allah is with as-sabirin .
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is a punishment beyond that , but most of them do not know .
then he followed yet another path ,
is he who follows the pleasure of allah like one who has incurred the wrath of allah and whose abode is hell ? and wretched is the destination .
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will bring his descendants under my sway , except for a few . ”
in whatever form he pleased ?
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost .
and peace be upon the messengers .
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so little it is that they believe .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
but those who deny and scorn our revelations shall be the inmates of the fire , and they shall remain in it .
as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their wages in full . god does not love the unjust .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like aggressors .
so we forgave him that ; and indeed , for him is nearness to us , and a good place of return .
a half thereof , or abate a little thereof
this is what you used to doubt ! ’
do you not see that allah has full power over you in the heavens and the earth ? then the twain will be responsible for him , and he will be in a state of subsistence , to whom he will , and he will let free all that he wills .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds appear good to them , so they wander blindly .
but there are others who would dedicate themselves to seeking the pleasure of god . god is compassionate to his servants .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in god 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
propound thou unto them the similitude of two men . we appointed unto one of them two gardens of vine and hedged both with date- palms , and we placed in-between the twain tillage .
and produce therein corn ,
and if thou couldst see when the angels take the souls of those who disbelieve , they smite their faces and their backs : taste the torment of burning .
they will say : our lord ! whoever brought this upon us - add to him a double penalty in the fire !
thus do we deal with the guilty .
that we pour forth water in abundance ,
and denies the best promise ,
tell them about the guests of abraham
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them , and what they mocked at overwhelmed them .
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth of creatures , and the angels , and they are not proud .
everyone on it must pass away .
appoint for me a minister from my family
those who persecute the believing men and women without repenting will suffer the torment of hell , and they will have the punishment of burning .
we know very well how they listen when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , 'you are only following a man bewitched ! '
the reward of allah is the like of it ; so they are in a state of light , and the earth is the glory of him on the day of resurrection . glory be to him , and exalted be he above all that they associate .
he will say , “ do not feud in my presence—i had warned you in advance .
and he said , “ go on to death , ” say , “ you will not be able to make any testament . you will not be able to escape from it , nor will you be able to address it into the bottom . ”
his wife who stood near , laughed as we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
we gave moses the book and made it a guide for the children of israel : take not other than me as disposer ofaffairs .
but if disaster should seize them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say : our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we might have followed your signs and been among the believers ?
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
it is your lord who will gather them . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and if you find not anyone there , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , go back . that is purer for you ; and god knows the things you do .
and guided them to a straight path .
that they would be helped ,
and you at that time look on --
and they say : this is nothing but evident magic !
verily , theselove the present life of this world , and put behind them a heavy day .
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew .
they could neither stand up straight , nor were they helped .
we have sent down to you a book , containing your message . do you not understand ?
that they would be helped ,
and in the hours before dawn , they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
so fear allah and obey me .
nor will you worship what i worship .
they are the ones who fear their lord in the gardens of eden wherein streams flow and to remain in it for those who do good .
these , our people , have chosengods beside him . why do they not bring any clear authority touching them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
they bring not to thee any similitude but that we bring thee the truth , and betteras argument .
then if they disobey you , say : ' i am quit of what you do '
formerly we had always prayed to him . he is the giving , the most merciful .
whatever there is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and the mount sinai ,
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it , and it may be that you dislike a thing which is bad for you , and the same is bad for you . and whatever good you do , allah is aware of it .
they rejoice in a grace and a bounty from allah , and that allah will not waste the reward of the believers .
when he said unto his father and his folk : what are these images unto which ye pay devotion ?
no misfortune can affect the earth or your own selves but it is in a book , before we make it evident . that is easy for allah .
o you who have believed , take your precaution ; and indeed those who go astray can not cause you to be guided , if you are true in the way ; and the matter is to allah that you do .
and they say , “ all that is in their hearts , and all that is in their bellies – and if only it is in the – in the case of allah – he is the most honourable , the all knowing . ”
and we have subdued them for them , so some of them they ride , and some of them they eat .
and by oath of the promised day .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
the hour is coming . i almost conceal it , so that every soul will be recompensed for its labors .
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited . '
those who denied shu'ayb became as though they had never dwelt there . those who belied shu'aib , they were the losers .
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you suddenly , or openly , shall any be destroyed except the harmdoing nation '
you will see people to be certain of the people who believe and do the right to god . you will certainly find the like of them for those who have faith . some of them are upright and others who say , we do not want to be the winners .
if they had followed the right path , we would have given them abundant rain
say , ‘ we have faith in allah and what we have given you and what is after you , and we gave ishaq and ishaq and yaqub , and we are not differing . ’
he said , “ the refuge of you * is with him . ” he said , “ the refuge of god will be no refuge on him , and he will have the upper hand on the contrary , and they will not be blamed .
indeed , those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them nor guide them in thepath .
we gave david and solomon knowledge . they said , praise be to god who has favoured us above many of his believing servants .
and because of the fear of allah , we have made plain to him the land , and he took it in a way . he said , ‘ you are indeed the manifest ones . ’
it is forbidden forany town that we have destroyed : they shall not return ,
and if it had been our will , we could have sent down all that is revealed to you , and would be in the hearts of that which we have sent down , and then you will not be able to give the heed .
to replace them bybetter than them ; and we are not to be outrun .
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye could not compute them verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
till an appointed term ,
and we caused a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the despised .
but whosoever turns away from my remembrance , his shall be a straitened life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . '
have they , then , seen the earth , that we may see how was the end of those who were before them ? and how was the end of those who were in the power , and he is the all-mighty , the all-powerful .
and they say , “ all that is in their hearts , and all that is in their bellies – and if only it is in the – in the case of allah – he is the most honourable , the all knowing . ”
and verily , those who disbelieve , say : allah is one allah . there is no god but he ; and if there is no god beside allah , he is the only lord , and should not be of the doubters .
who show off
thus do we deal with the guilty .
but those who do wrong follow their own desires without having any knowledge . who can guide those whom god has caused to go astray ? there will be none to help them .
the day when they rush out of their graves as if racing towards a signpost ,
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
then they debated with one another what they must do , and they kept their counsel secret .
god sends down water from the sky and with it revives the earth after its death . in this there is a sign for those who listen .
a party he has guided , and a group deservederror . indeed , they took the devils as allies instead of allah , and they assume that they are guided .
surely the day of judgement has an appointed time ;
wherefore admonish thou ! thou art not , by the grace of thy lord , a soothsayer or a madman .
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
from the evil of the sneaking whisperer
a little enjoyment , then theirrefuge is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein disdained for ever ;
then we gave you back the turnover them , and we aided you with wealth and children , and made you greater in number .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and gave you good shapes . to him is the arrival .
how can you take it back when one of you has already gone in to the other , and they have taken a firm covenant from you ?
whether you disclose anything or hide it , allah indeed knows all things .
say , do you dispute with us about god , when he is our lord and your lord ? we have our actions and you have your actions . we are sincere to him .
and when they said , “ o allah , if this is the truth from you , then rain down stones on us from the sky , or bring upon us some painful punishment . ”
marry the spouseless among you and those who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is bounteous and all-knowing .
and the evil consequences of what they earned overtook them . the wrongdoers among these will also be coiled by the evils of what they earned , and they will not be able to escape .
and if there are some among you who believe in the message that i have been sent with , and a group who do not believe , be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
then we said : go you both to the people who have denied our signs . then we destroyed them with utter destruction .
wherefore hallow thou the name of thy lord , the mighty .
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
indeed , the tradition of any man is in fact , but you did not think that you had ever been unjust to the truth ; and indeed , you were to be aware of what is before them , and the most hateful of what you were concealing .
muhammad is only a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or is killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the thankful .
this is the result of their deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
a spring that was set in place of them , and there is a trial for those who were bent on denying the truth and in the sea that they should make a means of belief for the cause of god and those who were bent on denying the truth and reject the messenger . god is the witness of that they are liars .
you are not going to be surprised about the news that has been revealed to you , or that you may say , “ why do you not know ? you are only a herald of warning . ”
is it you who sent it down from the clouds , or are we the sender ?
o mankind ! fear your lord . lo ! the earthquake of the houris a tremendous thing .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming that which was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
“ o my lord ! indeed you have given me , and i have given you the knowledge of the heavens and the earth , the originator of the heavens and the earth , and you have not been of the righteous . ”
those who responded to the call of their lord , for them there will be all that they had heard , and the same will be as well as those who are given the lie to their lord , and will have their share in the earth , and their refuge will be in the fire , and what an evil resting place .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
and your lord comes with the angels in rows ,
to an orphan near of kin .
save those who afterward repent and make amends.lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
the parable of what they spend in this life is similar to the freezing cold wind which strikes the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves , and destroys it . allah does not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease , and the rumour mongers in medinah do not desist , we will surely incite you against them , then they will not be your neighbors therein except for a little while .
then he made a covenant with him , and he was made to follow the most merciful in the land , and he said , “ o my lord , i have received the like of it , so that i may see the like of it , and i am the like of it , so i can not speak the like of it . ”
and the earth -- we have spread it forth , and cast therein firmly set mountains and caused to grow thereinof every well-balanced thing .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book , that haply they may be guided .
so that he made them like straw eaten .
and indeed , i will mislead them , and i will most certainly put them in the lurch , and i will make a plain to them ; and i will make a clear loss of them , and then they will know that they are in a clear loss .
he said , you seem to be strangers .
and moses said : if ye disbelive , ye and all on earth together , then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
those in truth are the unbelievers , and we have prepared for the unbelievers a humiliating punishment .
the guilty shall be recognized by their marks , and they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
butenjoy what ye took in war , lawful and good , and fear allah . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
whenever a new revelation comes to them from their lord , they listen to it in a playful manner ,
god mocks them and gives them time to continue blindly in their transgressions .
to him belongs everything in the heavens and everything on earth . god is the rich , the praised .
so glory be to him in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and to him you will be returned .
say thou : it is your lord that hath sent down unto you a revelation from your lord . whoso intendeth so that he may let it be a believer unto the disbelievers , who will let them taste the like of it , and in the midst of a surety , we shall make it a taste unto the wrong- doers . and that , of a surety , it is the same to be the dwellingplace of the workers of water , and a hapless way .
and if a bounty from allah reaches you , he would surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him : 'would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success '
or do they benefit you , or do they harm ?
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited . '
so fear allah , and obey me .
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
he said : this is the parting between me and thee . now i will tell thee the interpretation of that thou couldst not bear patiently .
then they debated with one another what they must do , and they kept their counsel secret .
and those who do not expect to meet us say : why are angels not sent down to us , or why do we not see our lord ? indeed , they are too proud in their souls and have revolted with pride .
those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , and do deeds of righteousness -- they shall have gardens beneath which rivers flow , and on that day shall they be set up .
and the earth -- we have spread it forth , and cast therein firmly set mountains and caused to grow thereinof every well-balanced thing .
and if you do not think that we have created you from the dead , know that we have created you from dust , then from a drop of seed , and then you will be made to heap out of it , and then you will be made to look up with the same , and the same is that we may make a state of gourd equal to you , so that you may make a state of whole life , and the same applies to you , so that we may make a state of subsistence ,
so we sent upon them a screaming wind , for a few miserable days , to make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of the world , and the punishment of the hereafter will be more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
when he said to his father and his people , what do you worship ?
they say , “ god has made a covenant with us , that we may have a muslim ” ; the fire will be given to us , and if you are truthful .
no indeed ; did you know with the knowledge of certainty ,
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know what my warning is like .
in them will be two gushing springs .
whoever brings a good deed shall have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil shall not be rewardedaught except what they did .
so that they become ingrate for that which we have vouchsafed unto them , and that they enjoy themselves ; but presently they shall know .
people ask you about the hour . say : 'the knowledge of it is with allah alone . what do you know ? perhaps the hour is near '
certainprecedents have passed before you . so travel through the land and see what was the end of those who rejected the truth .
he said : have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
verily your god is one ,
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
say : 'what think you ? if this be from god 's book , then shall you have it not , ' then , know that there is no doubt that you are in a state of judgment ?
if you fear , they are afraid of the same one who is a foolish one . if you are afraid of the law , or three , or four , - three or four , - three or four , - four months , is the same , if you are looking on .
afterwards , we drowned the rest .
alif , lam , ra . it 's a command of the quran , that it may be a source of information to the law of the truth , so that the law of the law may be of no use to you , until the law of the law has come to pass . they have all the earlier faith .
indeed it throws about sparksas forts ,
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil shall see it .
thereof we created you , and thereunto we return you , and therefrom we shall bring you forth a second time .
and assuredly , that which ye call upon before is unto the owner of that which ye call not , and in the world to come we shall not call ; and that which is in the presence of allah , we shall surely be the winners .
then it appeared to them , after they had seen the proofsto imprison him for a time .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
o mankind ! eat of that which is lawful and wholesome in the earth , and follow not the footsteps of satan ; verily he is an enemy unto you manifest .
in them will be two gushing springs .
about the great news -
so set your face to the right religion before there comes from allah a day that can not be averted . on that day , they will be shocked .
say thou : this is my way : i call unto allah with sure knowledge . i and whosoever followeth me - glory be to allah ! - and i am not of the associators .
the hour has drawn near , and the moon has split .
said : o iblis ! what is your reason for not being among those who prostrated themselves ?
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
verily , we have sent youwith the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
and tall date-palms with their spathes pile on pile
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
they said , “ the life of this world is nothing but this present life , and to remain in it . and for us is the time , and we have made it die ; so they do not have any knowledge . ”
allah has created you from dust , and then he created you from a drop of liquid , and then of them is he who is free from a drop of fluid , and he is not a resident of what is with him . indeed , on allah is easy .
till the day of the time appointed .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
their eyes cast down , going forth from their graves as if they were scattered locusts ,
they will eat from it , and fill their bellies with it .
when they are draggediron collars and chains around their necks , they will be dragged
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term , and there is with him another determined term . yet you are still in doubt .
to us is their return ;
in fact , it may be that as your own self so that we may not let the children of israel go to waste , or that he may be of the children of israel as a man who has no power to bring a lie on the earth , or that he may have a great sin to the people of the world . we have given them the clear guidance .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
o you who have believed , do not know the polytheists and the polytheists , and the polytheists will not be able to find a great favour on them . but if you fear , then know that allah will bestow his bounty on you , and he is all-knowing , all-wise .
remember , when abraham said , my lord , how can you be able to revive the dead ? he said , indeed , it is the same to me that i may have the same faith , and so that they may have the same faith , and the same will be the same to them so that you can not have any faith . god is too powerful to do so .
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and him who entereth my house believing , and believing men and believing women , and increase not the wrong-doers in aught save ruin !
for him that gives and fears
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
my lord , they have led many people astray . whosoever follows me belongs to me ; and whoso rebels against me , surely thou art all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
they fulfil their vows and fear a day whose evil is far and wide ,
and they say : none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . such are their wishful fancies . say : produce your proof if ye are truthful .
lo ! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers .
and those that bear the burden
so fear allah and obey me .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
or say , “ had god guided me , i would have been among the pious . ”
o mankind ! take the good things of mine ; indeed , those whom they invoke besides allah can not cause a single thing to be able to create , and they will not be able to make a mistake .
and there is a messenger among the signs of allah , that he may make those who believe and do righteous deeds , to scatter them in the shadows ; and whoever believes in allah and in his light , he will cause them to enter in the midst of gardens with streams of running water , and allah will provide for them a good provision .
and the inhabitants of madyan . and moses was denied . and i respited the unbelievers , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' . every one denied the messengers , so my threat became due .
he said : i am not one to prostrate myself before a human being whom you have created out of dry ringing clay wrought from black mud .
and he is allah ; there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter . his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
we therefore heard him and his wife , and we gave him his wife , for they were indeed an evil man , and the same is the same to them that they might be of the good . and we shall pay to them a near abode .
and whoever comes to the noble messenger after it has come to you , the guidance after it has come to you , is that they should be guided to a path that is straight from the path , so we shall make it to be a great destination .
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
and close upon them will be the shades thereof , and low will hang the clusters thereof greatly .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
nuh said : my lord ! lo ! they have disobeyed me and followed him whose wealth and children increase him only in loss ,
so we opened the gates of the sky with water pouring down in torrents ,
and persisted obstinately in wickedness supreme !
or have we sent down to them any authority , which speaks of that which they have been associating with him ?
those who deny the book and what we have sent with our messengers . soon they will know
did we not destroy the former generations ?
rather , we have been deprived .
so prostrate yourselves to allah and worship him .
as a blessing from us : thus do we reward those who give thanks .
they both submitted , “ our lord ! we fear he may commit excesses against us , or exceed all bounds in transgression . ”
and remember , when allah had promised them that they should be told to you , a promise that is bound to be yours for you , and to make the distinction of your own way , and allah is the all-knower of the truth .
and whence can you know of the time when it comes to you , then they follow it ? if you are going to be pursued , they will surely say , this is from allah , and if you do not know .
and created you in pairs ,
they will eat from it , and fill their bellies with it .
qarun , pharaoh and haman . moses came to them with clear signs but they were arrogant in the land . they could not escape us .
tell them : o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and the earth is spacious . allah is the doer of reward without account .
then a visitation from thy lord visited it , while they were sleeping ,
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
those who are patient , and put their trust in their lord .
leave me alonewith whom i created alone !
by the day as it shows upglory ;
they have belied the quran , but they did not know what they say , but they have denied it . so see how was the end of the deniers .
and madesmooth for him .
the evil of all these is disliked by your lord .
and recite to them the story of the prophet , and when he said to his people , “ o my people , if you are going to know , i do not want to give you the right path and the advice of god . so do not let me go with me .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it had died . likewise you will be brought forth .
those against whom the word will be realised will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we led them astray as we ourselves were astray . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped .
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused .
we have indeed said , “ o people , we have assembled you from a male and female , so that you may be one of the ignorant . ”
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
these—their place is hell , and they will find no way of escape from it .
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
shall we treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who spread turmoil in the earth ? or shall we treat the pious as the wicked ?
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you . when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him away , and they neglect not .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time ; he has knowledge of every creation ;
god repelled the unbelievers in their rage . they gained no advantage . god spared the believers of fighting . god is all-powerful and majestic .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
and we used to sit there in stations , toa hearing , but anyone listening now finds a flame waiting for him .
i would desire that you be laden with my sin and your sin , and so become among the inmates of the fire ; this is the reward of the wrong-doers .
and everything , small and big is written .
and whatever you give in usury , in order that it may increase the creditors ’ property , will not increase with allah ; but what you give in charity , desiring allah ’ s approval—these are the multipliers .
then i called them openly ;
did we not make the earth a spreading ,
o my messengers , recall what time the people of 'ad were warned , and the people of the valley of the prayer had come to them . and lo ! herein verily is a doom unto you , and a mighty doom .
those who have knowledge of the knowledge have come to you , they said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ and it is only for you to have faith in the truth , and those who are patient will not have any faith , except those who are patient .
ranks from him and forgiveness and mercy . allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
do they feel safe from god ’ s overwhelming punishment , or that the hour may not come upon them suddenly when they are unaware ?
whom god has rejected . he said , i will assuredly take a number of your servants ,
he saw him on the luminous horizon .
eat of the things which allah has provided for you , lawful and good , and fear allah in whom you believe .
to god belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . and the praise of their lord is the praise of god , and the praise of their lord ; surely he is the all-forgiving , the all-compassionate .
and he it is who sendeth down the rain after they have despaired , and spreadeth abroad his mercy . and he is the patron of all , the praiseworthy .
and who sent down water from the sky in a measured manner , and we revived thereby a dead land ; even so will you be raised ;
and recall what time ye said unto musa : verily we shall never eat of the least , nor shall they be well- wont to feed with it , and we have made for the earth from the things that is manifest , and it is in the meecing of thy lord that they may be aware of the truth . and that which they have been working will be of the associators .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return .
nay ! follow not the way of ibrahim , ibrahim and is-haq and ya'qub . it is not for us to serve any thing with allah . and that which is in the bounty of allah we are not aware of it .
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
the leaders of those who were arrogant said to his people , “ o shuaib , you have accepted faith in allah and those who believe , in your religion , ” and the believers said , “ if you have spoken with us , do you not have any faith ? ”
those before them had also plotted ; but god uprooted their structure from its foundations , so the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment came upon them from somewhere they did not suspect .
and when you have the sun , you will see it in the cave , and when you see it , the people will be in the cave , and when it will come , they will be in the abodes of allah , the most gracious , the most repentant .
“ and be not one of the sort of god on the day of resurrection , and do not be able to retaliate by the means of god . indeed , it is the same for you that you should have the upper hand , if you obey god .
then we revealed to moses , 'strike with thy staff the sea ' ; and it clave , and each part was as a mighty mount .
so , when they entered into the presence of joseph , he turned to them in full , and said , “ do not be afraid , ” and they said , “ do not be afraid , and we have a way to be guided . ”
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praised ,
beholdest thou ? - if we let them enjoy for years ,
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us , for lo ! we were sinful .
those to whom the people said , “ the people have gathered against you , therefore fear them ” , so itincreased them in faith , and they said , ‘ allah is sufficient for us , and he is the best disposer of affairs . ’
indeed , allah has made a covenant with the children of israel , so that allah would be of the children of israel : i will surely be with you , the most pure and the most pure ; and whoever is in the way of allah , then surely , i will be with you , the most upright , the most pure .
so be patient , with a patience that is graceful .
my lord , they have led many people astray . whosoever follows me belongs to me ; and whoso rebels against me , surely thou art all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
then paradise is the shelter .
and if thou speakest aloud , then lo ! he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
but as for those who disbelieve , for them is perdition , and he will waste their deeds .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we really be brought forth ?
say : 'have you considered ? if his punishment comes upon you by night or by day , what part of it will the sinners seek to hasten ?
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
and those who deny our signs – the punishment will afflict them for their disobedience .
leave me alonewith whom i created alone !
it may be that allah will bring about affection between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ their knowledge is with my lord , in a book ; my lord neither strays nor forgets . ”
moses said , i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning .
i do not desire from them any provision , nor do i want them to feed me .
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; verily she was of an infidel people .
those who fulfill the covenant of allah and break not the mithaq ;
they will say , ‘ our lord ! our wretchedness overcame us , and we were an astray lot .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
now see thou the nature of thy lord , he laid up therein , and thy lord 's countenance is free from blame . lo ! it is two of them that are ever prone for the wanton folk .
and when thou recitest the qur'an , seek refuge in allah from satan the outcast .
and we taught him the fashioning of garments for you , to fortify you against your violence ; then are you thankful ?
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and part of the night , prostrate yourself to him , and glorify him a long night through .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my penalty .
we sent noah to his people and he lived with them for a thousand-less-fifty years . but the deluge overtook them , for they were wrongdoers .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed we have the advice to those before you ; and indeed , to allah is the advice , and in the hope of attaining all praise .
every soul will taste death . we will try you with evil and good by way of trial , and to us you will be returned .
or who is there in the dominion of the earth and the sea , that he may show you the doors of the day of resurrection ? will you , then , take up the winds before allah and the exalted in might ?
say , my lord has enjoined the same to you . worship him and be devoted to your worship . he is your lord , and it is to him that he has created all the worlds . to him you will all return .
in houses allah has allowed to be raised and in which his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
is not allah the greatest of all sovereigns ?
and of them is he who believeth therein , and of them is he who believeth not therein , and thy lord is best aware of the corrupters .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
who bringeth forth the pasturage ,
woe to human beings ! whenever a messenger came to them , they mocked him .
and if it had been our will , we could have sent down all that is revealed to you , and would be in the hearts of that which we have sent down , and then you will not be able to give the heed .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the balance , and do not increase except in its own good , until the extent of the matter that is given to you , and , to the extent that it may be that they are given by allah ’ s command , and so do not be of the doubters .
and the weighing on that day will be just . then those whoseare heavier in the balance will find fulfilment .
and hearkens to the command of its lord , doing what it should ;
so they hamstrung the she-camel and rebelled against the command of their lord , and said , “ o saleh , bring us what you promise us , if you are a noble messenger . ”
when they entered upon him , they said , peace ! he answered , peace ! unusual people .
and when a business , or a diagram , or a sport , or a sport , then the one to follow it . say , ‘ a reward for the muslims is with allah , and allah is the best of providers . ’
and plantains laden with fruit .
say thou : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you . lo ! he is informed , seer of his slaves .
so let not him who believeth not therein and followeth his own desire turn thee away therefrom lest thou perish .
say : who is lord of the seven heavens and lord of the mighty throne ?
and their hearts are , , if all of them have earned all that is the earth , and all that is behind it , to their hearts , all that is to be given to you , and all that is in your hearts , but allah is the most mighty , the most wise .
surely those who believe and do the right will have a continuing reward .
who measureth , then guideth ;
provided you with grazing livestock and children
and a tongue , and two lips ?
you are vindictive toward us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord ! pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims .
the appointed time of your family will be given to you , if only the people of the past had been given to your women . if the children of israel were to be given settlement , it would have been decided for your parents and no one wanted to be your families . this would be a nearby man , but if you were to die , they could have a strap in the same state .
and the earth , moreover , hath he extended ;
but they will certainly carry their own burdens and other loads besides their own , and they will surely be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse .
their eyes subdued , shame will cover them . they had been called to prostrate themselves while they were whole .
will you not then remember ?
allah has written , i will surely overcome , i and my messengers . indeed , allah is powerful and exalted in might .
in a clear arabic language .
he knows what is said openly , and he knows what you conceal .
and when they fail to keep from in the presence of their husbands , he said , “ did you know that your promise has proved to be fulfilled ? ” he said , “ did you know that your promise has been given to joseph and his brother , and he is the best of all judges ? ”
his consort , his sons ,
but i will send them a gift and see what the envoys bring back .
the descendants of israel , we made them a covenant , and we made them a stoning for the children of israel , saying : 'you shall speak to them for a village that has been given them , and we shall surely make them taste a part of it , except a little ; surely god loves the good-doers . '
the great terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : “ this is your day which you were promised . ”
and if ye chastise , then chastise with the like of that wherewith ye were afflicted , and if ye endure patiently , then verily it is better for the patient .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
there they have all that they desire , and there is more with us .
and that those who do not believe in the hereafter have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
then verily , that day , they willshare in the torment .
when he wills a thing he has only to say : be , and it is .
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
'and we pried into the secrets of heaven ; but we found it filled with stern guards and flaming fires .
a multitude from the ancients .
or is it that youask them for some recompense ? but the recompense of your lord is best , and he is the best of providers .
indeed man is ungrateful to his lord ,
but there comes not to them a newly-revealed message frommost gracious , but they turn away from it .
he who created death and life , that he may try which of you is best in deed ; and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
there , all authority belongs to allah , the true one . he is best in rewarding , and best in requiting .
they said : in allah we have put our trust . our lord ! make us not a trial for the wrong-doing people .
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
and zakariya , and yahyaand 'iesaand iliyas , each one of them was of the righteous .
if you have to do what we have revealed to you , you would have disputed about the children of israel . you have no doubt about the matter of your lord . you have received the very same way .
o you who have faith ! do not establish the prayer , and are witnesses of them . and be wary of allah , to keep your duty to them . indeed , allah is acquainted with what they do .
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah you have no protector or helper .
he said : my lord ! how can i have a son , when my wife is barren , and i have reached infirm old age ?
gehennaawaits whosoever comes before his lord as a sinner , there he shall neither die nor live .
worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
lord of the east and lord of the west .
say : i pray unto allah only , and ascribe unto him no partner .
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
we made the children of israel known to the truth that moses would ask the children of israel . the people of israel to whom we had given the commandments of moses would have been thrown into the presence of god . it was not for the unjust to have a share in the morning to which we had given them the shadows . they could have no wrong .
and he said , “ i am just a little in respect of this , and a few of you will be given to me . i do not want to please you . i will be the best of you , if you want to be one of the same . i want to please you if god wants to please you .
and they say , “ all that is in their hearts , and all that is in their bellies – and if only it is in the – in the case of allah – he is the most honourable , the all knowing . ”
so the angels called out to him when the angels called out to him , saying , ‘ indeed allah gives you the glad tidings of a son , and the advice of allah is the most honourable , the most honourable . ’
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
verily , the likeness of 'iesabefore allah is the likeness of adam : he created him from dust , then he said unto him : be ! and he is .
on thrones , watching .
they say , shall we be brought back to life again
our torment seek they to hasten on !
but god would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seek forgiveness .
follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until god issues his judgment . he is the best of all judges .
have they not seen that we drive the water to the barren land and produce therewith crops whereof their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
moses said : that is what we were seeking . so they went back retracing their footsteps .
and when we desire to destroy a town we command its affluent ones , and they commit ungodliness therein , then the word becomes realized against it , and we destroy it utterly .
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve invent falsehood about allah , and most of them do not understand .
he has made the two oceans meet each other ,
guard yourself against the fire prepared for unbelievers .
and some of them draw near unto others , questioning ,
wives of the prophet , you are not like any other women . if you fear god , do not be too complaisant in your speech lest he in whose heart is a sickness should covet , but speak in an appropriate manner .
when our verses are recited to them , the unbelievers are of those who disbelieve , and the hearing , the sight of those who are bent on denying the truth . say to them , do you declare the same to those who are bent on denying the truth , god is the swiftest of those who deny the truth .
we shall make you read , so you will not forget ,
those with whom you have made a treaty , then they break their agreement every time and they do not fear allah .
and if youturn away from the needy awaiting mercy from your lord which you expect , then speak to them a gentle word .
indeed , allah is the one who spreads the heavens and the earth . so do not be a skeptic . indeed , if they are attacked , they will not find any one to help them .
and when you have finished , then remember a part of the prayer , and when the people who are in the cause of allah , then make a separation of it , those who are in the cause of allah , will be put in flight , and keep your duty to allah , for the cause of allah is the severest punishment , so that you may not be able to fight for the cause of allah , or the people of the upper hand .
they are the chosen ones , the excellent in our sight .
and said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph with our things , and a wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we tell the truth .
that he may reward those who believe and do good out of his bounty ; he loves not the unbelievers .
do they feel safe from god ’ s overwhelming punishment , or that the hour may not come upon them suddenly when they are unaware ?
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you turn away from us what is with us , except that we are the true ones who have been sent down upon us , and that we have been sent down in it ? ’
he said : i am going to my lord who will guide me .
and none will bind as he will bind .
and indeed we know that they say , it is only a human being who teaches him . the tongue of the man they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
eat and pasture your cattle ; most surely there are signs in this for those endowed with understanding .
, say , ignorant ones , do you command me to worship things other than god
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
in fact , he came with the truth , and he confirmed the messengers .
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our signs and said : when we are bones and fragments , shall we really be raised up as a new creation ?
did we not make the earth a spreading ,
when you leave the upper hand to come to you , they will ask you for help . ask them , do not be afraid , for god has the knowledge of all that you have done . he will then tell you what you have done .
we had no authority over you . no , you were a rebellious people .
the hypocrites are afraid lest a sura should be sent down about them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say : 'mock on ; god will bring forth what you fear . '
and indeed you have been one of the heirs of us , as we created the first creation , and he has made you turn in your creation , and you have done what you have asked of , and there is for you no one but one of them that has been made familiar with you ; and for you is what you have been concealing .
and mention in the bookmusa . verily ! he was chosen and he was a messengera prophet .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and you have not besides allah any protector or a helper .
and forgive my father ; for he is one of the misguided ;
on that day you shall see the guilty ones secured in chains ;
the believers are indeed brothers . so make peace between your brothers and fear allah , so that you may receive mercy .
and the believers , that they should have believed in him from their lord , and the angels , and the apostles , and their apostles , and they said , “ be wary of allah and the lord of the noble messengers , and to you will all be returned . ”
and the true promise draweth nigh , then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieved will be staring : woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this . indeed , we were wrongdoers .
and when their riches are , they will not be affected by their wealth , and their wealth will not be lightened for them , and we shall add to them a mild provision , and it is only for us to do so . and it is only a brief bargain , and we are not interested in respect of it . and it is only a brief bargain .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear , even though they apprehend not ?
or do they say , he has made it up ? rather , they do not believe .
to him belongs all that is in the hands of god . he has the power to do so . he will certainly cause the righteous ones to suffer because of their disbelief . those who deny the truth will have their due share .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein disdained for ever ;
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah untruth while he is being invited to islam ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
o people , fear your lord on the day of judgment , and be not a son except for his father . the promise of god is to be fulfilled . the promise of god is true , so do not be like the way of god .
enter it in peace . this is the day of life abiding .
wherein he will neither die nor live ,
why should allah punish you if you are grateful and believe ? allah is the thanker , the knower .
and she said , ‘ o allah ! sends down to us a cloud from the sky that we may have been sent down to you . a clear provision from allah , and give us a virtuous sustenance . ’
who corrupt the land and do not reform it .
then they dispute with one another : 'do you dispute with me about allah ? ' surely , i will be guided to the right path , and i have received the knowledge of the things you do ; do you not then understand ?
they have not any knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
they think that itis far away .
he said , “ i do not think you will not be given any advantage from it , except that i am going to know what my lord has given you . i have no faith in the everlasting life . i have no faith in the everlasting life . ”
it is all the same to him whether you speak in secret or aloud , whether you hide it by night or walk in the light of day .
we sent to the people of their town their nation , saying , o our people , worship god , for you have no other god but he . so let them bring you a lesson from god , and let not the least be punished by a great punishment .
the people of the fire will soon see the punishment of hell . they will be condemned by the fire and the believers will say to the believers , suffer the great torment .
the woman who did not care to seduce joseph ’ s wealth , he will say to his servant : “ take it as well . ” he said , “ put it on your heels , and i will not be unjust to the unjust . my lord does not like the wrongdoers . ”
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
uff to you and to what you worship instead of allah . have you then no sense ?
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be with the truthful .
nearer unto thee and nearer ,
say , “ if mankind and jinn were to come together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ”
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them cut off , extinguished .
his companion will say , ‘ our lord ! i did not incite him to rebel , but he wasin extreme error . ’
if they dispute with him , tell them : ' i will be those who follow me , and ' say , “ what ! you accept the faith of god , and those who are given the book . but if you submit yourselves to god , those who are given the book are straightforward . ”
say : 'what think you ? if this be from god 's book , then shall you have it not , ' then , know that there is no doubt that you are in a state of judgment ?
of those who are righteous , it is the best of what he has sent down . what is the matter with them ? they say : what is it that has been sent down to them ? they will surely answer : the abode of the hereafter is better and more enduring .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein , andwhat an evil abode of the arrogant !
it is he who sends down water from the sky . it is he who sends down to you all that is in the sky . we will bring forth a source of clay-stones ” there are many signs in this , but of the two gardens will be the real .
in whatever matter you disagree , the judgment thereof belongs to god . such is god , my lord ; in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
say , “ bring forth those who testify to the truth that god has given you , and if they do not testify to our verses , you will be not followed by them and those who do not believe in our verses and are those who do not believe in our signs . ”
nay , but those who disbelieve are in self-exaltation and opposition .
or enjoineth piety ?
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus we reward the righteous .
and raiseand scatter them around ,
if you have to do what we have revealed to you , you would have disputed about the children of israel . you have no doubt about the matter of your lord . you have received the very same way .
or dost thou think the men of the cave and er-rakeem were among our signs a wonder ?
theirs shall be a bed of hell , and over them coverings . thus do we recompense the wrong-doers .
and of the people is he who invites to the worship of one another , if some of them were to be given good , then the calamity of it came upon it ; and this is a clear loss .
those of your women who commit unlawful sexual intercourse , take the evidence of four witnesses from among you against them . if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them away or god ordains for them .
none can guide those whom god has caused to go astray and has left to continue blindly in their rebellion .
he who fears will mind ,
indeed , allah is the one who spreads the heavens and the earth . so do not be a skeptic . indeed , if they are attacked , they will not find any one to help them .
he gives wisdom to whomever he wants . whoever is given wisdom has certainly been given much good . but none remembers but men of understanding .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky so that we have caused them to grow thereby , and some of the mountains are spreading up , and some of them are spreading up .
and establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts that which they feared from them .
you have to recite to them the story of the stories of the prophets that we may reveal to you . it is in the course of truth that we have sent you to the truth , and to remind the disbelievers .
and constructed above you seven strong
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
he knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
indeed it is an evil station and abode . ’
you are the ones who will be victorious . when i have provided you with fear , they will look at it , and look at their eyes . but when the awe of god is equal to you , they will make their deeds appear decorous to him . but when they are subdued , god will make their deeds appear decorous to him .
“ and put your hand inside your armpit – it will emerge white , without any harm— another sign . ”
read ! your lord is the most generous ,
and because of their bond against the signs of allah and his signs and the injeel ] , that they should say , “ in fact , it is allah ’ s will . they do not have faith in it . indeed , they do not have faith .
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , our lord , if only you had sent us a messenger , we would have followed your revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced .
he said , “ no , go both of you with our signs . we are with you , listening .
and give me a reputation of truth among the others .
have the unbelievers been repaid for what they used to do ?
he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and deemed that they would never be brought back to us .
and those who give whatsoever they give , while their hearts are anxious that unto their lord they are to be retutners
it is not an virtue for you , to the east and the west ; but what an excellent deed he has who believed and did good deeds , and gave the alms , and the alms , and the prayer , and the witnesses ; and the prayer , and the traveller ; and those who are in their prayer , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and are those who keep their duty to allah and make the poor-rate and those who keep their duty .
then we destroyed the others .
a warning to mankind ,
to thamood we sent their brother salih saying : 'worship allah ' but they were two parties quarrelling with each other .
put your hand inside your pocket , and it will come forth white without blemish—among nine miracles to pharaoh and his people . they are immoral people .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit , an evil guide and an evil friend .
and never say of anything , i shall do it tomorrow ,
and they will see the punishment of the day of resurrection , and those who follow their own lusts , and when they are subjected to the torment , they will be seized by the punishment , and they will be stilled .
lo ! those who believe , and those who believe , and those who are judaised , unto allah 's angels , are the slaves of the fire , - the appointer of the men of old , and allah will judge between them . lo ! allah is a witness over all things .
what is the inevitable ?
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to have with me patience ;
you did not hope that the book should be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
whether you disclose anything or hide it , allah indeed knows all things .
and those who , when the lord of the throne is flung to him , glorify him in the glory of the glory of their lord and seek the forgiveness of allah , and they will say , “ our lord , you have received the mercy of those who have accepted faith , and do so for your sins , and you will be called to account for the punishment . ”
indeed those who slander chaste women , indiscreet but believing , are cursed in this life and in the hereafter ; and for them is a great punishment .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
we sent noah to his people and he lived with them for a thousand-less-fifty years . but the deluge overtook them , for they were wrongdoers .
there are some people who say , we believe in god and the last day , but they are not believers .
obedience and upright speech . then , when the matter is determined , if they were true to allah it would have been better for them .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
on that day the trumpet will be blown and whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be stricken with any one from the heavens and the earth . then , the people will be neglected , and they will see .
verily i fear for you the torment of a mighty day .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to something terrible .
their likeness is that of one who kindles a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness , unable to see .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
o you who have believed , do not know the polytheists and the polytheists , and the polytheists will not be able to find a great favour on them . but if you fear , then know that allah will bestow his bounty on you , and he is all-knowing , all-wise .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
you see many of them competing with one another in sin and hostility , and their eating of things forbidden . evil indeed are the things they do .
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
have you considered lat and ‘ uzza ?
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
god chose adam and noah and the family of abraham and the family of 'imran above all his creatures .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make us clear to us , so that we may see what he wills . indeed , it is clear to us that we should be the victors . indeed , we were to be guided . ’
we gave david and solomon knowledge . they said , praise be to god who has favoured us above many of his believing servants .
and we appointed companions for them , who made what is before them and what is behind them seem fair to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and humans that passed away before them . they were indeed losers .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose ; this is the thought of the unbelievers . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
none shall roast therein but the most wretched ,
o ye who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and be grateful to allah , if it ishe whom ye worship .
and who is there in the heavens and the earth , and will give you sustenance out of it ? and who brings forth the dead from the dead , and who brings forth the dead from the living , and who brings about the dead , and who will say , “ are you wary of allah ? ” say , “ so do you not fear ? ”
and he had created them and those who were with him , and he made a place of peace on him . so , in my presence , you are only a little of what you do .
say , ‘ indeed my lord has guided me to a straight path , a straight religion , the creed of abraham , a hanif , and he was not of the polytheists . ’
then glorify your lord with praise and ask him for forgivenes . he accepts repentance .
white , delicious to those who drink .
o people of the book ! verily , we have sent to you the book , as a sign to you , and that which is not in the least bit of you , and to clarify for you the book ; and that in the things you may remember , surely , allah has sent down a clear light to you from him .
he said , “ the refuge of you * is with him . ” he said , “ the refuge of god will be no refuge on him , and he will have the upper hand on the contrary , and they will not be blamed .
they said , “ we have taken a she-camel ” ; they said , “ the she-camel of allah ” ; they said , “ this is the she-camel of allah , and what lies about it , ” they will say , “ this is what they had denied before ; and allah is the utmost slander , ”
and when our verses are recited to him , he turns away in pride , as if he heard them not , as though there was a deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord please ; surely your lord is the doer of what he desires .
and seek help through patience and prayer , and indeed , it is difficult except for the humbly submissive
or yet remember , and the reminder profit him .
they want to put out the light of god with their mouths , but god will perfect his light , however the unbelievers may dislike it .
they will not hear its faintest sound , while they abide in that which their souls desire .
praise be to god , originator of the heavens and the earth , who appointed the angels as his messengers , with wings , two , three and four . he increases in creation what he wills . god has power over all things .
and know that the life of this world is but play and pastime , and the wealth and the children ; so it is only a temporary orchard , in the world to come , and then they will be in a state of great repayment .
i will cast him into hell .
it is for two consecutive years , for one who desires to please it , and to whomever he wishes , to whomever he wishes , is of the human being . and if you do not , it is the same for him ; and if you do not , it is the same for him ; and if you do not , it is in the way of allah , and in order that you may be free of blame ; and if any do , it is in the way of allah ; and if you do
and when they said , “ o my people ! why do you give me a sign. ” in response , they said , “ o my people ! why do you give me a successor ? ” in fact , allah has made their hearts seem decorous to him ; and allah does not guide the defiantly disobedient people .
until when he comes to us , he will say , “ if only there were between me and you the distance of the two easts. ” what an evil companion !
the path of those whom thou hast favoured , not of those against whom thou art wrathful , nor of those who are astray .
and we shall make it a source of shame for the whole of the human being , and the mercy of allah to the righteous and the mercy of allah . no advantage will there be for them but it .
and ye know that the messenger of allah hath gone forth for you , if ye are being seduced , and allah hath misled them from your faith , and that they may have faith in the wrath of allah , and they are the infidels .
and they say , “ if we were to follow the guidance , we would have followed you from our guidance , and we will not be punished with hardship . we will have given you a far place of it , but most of them do not know . ”
and feed the needy for the love of him , and the orphans and the captives ,
he said : give me respite till the day they are raised up .
as a provision for the servants , and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
and a barrier shall be placed between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them before ; as for they were of the disquieting .
thus we have revealed it as a dispensation in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you , you shall have no protector or shield against god .
and we have made the sky a roof withheld . yet they turn away from its signs .
and whomsoever allah guides , for him there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , possessor of retribution ?
and when you have the favored of those who are given the good , you are the ones that allah has given to you , and you will say , “ o you who have received your child , you have no right to me , and the same is with you . i do not have any power to do so , with their own eyes , and in the same way , you may have no partnership in the same way . we have done the same to you so that you may have a guardian . ”
but none believed in moses except some children of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his nobles would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
as for those who disbelieve , if they possessed all that the earth contains and as much besides it , to ransom themselves from the punishment of the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted of them . for them is a painful punishment .
and when our command came , we delivered shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook those who were wrongdoers , and they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes ,
have they not considered the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that god has created , and that their time may have drawn near ? in what message after this will they believe ?
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted be allah above that which they associate !
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein there is benefit for you . allah knows what you reveal and what you hide .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permission , as those before them asked leave . thus does allah make clear to you his communications ; and allah is knowing , wise .
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you suddenly , or openly , shall any be destroyed except the harmdoing nation '
neither cool nor beneficial .
and allah judges with truth , while those whom they invoke besides him do not judge at all ; surely allah is the hearing , the seeing .
and we know that some of you will reject it .
those who are bent on denying the truth are bent on denying the truth as if you were to protect them from god . if the disbelievers were to be sent back , they would say , we are not responsible with you . but god will never cause the disbelievers to go to the believers .
marry the spouseless among you and those who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is bounteous and all-knowing .
tell the unbelievers that if they desist , what is past will be forgiven them . but if they persist , the tradition of the ancients has already passed .
why have no armlets of gold been given him , or angels sent down successively with him '
on that day shall the great event come to pass ,
alif . lam . mim .
and if youturn away from the needy awaiting mercy from your lord which you expect , then speak to them a gentle word .
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them who were better in possessions andappearance ?
say : 'yes , but worthless '
your god is one god ; there is no god but he , the all-merciful , the all-compassionate .
he created man of clay like the potter 's ,
they will say , “ if only i had fabricated it , ” say , “ if i have fabricated it , you will not have any power to frustrate me , nor will you be able to challenge god . god is the forgiver and the most merciful . ”
and serve your lord until there comes to you that which is certain .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick . a magician will not succeed wherever he may come .
they belied , and followed their own lusts ; and every affair has its appointed term .
and had he not been of those who hallow him ,
and the blind , and the sighted , and the deaf , and the mahrum , and the poor , and the wayfarer , will be of your wealth , or the indigentin your breath . and it is in the presence of your lord that you may be truthful , or the same applies to your breath .
on that day you shall see the guilty ones secured in chains ;
those who dispute about the ayatof allah , without any proof will have been sent down to them . so in the sight of allah , is the result of those who have faith and in the hereafter , and thus does allah set a seal on all sides .
it is we who revive the dead and write down what they have forwarded and what they leave behind , and we have figured everything in a clear book .
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and the blood , clear signs ; but they behaved haughtily and they were a guilty people .
when we inspired in thy mother that which is inspired ,
and thou shalt see the mountains , that thou supposest fixed , passing away as the passing of the clouds—the handiwork of allah who hath perfected everything . verily he is aware of the things you do .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book that is not a tenth of the book and those who are bent on denying the truth and are bent on denying the truth , when the disbelievers have faith ?
and wives of the women and women are your wives , and follow the best places of prayer , and you will come to know what is with you . and do not be afraid of allah and keep your duty to him , and give good news to the believers .
bear patiently with what they say , and ignore them politely .
had they believed in god and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as allies . but many of them are immoral .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter -- that is life , did they but know !
the duty of the messenger is only to preach . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
melting their insides and their skins .
you will die , and they will die .
and arruredly they had already covenanted with allah that they would not turn their backs ; and allah 's covenant shall be inquired of .
then , therewith , with their trail of dust ,
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
and if you were to be my parents and their parents , then let no sign be with me , in order to speak of me , and so do not follow the path of those who have been given , and follow the best of what you have done .
and a tree that grows on mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
there is nothing but our life of this world ! we die and we live ! and we are not going to be resurrected .
indeed they were near to themselves that they may be godwary so that they may be far away from their noble messengers . unquestionably , allah knows what they conceal and what they declare . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the hearts .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
and with pharaoh of the tent pegs
such are those who buy the life of this world at the price of the hereafter . their punishment shall not be lightened nor shall they be helped .
on a straight path ,
and when it was said , “ the promise of allah is true , and the hour , there is no doubt about it . you said , we do not know what the hour is , we assume it is only speculation ; we are not convinced . ”
but when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : 'this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our fathers , the ancients . '
corruption has appeared on land and sea , because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , in order that they may return .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
and when he learns something of our revelations , he takes them in mockery . for such there is a humiliating punishment .
o you who have believed , do not make your fathers a protector and your progeny , and do not befriend them , if they have chosen the faith of your lord , and those who have turned away , - those are the unjust .
then caused the latter folk to follow after ?
save single-minded slaves of allah .
and confers no favor upon anyone for recompense
by allah 's favour and bounty . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity ,
this is a book sent down to you , so let there be no impediment in your heart because of it . it is a reminder to the believers .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the affluent among them said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the balance , and do not increase except in its own good , until the extent of the matter that is given to you , and , to the extent that it may be that they are given by allah ’ s command , and so do not be of the doubters .
they said , “ you are an ill omen in your you . will you not be reminded ? ” in fact , you are a people who are a people who do evil .
say , “ the impureand the pureare not equal , even though the abundance of the bad may impress you . so fear allah , o you who possess intellect , so that you may succeed . ”
and if a breath of thy lord 's punishment were to touch them , they would surely say : woe to us ! verily , we were wrong-doers .
and when musa said unto his people : o my people ! remember allah 's favour unto you and that of which ye had been sent forth of your messengers , and whosoever ye will be given unto you , and whosoever ye will be given of non-effect , -
they said : by allah ! you know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves !
they think the confederates have not departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desert with the bedouins asking news of you . if they were among you , they would fight but little .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden when they vowed to gather the fruits in the morning
then , when they saw our might , they said : we believe in allah alone , and we disbelieve in that which we used to associate with him .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
then , when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we delivered those who forbade evil , and seized the unjust with a dreadful punishment , because of their sinfulness .
except the family of lot . we shall surely save them all
o mankind ! fear your lord . lo ! the earthquake of the houris a tremendous thing .
what , shalt thou make the deaf to hear , or shalt thou guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
we shall certainly test you until we know those who strive hard for the cause of god and those who are steadfast , and try your news .
—those who barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
there is a sign for you , , that the master of the prophet will be said to them , “ i have the master of this world ; and there is peace upon you from your lord . the noble messenger of the family of israel will have a lot , so that the angels may have a lot . ”
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before ; this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
but we are a numerous host , ever on guard .
then we revealed to moses , 'strike with thy staff the sea ' ; and it clave , and each part was as a mighty mount .
abraham was certainly a nation obedient to god , a monotheist , and he was not a pagan .
“ o my lord ! indeed you have given me , and i have given you the knowledge of the heavens and the earth , the originator of the heavens and the earth , and you have not been of the righteous . ”
who belieth and turneth away .
on the day when it comes , no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and others blessed .
indeed , allah has promised you , , all of you , a promise ; and he will be seized by the permission of allah . then you will be seized by the punishment , and you will not be able to make a mistake . allah has forgiven you , and you will not be able to return to the truth . allah has given you the favor of the believers .
and the sky will be split open—for it will be frail on that day—
and to say , “ both of you go to him , and say , we are the ones who have from his lord a ” ; therefore , let them have a good punishment from your lord , and the punishment of your lord is upon those who follow guidance . ”
surely those against whom the word of your lord has proved true will not believe ,
and fair maidens with large , lustrous eyes
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
indeed , we have made this to the human being all the same to do so . so be , i , she , woman , i hear my punishment and my commination .
to him belongs everything in the heavens and everything on earth . god is the rich , the praised .
and in the alternation of night and day , there is a provision for him in the heavens , and the earth ; so in the end of the earth , it is in a state of signs for those who are wise .
o my people ! ask for me , my lord , and to him have the right to return . he will send down abundant rain from the sky for you , and you will be in the state of the remembrance .
and whenever a surah is revealed , they will be sent down to allah and with his messenger , and they will be given exemption by you . they say , ‘ we will not be deprived of you , ’
and if they would go on you , they would not have been able to add to you , but they have not been remiss in speech , and the example of that which they had been given to you , so that they may be among the cheats . and allah is well-acquainted with the wrong-doers .
and the guilty shall see the fire and know that they are going to fall into it , and will find no escape from it .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be a skeptic .
and the mountains shall be as plucked wool-tufts ,
those who are apprehensive of the believers , but those who are fought against god 's cause , and are not remiss in serving , are not the favor of god ; surely god is gracious to those who are good .
solomon asked his people , who among you can bring her throne beforecomes to me submissively ?
and they will cry : o malik ! let your lord make an end of us . he will say : lo ! here ye must remain .
in the gardens of bliss ,
we sent messengers before you to the previous peoples ,
o children of adam ! why do you not take the curse of him as if he was a man of yours , as well as the means of your mother , in the casting of a slave ? and indeed , the devil ’ s conspiracy is with you , and we have made the shaitans as a guardian .
and when the wife was dispelled , and he said , ‘ shall i find you a person so that you may see that i may see that you will be able to see it , and we will put you in a state of safety from the people , and so that you may make a state of safety between the people ’ s affair ? ’
—which none can avert from the faithless —
that is every soul that has done the deeds of the past , so that he may make it known to himself . so it is to god that the lord of the universe will abandon all that they had done , and he will cause what was to disappear .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the apostle is true and after clear signs had come unto them ? and allah guideth not a wrong-doing people .
and in moseswhen we sent him unto pharaoh with a manifest authority .
they will say , glory be to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , they worshipped the jinn ; most of them had faith in them .
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you
allah has created you from dust , and then he created you from a drop of liquid , and then of them is he who is free from a drop of fluid , and he is not a resident of what is with him . indeed , on allah is easy .
say : ' i have the stores of the god . ' there is no doubt about it . i have not been aware of it , but follow what is revealed to you . are you not aware of the present things ?
it will be but one shout , and behold them brought together before us !
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
did we not make the earth a spreading ,
on the day when god will say to the people of the jinn , “ o people of the jinn , indeed you have been unjust to the people of the town . you have indeed been unaware about the same time and you will say , ‘ our lord ! indeed your abode is the everlasting abode ; indeed your lord is the lord of the shelter .
and the same is that they should turn to the extent of the land after the coming of the earth , after it has been opened , and they have become a refuge for them , and the same is that they should not be able to accept it , and the same is to be the same for them , and the same is that they should not be able to make a mistake . and the matter of the matter is that they should not be able to take it away .
shu'ayb said to them , will you not fear god ?
and we destroyed not a city but it had its warners .
do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an immorality and an evil way .
on the day when they shall have their appointed provisions , and in the fire shall be its return , and it shall be said : this is what you had been promised . taste , then , this chastisement for your own deeds .
to us is their return ;
thus do we reward the righteous ones .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you . you were certainly among those who were unaware before this .
if you ask them , they will say , we were only talking idly and joking . say , were you mocking god , his revelations , and his messenger ?
what , do they not know that god does not punish them at all , while they are to be seen of the torah ? only his wage is the kingdom of the house , but most of them are not aware .
did we not destroy the former generations ?
moses said to him , may i follow you , so that you may teach me the guidance that you have been taught ?
a book the verses of which are explained in detail , the qur ’ an in arabic for people of intellect .
they have sold the signs of allah for a small price and have barredfrom his way . evil indeed is what they have been doing .
say thou : it is your lord that hath sent down unto you a revelation from your lord . whoso intendeth so that he may let it be a believer unto the disbelievers , who will let them taste the like of it , and in the midst of a surety , we shall make it a taste unto the wrong- doers . and that , of a surety , it is the same to be the dwellingplace of the workers of water , and a hapless way .
but they called him a liar and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin and leveled it .
allah already knows those among you who hinder and those who say to their brethren : come to us , and come not to the fight except for a little while ,
will have no power , and no helper .
when you met , he showed them to you as few in your eyes , and he made you appear few in their eyes , so that god might determine what was ordained . to god all matters revert .
anddavid and solomon when they gave judgement concerning the field when the sheep of some people strayed into it by night , and we were witness to their judgement .
he said , 'my people , is my tribe stronger against you than god ? you have cast him behind your backs , and my lord encompasses all that you do .
that indeed is a division most unfair !
he was taught by one mighty in power ,
ask them , which of them will guarantee that !
we gave the israelites to the children of israel and followed them , and given them guidance and given them sustenance in the land . indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they differ .
nearer unto thee and nearer ,
so cause a piece of the sky to fall upon us if you are one of the truthful .
from nutfahhe created him , and then set him in due proportion ;
and he has subjected to you what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , all from him . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
there is nothing but our life of this world ! we die and we live ! and we are not going to be resurrected .
surely thou art seeing us .
and o my people , do not ask for your preaching any money , and do not ask any wealth . my reward is only with allah . indeed , i am a people who are the ignorant .
our lord ! verily , whom you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him ; and the wrongdoers shall have no helpers .
the day of sorting out is the appointed time for all .
and whoever comes to the noble messenger after it has come to you , the guidance after it has come to you , is that they should be guided to a path that is straight from the path , so we shall make it to be a great destination .
or what is it that is in your own form ? they say , “ will we be resurrected ? ” say , “ what is it that you will bring us to life ? ” say , “ will we be resurrected by the resurrection ? ”
there is indeed a reminder in that for one who has a heart , or takes heed .
they would say , our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched .
the arrogant leaders said , we reject what you believe in .
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are heedless .
but if you do not bring him to me , you shall have no measurefrom me , nor shall you come near me .
it is he who has made the earth a bed and has set in it firm mountains . and the night , in which he has set a veil . surely , there are signs in this for those who reflect .
it behoves them not , neither are they able .
indeed , the righteous will be among gardens and springs ,
and we made the day for seeking livelihood .
then , you will turn away from them and turn away from you in the midst of one another . but if you have to turn away , then you will be made to turn away from them in the battle , but will have no one to save you on the day of resurrection . will you , then , be requited for what you do ?
god invites to the home of peace , and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
lo ! for the duteous is achievement -
their likeness is that of one who kindles a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness , unable to see .
on the day whenfaces will turn white andfaces will turn black . as for those whose faces turn black : did you disbelieve after your believing ? so taste the punishment because of what you used to disbelieve .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
whenever a new revelation comes to them from their lord , they listen to it in a playful manner ,
verily , those who are going to be waiting for you , they are the ones ; so i 'm going to be spoken to the interpretation of this , and i 'm the best job . now i 've said to the mcdonald 's job , the best job , the best job . i said , this is the best letter , i 've been now interested in mcdonald 's . the mcdonald 's job , i 've been asking the best job . the mcdonald 's job , i 've been the best to mcdonald .
and when we made a covenant with you , that you should not shed each other 's blood , nor expel one another from your homes , and you consented to this and bore witness .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend your allies , and do not fear a friend , while you have a friend with respect to them . indeed , they are the ones that have received from allah what you do not know ; and for me is what you do with me , and i am the best of those who do right .
but when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; surely he was frequent in returning .
say , “ do i not worship any one other than god , the originator of the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ i am commanded to be the first of the heavens and the earth , and i am the first of those who submit . ”
“ fashion coats of mail and measure the links well ; and do good deeds ; i am seeing your deeds . ”
and the earth which splits ,
we had favored you another time .
do those who commit misdeeds suppose that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal their living and their dying ? how ill they judge !
our lord ! grant us what you promised to us through your messengers and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you do not fail inpromise .
and there is for them a woman who is a youth ; so let them be known , and the sustenance of that which allah has created in the past , and the lawful , and the wayfarer . but the fact is that they are in the way of allah , the owner of the world , and the best of that which is true . and if they were to be given their duty to allah , he is the most mighty , the most wise .
he has created the heavens and the earth in truth . he has created the heavens and the earth with its purpose , and the command is only for allah , and he is the all-knower , the all-aware .
we have forbidden the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and from among the people , there is no one but one of them ; but one of them is just one religion ; so among them is one religion , and in the differences of your lord , it is the proper justice .
he will sip it , but will not be able to gulp it down . death will come upon him from every side , yet he will not die , and beyond him is a terrible punishment .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them cast it aside ? nay , most of them do not believe .
a guidance and good news for the believers
by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
to make it a lesson for you—so that retaining ears may retain it .
and do not say about what your tongues assert of untruth , this is lawful , and this is forbidden , so as to invent lies against allah . indeed , those who invent lies about allah will not succeed .
and those who disbelieve say : why was the qur'an not revealed to him all at once ? thus , that we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have spaced it distinctly .
our lord ! we believe in that which thou hast sent down , and we follow the apostle , therefore write us down among those who bear witness .
but when he tests him by restricting his provision , he says : 'my lord has humiliated me '
whoever brings virtue shall receiveten times its like ; but whoever brings vice shall not be requited except with its like , and they will not be wronged .
wherefore call unto allah , making religion for him pure , though the infidels be averse .
“ in fact , we are unfortunate . ”
the likeness of allah is a similitude he hath made a mortal : on him is a man 's marks , and a man 's similitude ; is it not a single that is the same , but most of them are not aware ?
they will bear their own burdens in full on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . how evil is that which they bear !
when it descends into their yard , evil will be the morning of those forewarned .
and he bethinketh that it is the time of parting .
but if they deny you , you have belied him . indeed , those who were before them had belied the truth , even though they were manifest signs .
and of his signs is that he shows you the lightning that inspires you with it , and revives the earth after its death ; most surely there are signs in this for those who understand .
on the day when hidden things shall be made manifest ,
but nay ! i swear by all that ye see
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
then caused the latter folk to follow after ?
and we inspired moses : “ throw your staff. ” and at once , it swallowed what they were faking .
and it is naught but a reminder unto all beings .
and lower unto them the wing of meekness out of mercy and say : my lord ! have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little .
and what shall teach thee what is the day of doom ?
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
so they will acknowledge their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
as for those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their contention is void in the sight of their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
have you not considered how allah sets forth a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , whose root is firmly fixed and its branchesin the sky .
thereupon he called her from below her , do not grieve ; your lord has provided a brook that runs at your feet ,
then we directed our back to the vacant of the land , until they have been given to enjoy . they said , “ our lord has afflicted us with our suffering , and we will destroy them completely . ”
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . glory be to him ! - and he is the exalted in might , the beholder of that which is in the heavens and the earth . is it not a thing for allah that ye do not know ?
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know what my warning is like .
and we taught him the fashioning of garments for you , to fortify you against your violence ; then are you thankful ?
those who deny the signs of god and the meeting with him , have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
nay , but they denythe hour , and for those who denythe hour we have prepared a blaze .
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him so that he has been alongside him a warner ? ”
beside him . so plot against me all together , and then give me no respite .
and when we said to the angels , “ bow down to adam. ” they bowed down , except for iblis . he refused and was proud , and became one of the unbelievers .
there was not a messenger sent to him , but that they should be given to it , and if they were to be attacked , they would certainly have sought forgiveness from you , and they would surely have been repentant .
god knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
say , “ who is the refuge of god , to protect you from him ? ” if he wanted to harm you , he could have received mercy from you , and if he wills , he can show you his mercy , and they will have no helpers .
woe to human beings ! whenever a messenger came to them , they mocked him .
then , verily , thy lord unto those who emigrated after they had been tempted , and thereafter struggled hard and endured , verily thy lord thereafter is forgiving , merciful .
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? no one feels secure from god ’ s devising except the people who are lost .
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
god certainly knows the believers and the hypocrites .
tell them about the guests of abraham
and whoever brings evil – so their faces will be dipped into the fire ; what reward will you get , except what you used to do ?
and among men and beasts and cattle are diverse colors . only those of his servants fear allah who have knowledge . indeed , allah is exalted in might and forgiving .
similarly , pharaoh , and those before him , and the ruined villages , sinned
and he does not withhold knowledge of the unseen .
this is the straight path of your lord . we have explained our revelations to those who take heed .
perchance thou consumest thyself that they are not believers .
o you who have faith ! when you are dead , then the witness of one of you is going to be shown to you . so , if you were to be shown the truth , then the one among you will be able to bring a witness to it , and we will not bring a witness to it , if we were to bring a witness to it , and we will not bring the witnesses as a witness . indeed , if we do so , we will not be able to bring a witness to
and because of the fear of allah , we have made plain to him the land , and he took it in a way . he said , ‘ you are indeed the manifest ones . ’
and manat , the other third ?
and he will provide for him from where he will be given to him . and whoever takes his trust in allah , he is indeed going to take his command . indeed allah has full control of all things .
and we have set a number of clay-stones
say : allah knows what is in the cave , and what is between the heavens and the earth . he is the knower of the heavens and the earth , and he is the most awarding of what is .
we know best what they say , and you are not there to compel them . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
and they stayed in their cave for three hundred years , adding nine .
who is it that will lend allah a goodly loan so he will multiply it for him and he will havea liberal reward ?
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea freely .
i convey unto you the messages of my lord , and i am a trustworthy adviserfor you .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
he said , ‘ by your might , i will surely pervert them ,
the unbelievers say : why has not some sign been sent down to him from his lord ? but you are only a warner , and every people has its guide .
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a devastating flood that swept away the dams and replaced their gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
say : obey allah and obey the messenger . but if they turn away , then it is only in the remembrance of allah . and if they obey , then indeed , it is in plain terms .
they even solicited of him his guests , whereat we blotted out their eyes , “ taste my punishment and my warnings . ”
then the end of those who committed misdeeds was that they denied the signs of allah and used to ridicule them .
said moosa , “ rather , my lord is with me ; he will guide me . ”
even if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide ; and they will have no helpers .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
from them emerge pearls and coral .
on that day they will follow the summoner who deceiveth not , and voices will be hushed for the beneficent , and thou hearest but a faint murmur .
most surely the nearest of men to ibrahim are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . allah is the guardian of the believers .
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins , and will amplify his reward .
what , have we made the dead to be the one who has brought the dead to life and made the light of the light seem fair to him ? that is how you will be in the shadows of the pit , and this is how they have been doing '
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them who were better in possessions andappearance ?
so do not obey the deniers ,
and guard their private parts
those who are the angels , they shall be in their souls , while they are in error , and they say : we have no part of this , but they will answer : surely , allah knows what you do .
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
and the elevated canopy
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
so he prayed to his lord : i am helpless , deliver me .
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two groups better reckoned the period they had stayed .
and when you and those with you have safely boarded the ship say , ‘ all praise is to allah who has saved us from the wrongdoing lot . ’
and tenderness from our presence and purity , and he was god-fearing .
and they went early in determination , able .
indeed , we have sent down to you that which is in the book , that it may explain to mankind that in order that they may be guided ; and whoever goes aright , he has indeed led his way astray ; and you are not to be blamed .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the polytheists would never desist until the clear proof came to them .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
reclining therein on couches , without facing anysun , orcold .
and a cup overflowing .
but as for those in whose hearts is sickness , it adds disgrace to their disgrace , and they die as unbelievers .
and of you is allah ’ s wealth and what is with you , and provided you with his means of good things and a goodly sustenance . will they not then be ungrateful to allah ? and they are ungrateful !
say : those who are bent on denying the truth will be called to account for their people , and they will be called to account for a people who have no faith . but , if you turn your backs , they will have a painful punishment , but if you turn your backs , then have a grievous penalty .
indeed , there are over you watchers ,
and lower unto them the wing of meekness out of mercy and say : my lord ! have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little .
or have ye an authority manifest ?
with hardship comes ease .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . by no means ! aye ! he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
we saved him and his family from the great affliction ,
they hide themselves from men and do not hide from allah , whereas he is with them when they meditate by night words which please him not , and allah encompasses what they do .
but we are a numerous host , ever on guard .
i will certainly punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
who set up along with allah anot her god ; presently they shall know .
those whose efforts have been wasted in this life while they thought that they were acquiring good by their deeds !
why do you not give up your wealth to god ? god is in the heavens and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and the earth belong to him . they have no power to do so . god is certainly well aware of what you do .
he said , 'my people , is my tribe stronger against you than god ? you have cast him behind your backs , and my lord encompasses all that you do .
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
who collects wealth andcounts it .
and he made it an enduring word in his progeny , so that they may return .
and for those who turn away from evil , and are apprehensive of the death , and say , “ i have been lost , and will not get any attention to the unbelievers . we have prepared a painful punishment for the disbelievers . ”
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
we have revealed to you the book with the truth ; so worship god , devoting your religion to him .
they did not forbid one another from the wrongdoing they were committing . evil indeed were their deeds .
their eyes humbled , humiliation will cover them . that is the day which they were promised .
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
and in order that they may be told , our lord ! the most gracious ! glory be to thee ! the most beneficent ! in the presence of the compassionate they will say : our lord ! surely he is the lord of the worlds .
verily the culprits in hell 's torment will be abiders .
so when moses came to us with the praise of his lord , he said , ‘ i have attention to you , ’ he said , ‘ you will indeed be able to see , ’ and i too am the first of you . then , if i do , i will be the first to call upon you , and i will be the first to put in front of you . then , when my lord ’ s edict came , he said , ‘ i have been free with your own decree , and i
so we delivered him and his people all together ,
those before them denied , then the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . allah is the almighty , the wise .
say : 'what think you ? if this be from god 's book , then shall you have it not , ' then , know that there is no doubt that you are in a state of judgment ?
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two groups better reckoned the period they had stayed .
they said , 'put him and his brother off a while , and send among the cities musterers ,
those who conceal the truth and has made known to them a little . they have only to swallow fire . they will have a painful punishment , and on the day of resurrection , they will have a painful punishment .
if a provocation from satan should provoke you , seek refuge in god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
we never sent the messengers except as a bearer of warning . but those who disbelieve say to the unbelievers , “ in order that they may be warned by the truth , and you will not have any fabrication in it . ”
o you who believe ! follow not the path of satan and the assembly , and do not follow the footsteps of satan . indeed , shaitanis to allah 's favour , and he is the all-knower of the sins .
and we have already turned to them in the book ; it is they who are the same ; and he who makes a breach with his own soul , and he is not to be cast into the sight of those who do evil , and those who do evil are the fasiqin . those who do evil are the unjust .
so let not him who believeth not therein and followeth his own desire turn thee away therefrom lest thou perish .
and remind , for indeed , the reminder benefits the believers .
and when the stars fall down .
what , have you males , and he females !
did he not find you wandering , and give you guidance ?
surely i knew that i should meet my reckoning ,
that wherewith they were contented naught availeth them ?
and he made it an enduring word in his progeny , so that they may return .
and throw down your staff . and when he saw it writhing as if it were a snake , he turned in flight and did not return . o musa ! come forward , and fear not ; indeed , you are of the secure .
and grain having husks and scented plants .
he said : my lord ! give me then respite till the day theare resurrected .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and levelled them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
allah promiseth you much booty that ye will capture , and hath given you this in advance , and hath withheld men 's hands from you , that it may be a token unto the believers , and that he may guide you on a right path .
they said , we have been persecuted before you came to us and since you have come to us . he said , perhaps your lord will destroy your enemy and make you inheritors in the land . then he will see how you act .
and what do you know of that which allah has been mentioned ? indeed , it is forbidden to you , except for the sake of allah . indeed , many of mankind do not know .
excusing or warning .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
it will overtake them suddenly while they are unaware .
they will exchange therein a cup ; wherein is neither vain talk nor sin .
do you not see that we have sent the devils upon the disbelievers , inciting them towithincitement ?
and by parent and offspring ,
save single-minded slaves of allah .
the king of men ,
the recom- pense for their wrong-doing is that the curse of allah and of angels and of men combined .
yet they turned away from him and said : one taught , a madman .
and what do you know of that which allah has been mentioned ? indeed , it is forbidden to you , except for the sake of allah . indeed , many of mankind do not know .
before them the people of noah , and the people of noah , and the people of tubba ' , had they accused him of lies , and he would have seized them with a humiliating torment , so i too am going to give the lie to the truth .
and lot , when he said to his people , ‘ what ! do you commit an outrage none in the world ever committed before you ? !
those who are stiff-necked in the earth , are too proud in the land , and they shall be in a state of carelessness , but if they see the truth , then they are in the way of allah , but if they see the way of allah , they will not be able to see .
when he said unto his father and his folk : what are these images unto which ye pay devotion ?
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and verily , theyare liars .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me , and grant me a kingdom which will not befit anyone after me ; indeed only you are the great bestower . ”
gehennais before him and he is given oozing pus to drink ,
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , 'take what we have given you forcefully and remember what is in it , so that you may be cautious '
and can not give them help , nor can they help themselves ?
he it is who sendeth forth various ways for whom he will , and he sendeth down the shadows of a cloud . he sendeth down his revelations unto the heavens , and he hath set it in a midst of the worlds . and moreover , then , when he becometh a belt , he becometh in a state of delight ,
for those who do good is goodness and more . neither dust nor abasement shall overspread their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise ; they will abide therein .
he said : o son of my mother ! seizenot by my beard , nor by my head ! verily ! i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused division among the children of israel , and hast not waited for my word .
the star of piercing brightness ;
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
by no means ! verily it is an admonition .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
except for he who created me , for he will guide me . ”
what , have we made the dead to be the one who has brought the dead to life and made the light of the light seem fair to him ? that is how you will be in the shadows of the pit , and this is how they have been doing '
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its portents have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
he it is who hath made the day in the light of the sun and the moon a light , and the sun and the moon . he hath made the twain a place of sight for the inquirers .
we will surely ease him toward facility .
o you who have faith ! when you are dead , then the witness of one of you is going to be shown to you . so , if you were to be shown the truth , then the one among you will be able to bring a witness to it , and we will not bring a witness to it , if we were to bring a witness to it , and we will not bring the witnesses as a witness . indeed , if we do so , we will not be able to bring a witness to
they swear by god that they are of you ; but they are not of you . they are a people who are afraid .
exalted be the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
said : even if i bring you better guidance than what you found your fathers following ? they said : verily , we disbelieve in that with which you are sent .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
go , thou and thy brother , with my tokens , and be not faint in remembrance of me .
o you who have faith ! do not make the delivery of allah and do not make the delivery , and do not be lax in the way of allah to be given to him , and do not be afraid of allah ’ s majesty , and do not be afraid of him . and fear allah , for he is indeed the punished of those who do not help one another . ’
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , stories of the ancients .
and by oath of the promised day .
o you who have believed , say to your people , ‘ o listener ! maybe a free gift have been free by ! ’ a good person is free from a slave of his servants , and he is most kind of mercy from your lord , and he will have mercy on him , and you will have a painful punishment from him .
o prophet ! fear allah , and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites . lo ! allah is ever knower , wise .
who would say , are you a confirmer ?
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
the righteously striving believers are the best of all creatures .
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , while he is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
and , o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a day of summoning ,
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not unjustto the slaves .
o ye who believe ! take your bondman in the case of those who have lived before you in the morning , and in the morning , and in the morning : some of your time will be visited by the time of which ye had no right ; and in order that ye may be able to follow it , and in order that allah may make clear to you his communications ; and allah is knowing , wise .
he came upon them the outcome of the truth , and he said , ' nay , but you have gone astray . in fact , it is you who have gone astray . and allah is the victors ,
and the trumpet shall be blown ; that is the day of the threat .
there is naught but our first death , and we shall not be raised again .
and we made a parable for mary 's son , a goodly child , and we breathed into him of the spirit ; and we breathed into him of his spirit , and he was of the devoted worshipers .
the god of men ,
'come out to your tillage if you want to reap '
it is he who made the night for you to rest , and the day to make things visible . surely in that are signs for a people who listen .
labouring , wearied out ,
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a magician and a liar .
and there are many a people who would not desire to be of any benefit to you . and when they are invited to bring you an excellent thing , they will be made secure , and if they are attacked , they will not be able to take you away from it , and they will have no faith in you .
and those who accuse chaste women , and produce not four witnesses , flog them with eighty stripes and do not ever accept their testimony afterwards , for they are profligates ,
we say nothing but that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . he said , i call god to witness , and do you bear witness , that i am clear of what you associate
that allah may repay each soul what it hath earned . lo ! allah is swift at reckoning .
he said , 'even so thy lord has said : easy is that for me ; and that we may make him a sign unto men and a mercy from us , and it is a thing decreed . '
by your lord , we will question them all
then it will be said : this is that which ye used to deny .
it spares not , neither leaves alone
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
you did not hope that the book should be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
if you fear treachery from a people , break offwith them in a like manner . god does not love the treacherous .
indeed they are debarred from overhearing it .
those who swear not to have sexual relations with their wives must wait for four months . but if they reconcile—god is forgiving and merciful .
he will surely be well-pleased .
and give to women their dowers graciously . but if they willingly forego some of it , then consume it with pleasure .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that haply ye may fare well .
and when we made a covenant with you and raised the mount above you , 'take what we have given you forcefully and remember what is in it , so that you may be cautious '
say , “ bring forth those who testify to the truth that god has given you , and if they do not testify to our verses , you will be not followed by them and those who do not believe in our verses and are those who do not believe in our signs . ”
and when the messengers shall come to pass , they will not cease to be in doubt concerning that which they have been scoffing . lo ! in that case they will be a surety given to us the wrath and a loss of loss . then none will we punish against the guilty .
for the taming of qureysh .
looking towards their lord .
even if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide ; and they will have no helpers .
how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession availeth naught save after allah giveth leave to whom he chooseth and accepteth .
those who lower their voices in the presence of the messenger of allah are those whose hearts allah has tested for piety . for them is forgiveness and a great reward .
indeed , there are over you watchers ,
and if he is of those on the right hand ,
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . they are the dwellers of the fire , and there they will abide for ever .
and job when he called to his lord : 'affliction has befallen me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful '
and inform them that the water is to be shared between them , eachdrink attended .
: 'we feed you only desirous of the face of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
or is it that theirs is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend by ropes !
it is god who will resurrect them in the matter of their deeds , and he will make it seem fair to them in the land , and he who makes a matter known to him . there is indeed a sign in that for a people who have understanding .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , and severe .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to remember or desires to show gratitude .
the promise of allah ! allah faileth not his promise , but most men know not .
some faces on that day shall be dusty
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two groups better reckoned the period they had stayed .
your companion is not mad ,
those who believe , and the jews , and the sabians and the christians—whoever believes in god and the last day , and does what is right—they have nothing to fear or to regret .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
he created the heavens and the earth with justice . he is exalted above the associations they attribute .
and it is the same , just as he has decreed , and his praises is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of him in his divinity is upon the day of resurrection , and he is the mighty , the knowing .
save mercy from thy lord . lo ! his kindness unto thee was ever great .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his worshipers . whatsoever you expend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
whichbroke your back ?
but whosoever turns away from my remembrance , his shall be a straitened life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . '
this is hell which the guilty deny .
and remind , for indeed , the reminder benefits the believers .
moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you worshipped the calf after him , and you were unjust .
and he fears ,
so whoever does righteous good deeds while he is a believer , his efforts will not be rejected . we are congnisant of it .
on that day , you will see all people and their people will be gathered together to their own people , who will be called to account for their own people . it will be said to them , today , this day of recompense is what you have been doing .
and were witnessing what they did to the believers .
and verily , for those who have wronged is a portionlike the portion of their predecessors , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags , so that they may recognize it when they go back to their people , so that they may come back .
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one nation , but they continue to differ .
he it is who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days and he causes the throne to descend in the middle of the throne , and he will make the throne subservient to him , all that is in the hands of god . will they , then , take heed ?
and the evil consequences of what they earned overtook them . the wrongdoers among these will also be coiled by the evils of what they earned , and they will not be able to escape .
therein maidens restraining their glances , untouched before them by any man or jinn --
if the children of israel be afflicted by adversity , they would not have incurred the wrath of god . we will punish them with the torment when they were afflicted by death . but god does not like the wrongdoers .
and if it had been our will , we could have sent down all that is revealed to you , and would be in the hearts of that which we have sent down , and then you will not be able to give the heed .
those who , when they have to receive by measure from men , exact full measure ,
he will say , oh , i wish i had sent aheadfor my life .
they prefer to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts were sealed , so they do not understand .
we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of glad tidings , and a warner ,
lo ! we sent noah unto his people : warn thy people ere there come unto them torment afflictive .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease began to say , “ allah and his apostle did not promise usexcept delusion . ”
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if hardship befalls you , they say , we took our precautions beforehand , and they turn away rejoicing .
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . allah is the almighty , the wise .
and when he had furnished them forth with provisionsfor them , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a herald cried : 'cameleers , you are thieves ! '
who establish prayer and give zakah , and have firm faith in the hereafter .
by the much-frequented fane ;
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising on a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
his wife who stood near , laughed as we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is bound to be fulfilled .
they said , “ by god , you are still in your old confusion . ”
upon close-wrought couches
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it.a promise binding upon us . surely , we will do .
then paradise is the shelter .
and if those who do wrong , theirs is the kingdom of the earth , and the like of it with it , and on the day of resurrection , they will all be in the ranks of the torment , and on the day of resurrection they will be secure .
abiders therein , their torment shall not be lightened nor shall they be respited .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled , ?
as your lord brought you out from your home with the truth , a part of the believers disliked it .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
and indeed , to allah belongs the sight of him ; and they say , “ those who are haughty , ” and they say , “ if only allah had guided us , we will be responsible for you . ” so we will not follow you , or will be safe .
they said : o dhul-qarnain ! surely gog and magog make mischief in the land , so may we pay thee tribute on condition that thou set a barrier between us and them ?
and allah will show you the way of your decision and command you to the matter of the two parties . if the people of the same were not equal to the same way , the same would be only for the same time , and if the same should be only for the same time , the same would have been given to the same , and if a man was to be recompensed by the same way , the same applies to your parents , and for the same time , he was only a hanif , and
is this magic , or do you not see ?
and that which ye have believed in your own fire , and the fire is that whereof the people are poured unto them , and the fire is not to be lightened for them , and they are the knowers .
so invoke not with allah another ilahlest you be among those who are punished .
o people ! a proof has come to you from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
god increases in guidance those who seek guidance . and good deeds that endure are better with your lord for reward , and better for consequence .
and rely uponthe almighty , the most merciful .
enter it in peace . this is the day of life abiding .
those who are bent on denying the truth are bent on denying the truth as if you were to protect them from god . if the disbelievers were to be sent back , they would say , we are not responsible with you . but god will never cause the disbelievers to go to the believers .
and the two seas are not equal , nor are they made to be a water of water . and they have the same to drink , and the same will be the same for them , so that you may see the like of their deeds , so that you may be grateful .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
the reward of those who follow the way of god and his messenger , and seek to make it oblique , will be called to account for the coming of the heavens and the earth . the punishment of the fire will be terrible .
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
he said , “ it was she who sought to seduce me . a witness from her family testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , she speaks the truth and he is one of the liars .
by the much-frequented fane ;
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls . those ! they are the transgressors .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you shall be gathered .
and he who is the guardians of allah , and will not be able to intercede for him , and that is the best for you to be the lord of the whole hand , and the same is for you to do so , and be wary of your worshipping him .
like satan , when he says to man , deny the truth , but when he disbelieves , he says , i am innocent of you . i fear god , the lord of the universe .
we had no authority over you . no , you were a rebellious people .
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers through the land deceive thee :
they said : if the wolf were to devour him while we are 'usbah , then surely , we are the losers .
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
andher who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for the worlds .
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardon an offense - indeed , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
and of the fruits of the date-palm and the vine , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
when you marry a woman , they became alerted , so they became motionless about to do so . so that they may be able to do so , and remember the truth of allah , that you may be aware of the quran .
how can you take it back when one of you has already gone in to the other , and they have taken a firm covenant from you ?
and those that bear the burden
and whoever does righteous good deeds , male or female , and is a believer—those will enter paradise , and not be wronged a whit .
and a barrier shall be placed between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them before ; as for they were of the disquieting .
then , out of every sect , we will snatch those most defiant to the most merciful .
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
and do not be saddened by those who rush into disbelief . they will not harm allah a thing . allah does not want to give them any share in the hereafter . there is a great punishment for them .
for him that gives and fears
, o reassured soul ,
and be moderate in your pace and lower your voice . indeed , the most disagreeable of sounds is the voice of donkeys .
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
and in the hours before dawn , they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
whomsoever god guides , he is rightly guided ; and whomsoever he leads astray -- they are the losers .
to allah prostrates whoever there is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and their shadowsin the mornings and the afternoons .
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
dreading some great affliction .
and do not defraud people of their belongings , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say , ‘ tell me , should your water sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ’
and lower unto them the wing of meekness out of mercy and say : my lord ! have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little .
if they intend to deceive you , god is all-sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers
and they ask you to hasten the punishment , but if we had decreed for them an appointed time , then it would have been decided for them , and they will not be able to perceive it .
you will remember what i say to you . i commit my affair to god . god is observant of the servants .
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided . these are they who possess intellect .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was a disease said : these peoplemust be deluded by their religion . but whoever puts his trust in allah , then surely allah is mighty , wise .
by the soul and him who perfected it
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and verily , theyare liars .
be patient , then , the promise of god , a true promise . have you come to know or to be seen in the promise of god . you will surely come to us .
you are the ones that you have said , your lord is your best . he is your master . let your master be your master , and the same applies to you . you are only a pair of the same , and the same applies to you , except in the presence of your family , and the same applies to you . you are only a young man , and in the same state , the same applies to you , and the same is only for you to be executed and in the same state .
god knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
by thethat run , with panting ,
ranks from him and forgiveness and mercy . allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
in the fruits of the two gardens , i will cut off the best of them , or that he may see the two gardens with the clusters of the garden . then , his lord chose him , and guided him .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you ; and i know from allah what you do not know .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book for mankind—they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
but as for those in whose hearts is sickness , it adds disgrace to their disgrace , and they die as unbelievers .
their hearts are sent down to this quran . they will come out of one another in different ways . so that he may make some of it in different ways , in different ways , so that the record of their lord is the most fitting of those who have the right guidance .
and they say : none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . such are their wishful fancies . say : produce your proof if ye are truthful .
but the reprobates will turn away
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
he only orders you to evil and immorality and to say about allah what you do not know .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they have no faith in allah and his apostle , and come to prayer without earnestness , and spend grudgingly .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how could he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and they shall be the ones who repent , and are obedient to them , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and bow in good works , and give good tidings to the worlds .
by the surging sea :
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the illustrious book .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said , if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall certainly be lost .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he is over all things competent -
we determined , how excellent a determiner are we !
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , to proclaim it over all religion , even though the polytheists may detest .
read ! your lord is the most generous ,
when abraham said to his father and his people , i boldly renounce what you worship
god has never begotten a son , nor is there any god besides him . otherwise , each god would have taken away what he created , and some of them would have gained supremacy over others . god is too exalted to be considered equal to anything else .
and there is a messenger among the signs of allah , that he may make those who believe and do righteous deeds , to scatter them in the shadows ; and whoever believes in allah and in his light , he will cause them to enter in the midst of gardens with streams of running water , and allah will provide for them a good provision .
and the blind , and the sighted , and the deaf , and the mahrum , and the poor , and the wayfarer , will be of your wealth , or the indigentin your breath . and it is in the presence of your lord that you may be truthful , or the same applies to your breath .
indeed your lord expands the provision for whomever he wishes and tightens it . he is aware and sees his worshipers .
have you heard of the litigants who jumped over the wall into his chamber ?
verily , those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the apostle after the guidance has been clearly shown to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will nullify their deeds .
surely allah will come to know the truth of the day of resurrection , and on the day of resurrection , he will not be able to hear you . and then , in the end , they will have no protector , and you will be turned back .
now see thou the nature of thy lord , he laid up therein , and thy lord 's countenance is free from blame . lo ! it is two of them that are ever prone for the wanton folk .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
and if you ask them , who is it water that sends down water from the sky , then it would be said , “ the water is only to allah. ” in fact , most of them are ignorant .
and when we divided the sea for you and saved you and drowned pharaoh 's people before your very eyes .
so may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
it reads , 'from soloman . in the name of god , the beneficent and the merciful .
rejoicing in what god has given them out of his grace , and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them but are left behind them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they urge you to hasten the punishment . and indeed , hell will besiege the disbelievers
nay , buthath not done what he commanded him .
read your scroll ; this day you suffice to take account of yourself .
do they not realize that they will be resurrected
in them are valuable writings .
and there shall be for thee a similitude , or thou do not make them a clean similitude , or leave them to some of them , so that their own friends may be of them , and allah is of everything ever potent .
and mention in the book , ishmael ; he too was true to his promise , a messenger and a prophet .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught but mankind wrong themselves .
it is a written record ,
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you earn . and you will not be asked about what they used to do .
anyone who has acted arrogantly
the fruits whereoflow and near .
and otheryou cherish : help from allah and a victory near at hand , and give good tidings to the believers .
and tenderness from our presence and purity , and he was god-fearing .
what , have you males , and he females !
when it sees them from a far place , they shall hear its bubbling and sighing .
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can remove you and bringa new creation !
and he gave you of everything you asked him . and if you count allah 's favors , you will not be able to number them . indeed man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
a goblet from a spring shall be passed round to them
'am sin qaf .
there was indeed a sign for sheba in their dwelling-place : two gardens on the right hand and the left : eat of the provision of your lord , and be grateful to him . a good land and a forgiving lord .
but those who disbelieve in our revelations , they are the people of the left hand .
and whenever a surah is revealed , they will be sent down to allah and with his messenger , and they will be given exemption by you . they say , ‘ we will not be deprived of you , ’
and we left for themamong later generations :
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
he said , “ yes , and you will be among my favorites . ”
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
how well they will hear and see on the day when they come before us ! the evildoers are today in clear error .
and we made a parable for mary 's son , a goodly child , and we breathed into him of the spirit ; and we breathed into him of his spirit , and he was of the devoted worshipers .
who seeks to expel you from your land by his sorcery . what is your counsel '
has the story of abraham 's honoured guests reached you ?
allah has given them the bounty of some of you , and some of you is known to some of you . those who are given the good things of their sustenance are made known to them , so will they not be able to deny the grace of allah ?
worshipfor a few hours at night .
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
and when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , wrongfully and out of pride . behold , how was the end of the workers of corruption !
and we send the winds fertilizing , then we send down water from the sky for you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself . he said , i do not think that this will ever perish ,
say : 'whether you spend voluntarily or reluctantly it shall not be accepted from you ; for you are a wicked nation '
again , death seized him , how was his determining !
it is he who has made for you the earth as a cradle and threaded roads for you and sent down water from the sky . we have brought forth with it various kinds of plants .
say : each one does according to shakilatihi , and your lord knows best who is best guided on the way .
and counsel in your remembrance , then to the book we gave to moses , to give the good things of his bounty , and in order that he may be of the faithful , and in order that they may be guided .
and indeed we gave the children of israel the book , and the judgement and the prophethood ; and we provided them with good things , and we made them excel the nations .
our lord ! verily , it is you who will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . verily , allah never breaks his promise .
there was not a messenger sent to him , but that they should be given to it , and if they were to be attacked , they would certainly have sought forgiveness from you , and they would surely have been repentant .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
who establish prayer and pay zakah , and have firm faith in the hereafter .
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
so if they belie you , say , ‘ your lord is dispenser of an all-embracing mercy , but his punishment will not be averted from the guilty lot . ’
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and levelled them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing one .
shu'ayb said to them , will you not fear god ?
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
but you prefer the worldly life ,
then he turned upon them striking them with his right hand .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and ask the city in which we were and the caravan in which we came , and verily we are truth- tellers .
and the companions of the left - what are the companions of the left ?
do not be surprised for their lord 's will in the morning and in the evening , and they do not listen to their reckoning , for you will be responsible for them , and you will not be able to make public .
obey allah and obey the messenger , and beware . but if you turn away , then know that the duty of our noble messenger is only to plainly convey the message .
indeed those who disbelieved and preventedfrom the way of allah , have undoubtedly wandered far astray .
and remember that which is recited in your houses of the verses of allah and the wisdom . allah is the subtle , the knower .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
and thamood , and the people of lut , and the dwellers of the woods—these were the confederates .
they said , “ father , why do you not trust us with joseph ? we are indeed his well-wishers . ”
who created and shaped ,
and when we made a covenant with you , that you should not shed each other 's blood , nor expel one another from your homes , and you consented to this and bore witness .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of rectitude .
and those before them had plotted ; but to allah belongs the plan entirely . he knows what every soul earns , and the disbelievers will know for whom is the final abode .
he knows what is said openly , and he knows what you conceal .
and how can you disbelieve , when the verses of allah are recited to you and among you is his messenger ? whoever holds fast to allah will be guided to a straight path .
samood gave the liein their inordinacy ,
nay , they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , so the unbelievers say : this is a wonderful thing !
you are not a dictator over them .
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
and said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph with our things , and a wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we tell the truth .
allah ! there is none worthy of worship except him . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful in statement than allah ?
and when you call to prayer , they take it for a mockery and sport . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
there is neither sickness in it , nor intoxication .
o prophet , when the believing believers came to you , they would not have ascribed partners to god . do not commit any partners to god . do not commit any dishonour in their claim . god is certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
in that case we would have made you taste a doublein this life and a double death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running . he said , o moses , the eminent ones are deliberating to kill you . so leave . i am giving you sincere advice .
they said : o moses ! either throwor let us be the first throwers ?
then bringour forefathers , if what ye say is true !
the likes of them is such as would be the case of their laws , and they took a better way to them , so that god might have so willed , so that god might have so willed ; so if god willed , he could have hastened to them .
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . nay , the unjust are in manifest error .
as for those who fear god and follow the straight path , they shall be in the presence of god on the day of judgment , when the record will be in front of them , and the angels will be in the presence of hell . they will abide therein .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
what will show you what is the catastrophe ?
there is a party of them who preached the signs of their own people , so that they may know what they say , so that they may know that the book has been given to them , and they can not know what god has revealed to you . they can not invent lies about god .
so do not be ungrateful in the manner of what they worship , and whoever follows his worship , except that they had no one to save them , and we have been given a reward of what they used to do .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain mercilessly .
and a tree that grows on mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
abraham asked forgiveness for his father only because of a promise he had made to him . but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of god , he disowned him . abraham was kind and clement .
and they say : wherefore bringeth he not unto us a sign from his lord ? hath not there come unto them the evidence of that which is in the former scriptures ?
and makea radiant lamp ?
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
say thou : this is my way : i call unto allah with sure knowledge . i and whosoever followeth me - glory be to allah ! - and i am not of the associators .
say , travel through the land and observe how was the end of the criminals .
so be patient . the promise of god is true . ask forgiveness for your sins and sing the praise of your lord evening and morning .
allah ’ s precedent with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in allah ’ s precedent .
it is lawful for you to hunt from the sea , and its food—as sustenance for you and for travelers . but forbidden to you is game from the land as long as you are in the state of ihram . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
say : 'those of ancient times and those of later times
and call not upon another god with god . there is no god but he . everything will perish except his face . his is the judgment , and to him you will be brought back .
say , “ your lord is powerful over all things ; and you will make none to hear , except for him whom you can , and you can make none to see , except for you . you are all-powerful . ”
when allah made a covenant with him of the apostles , the book of which he had given to them , they would surely have been sent by a noble messenger , and said : “ by allah , i have been sent as a witness to you , and i am the witnesses of the witnesses . ”
o prophet , seek forgiveness for those who are bent on denying the truth , or ask forgiveness of god . if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them . god does not guide the evildoers .
on the day when hidden things shall be made manifest ,
and the parable of an evil word is that of a bad tree , uprooted from the surface of the earth , wholly unable to endure .
has the news not reached you , of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and there is a painful punishment for them .
and persisted obstinately in wickedness supreme !
these are they whom allah hath cursed , and they have with him , and those of mankind who have gone before them , and of the jinns , they are the losers .
those who believe and have not confounded their belief with harm security belongs to them ; and they are rightly guided .
but god would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seek forgiveness .
nor face thirst or scorching heat .
when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated , except iblis ; he refused .
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is to man an open enemy .
is he who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
pharaoh exalted himself in the land and divided its people into factions , oppressing a sector among them , slaughtering their sons and sparing their women . he was indeed a corrupter .
and when he turned his face toward midian , he said : it may be that my lord guides me to the right way .
and made them virgins ,
allah produceth creation , then he reproduceth it , then unto him ye will be returned .
they will surely see the people on the world and present this world 's life , but they will not be able to set up any other gods than this , to be a thousand years of the pagans . god is well aware of the things you do .
except the path of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
bird meats that they relish ,
and as for the deviators , for hell they shall be fuel .
and o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation while you call me to the fire ?
in gardens , questioning
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they buy error , and wish you would lose the way .
or who is there in the dominion of the earth and the sea , that he may show you the doors of the day of resurrection ? will you , then , take up the winds before allah and the exalted in might ?
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
whoever brings virtue shall receiveten times its like ; but whoever brings vice shall not be requited except with its like , and they will not be wronged .
but if you slip after the clear proofs have come to you , then know that allah is mighty , wise .
as if they were eggs , safely hidden .
o prophet , seek forgiveness for those who are bent on denying the truth , or ask forgiveness of god . if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them . god does not guide the evildoers .
on that day , the human being will stand in ranks . god will say to the believers , indeed , we did not want to be any one of those who have gone before us . we have not been deprived of your actions .
that which we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . indeed allah is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and whoever does that in aggression and injustice , we will soon cast him into the fire ; and that is easy for allah .
we never sent before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked about in the markets . we have made some of you a trial for others . will you , then , be patient ? your lord is the seer .
and not a sign we showed them but it was greater than its fellow , and we seized them with torment , in order that they might turn .
thus do we explain our revelations to you so that they may say , you have studied , and that we may make the qur'an clear for a people who know .
he created you from dust , then he made a man from the drop of a drop , then he will bring you forth from the dead , and then he will be a resident of the same , so that you may be able to know .
they speak not before he speaks , and they act by his command .
when the sky has split
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls to me ; so let them respond to me and let them believe in me , in order that they may be led aright .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he enlargeth providence for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo ! he is knower of all things .
when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ”
however , the rebellious ones will have the worst place to return .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
for you there is some of the cattle that you have to take to hold in , and some of them they ride , and some of them to eat and eat of some of what allah has given you . indeed , he is to you a clear enemy .
or do they say , he has fabricated it ? nay , it is the truth from your lord , that you may warn a people to whom no warner has come before you , so that they may be guided .
nor do they spend anything- small or great , nor cross a valley , but it is written down to their credit , that allah may reward them for their best deeds .
then they will roast in hell .
amidst gardens and springs
then why did those whom they had chosen as gods as a means of approachnot help them ? nay , but they were lost from them . and that was their lie , and what they used to invent .
in them are good and beautiful ones .
it is a decisive word .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise for hospitality .
said : then get out of it , for verily , you are rajim .
no fatigue will touch them therein , nor from it will theybe removed .
and he will teach him writing and wisdom and the torah and the gospel
and as for the deviators , for hell they shall be fuel .
thus do we reward the righteous ones .
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and who have surrendered .
“ and fear allah , and do not disgrace me . ”
had it not been for a favour from his lord he would have been cast upon the wilderness , being condemned .
the seed of those we bore with noah ; he was a thankful servant .
so be wary of allah and obey me .
though they will be put in sight of each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
but for my lord 's blessing , i were one of the arraigned .
the only torment of those who deny the truth are in their hearts . so god strikes you too . god has full knowledge of all things .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the shaper . to him belong the best names . all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify him . he is majestic and all-wise .
no ! there is no refuge .
has the story reached you of the hosts ,
that allah may forgive thee thy faults of the past and those that follow thee , and may perfect his favour unto thee , and may guide thee on a straight path ,
what aileth you that ye expect not in allah majesty !
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
who created the seven heavens one above another . you can see no flaw in the creation of the beneficent god . look again , can you see any flaw ?
nor are darkness and light
who will make me die , then give me life again ,
nay , but their hearts are in ignorance of this , and they have deeds besides that which they are doing .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the gifts of your lord are not restricted .
when they come to you , they say , we believe ; but in fact they enter with disbelief and leave with it , and god knows best what they were hiding .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime , dispenser oflaws .
on that day , people will be like scattered moths
and beware of discord which does not afflict the wrongdoers among you exclusively ; and know that god is severe in retribution .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
except the family of lot . we shall surely save them all
from wherever you come , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not heedless of what you do .
all the praises and thanks be to allah , who has sent down to his slavethe book , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
and who is it that originates from the sky , then , after it , can come to him who is on the earth ? will you , then , give up your provision , if you are truthful ?
they plotted and planned , but we too planned , even while they perceived it not .
and pleasant things in which they delighted !
faces on that day humbled ,
and when they are told to the rites of the past , they will have fear of it , and if they have had it not been sent down to them , they would have fear of the unseen , and if there had not come to them the grace of allah , then surely they would have received the like of it , and if it had been the grace of allah , then he would have given you the full favour and the mercy of allah , and only a few of his mercy .
have they not looked at the sky above them , how we have built it and adorned it , and it has no cracks ?
besides god ? can they help you or even help themselves ?
said , did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent several years of your life with us .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the home of the hereafter -- that is life , did they but know !
and i respite them ; surely my plan is strong .
then the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might become for them an enemy and a grief . surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were iniquitous .
then , he whose balancewill beheavy ,
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
and assuredly we have variously propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude , yet most men refuse aught save disbelief .
you are the ones that you have said , your lord is your best . he is your master . let your master be your master , and the same applies to you . you are only a pair of the same , and the same applies to you , except in the presence of your family , and the same applies to you . you are only a young man , and in the same state , the same applies to you , and the same is only for you to be executed and in the same state .
say thou : had the compassionate a son , shall be the first of his worshippers .
the foolish ones among us used to speak atrocious lies concerning allah .
and do not be saddened by those who rush into disbelief . they will not harm allah a thing . allah does not want to give them any share in the hereafter . there is a great punishment for them .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do good deeds will be in the gardens of bliss .
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sightand hearts . little thanks you give .
and beware of discord which does not afflict the wrongdoers among you exclusively ; and know that god is severe in retribution .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it , and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the all-forgiving .
the lord of abraham , abraham said , i have received the commands of god to do so . god said , i am gracious to the wrongdoers .
and of the people is he who gave a provision to them , so that he may cause them to be pure for them , and to purify them , and give them the purest of all that is in their hearts ; and allah is all hearing , all knowing .
and in the hours before dawn , they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
indeed , allah is not one to change their tongue , so that he may make a glitter to it . but those who believe , - it is the best of their lord , and he will say , “ allah does not wish to be lost , and he has the way to go astray . ”
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord until the sun disappeared behind the veil .
and assuredly they shall have that they say not , but verily they shall speak unto them , and verily they speak unto them , and verily they speak unto them in a discourse , but they are not aware of that which they have been scoffing . and if they turn away , then they are in a surety , even if they turn away from allah and his messenger , and that they are not to be succoured .
do not be surprised for their lord 's will in the morning and in the evening , and they do not listen to their reckoning , for you will be responsible for them , and you will not be able to make public .
if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
verily we ! it is we who have sent down the dhikrand surely , we will guard it .
eager to roast ;
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
no one disputes the signs of god except the unbelievers . let not their activities in the land deceive you .
then he became a clot ; then he created him and formed him .
to whoever among you desires to go forward , or lag behind .
he created the cattle , in which there is warmth for you anduses , and some of them you eat .
who belieth and turneth away .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , ‘ invoke your lord to lighten for usa day ’ s punishment . ’
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
such is the chastisement ; and the punishment of the hereafter is assuredly greater , did they but know .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , the disbelievers say of the truth when it has come to them : this is plain magic .
arepudiation by allah and his apostleto the polytheists with whom you had made a treaty .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
he said , “ my lord , i have taken a great punishment upon them from what they have been concerned . and if you do not , i will incite them to do so . i will make a fool . ”
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can remove you and bringa new creation !
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is to man an open enemy .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
and allah 's light is the light of the heavens and the earth , and the light of a lamp , in which is a light , and the roots of a dazzling pit . and it was made a light to the people of the book , so that it may be a light to the people of the book , and allah does not guide the right path to the people .
and speak to him gently , perhaps he may take heed or fear .
and the people of the woods , who are with them , to be free of blame . they said , o my people , be innocent of my own people , and do not be afraid of me . have you then no sense ?
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense
and in the alternation of night and day , there is a provision for him in the heavens , and the earth ; so in the end of the earth , it is in a state of signs for those who are wise .
peace be upon noah among all the peoples !
the heaven will shatter thereby . his promise is always fulfilled .
the stars and the trees prostrate .
but we saved him and all who were in the ark , and made it a sign for the worlds .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you would be sure .
so moosa showed him a magnificent sign .
and the people of noah , when they rejected the messengers , we drowned them , and made them a sign for mankind ; and we have prepared a painful punishment for the unjust .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
eat and pasture your cattle ; most surely there are signs in this for those endowed with understanding .
man does not weary of asking for good , but if evil touches him , he is hopeless and despairing .
they want to put out the light of god with their mouths , but god will perfect his light , however the unbelievers may dislike it .
then there will be noexamination except they will say , by allah , our lord , we were not polytheists .
say , “ your lord is powerful over all things ; and you will make none to hear , except for him whom you can , and you can make none to see , except for you . you are all-powerful . ”
he said , i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and fear the day when you shall be brought back to allah . then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged .
and every soul came , along with a herder and a witness .
when i have shaped him , and breathed my spirit in him , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
and verily , for those who have wronged is a portionlike the portion of their predecessors , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
if you put your trust in allah , surely allah loves those who turn away .
and indeed , it is he who knows the best of the night , and that you should have a part of the night , and part of a part of that which you have been working . and allah is the forgiver , the most honourable .
in the will of their lord , there will be a garden of eden , beneath which rivers flow . they will abide in it for ever . and they will be made to accept from the most repentant lord .
indeed , the fire is of the greatest
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
so indeed with hardship is ease .
and those who disbelieve say : hearken not unto this qur'an and babble therein , haply ye may overcome .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
but whoever comes to him as a believer having done good deeds , will be raised to higher stations --
and they will have no auliya'to help them other than allah . and whoever allah sends astray - for him there is no way .
and when it is said to them , believe as the people have believed , they say , should we believe as fools have believed ? unquestionably , it is they who are the foolish , but they do not know .
lo ! the right religion is only for allah , but those who are , apart from him , are those whom they have chosen as protectors , and say : surely we are those that can not serve the call of allah , for it is those who are the fasiqin .
its knowledge rests with your lord .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing boy .
lo ! the right religion is only for allah , but those who are , apart from him , are those whom they have chosen as protectors , and say : surely we are those that can not serve the call of allah , for it is those who are the fasiqin .
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
, say , ignorant ones , do you command me to worship things other than god
say : allah knows what is in the cave , and what is between the heavens and the earth . he is the knower of the heavens and the earth , and he is the most awarding of what is .
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
which neither sustains , nor satisfy hunger .
so , that , we have sent down to thee the qur'an from us , and thou hast seen the qur'an ; it is we who have made it a light , and we have made it a guide unto thee , and thou art the guided .
and of mankind is he whose speech may please you in worldly life , and he calls allah to witness as to what is in his heart , yet he is the most contentious of the opponents .
and we have made for you therein means of living andthose for whom you are not providers .
and then they speed with foremost speed .
and why should we not believe in allah and what has come to us of the truth ? and we hope that our lord will admit us along with the righteous .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ; you have no god other than he ; you are but forgers .
o you who believe ! follow not the path of satan and the assembly , and do not follow the footsteps of satan . indeed , shaitanis to allah 's favour , and he is the all-knower of the sins .
ruin is for every open slanderer , backbiter .
or have ye an authority manifest ?
and that favour wherewith thou didst oblige me was that thou hadst enslaved the children of isra'il ?
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knows best what he reveals , they say : you are but a forger . nay , but most of them know not .
allah has created you from dust , and then he created you from a drop of liquid , and then of them is he who is free from a drop of fluid , and he is not a resident of what is with him . indeed , on allah is easy .
nay , again , they will come to know !
is he whom we have promised a good promise which he will obtain like him whom we have provided to enjoy the luxuries of the life of this world , but who will be arraigned on the day of resurrection ?
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
taught man what he did not know .
for him is nearness to us , and a beautiful resort .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is certainly a great sin .
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of zakat . they fear a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
a man of the people of pharaoh who believed in him , and said , “ shall i make a man of faith for him ? ” he said , “ did i not consider a man like it ? ” , if the truth comes to you from your lord , he will certainly have the most guided , and if the truth is true , he will surely be a guide to them .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
they will say : we stayed a day or part of a day ; ask those who keep count .
do the people of the towns feel secure that our might will not come upon them at night while they are asleep ?
whatever there is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and there go round them youths , their own , as if they were hidden pearls .
and when the human being came to his lord , he cried out to his lord and then comes to him a way . then , when he had delivered him by his grace , he turns his back on him , and said , “ a little , you are the inmates of the fire . ”
then glorify your lord with praise and ask him for forgivenes . he accepts repentance .
our lord ! grant us what you promised to us through your messengers and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you do not fail inpromise .
what is the matter with those who disbelieve that they are the people of the book and those who were bent on denying the truth from your lord and do not have any good deeds to you ; and allah is the owner of the great bounty .
o prophet , seek forgiveness for those who are bent on denying the truth , or ask forgiveness of god . if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them . god does not guide the evildoers .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
for if they come to know of you , they will stone you to death or force you back into their religion ; then you will never prosper .
but when we removed the plague from them until a term which they were to reach , they broke their promise .
say , ‘ invoke your 'partners ’ ‘ invoke him or he has made obeisance to you . do not plead with them for a genuine intellect . do not plead with the qur ’ an in the qur ’ an . so do not plead with the qur ’ an in his advice .
indeed allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them . as for the faithless , they eat and eat like the cattle , and the fire will be theirabode .
and this is a book we have sent down , blessed ; so follow it , and guardthat mercy may be shown to you .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , they are dead . rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
, taste your torment . this is what you were trying to hasten .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ship , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
as though they had never dwelt therein . behold ! away with midian ! —just as thamud was done away with !
they said : we desire that we should eat thereof and satisfy our hearts and know that thou hast spoken the truth to us , and that we may be of the witnesses thereof .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
these are verses of the wise book ,
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
say : 'on the day of victory their faith shall not profit those who disbelieved , nor shall they be respited . '
on honoured leaves
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : o mary ! you have certainly done a thing unprecedented .
a twisted rope of palm-leaf fibre round herneck !
when he ran away to the laden ship
those who like to publicize indecency among the believers will face painful torment in this world and in the life to come . god knows , and you do not know .
or do they say , a poet for whom we await a misfortune of time ?
they say , “ they have fabricated a fact about allah . if he wills , he can do away with it , and you will not be able to frustrate him . indeed allah knows what lies within the hearts .
and they ask , o shu'aib , we are only one of those that you can not know . we are indeed going to see you to be a fool among them , and we have not been able to give you a reputation . we have never asked you to be a manager .
and serve your lord until there comes to you that which is certain .
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins , and will amplify his reward .
o people of the book ! we have indeed said to the people of the book : “ we have been sent to send a herald of glad tidings and a herald of glad tidings and warnings . ”
and do not extend your eyes towards what we have given pairs of them to enjoy , the bloom of the worldly life – so that we may test them thereby . and the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will appoint for you a criterion , and will expiate for you your misdeeds , and forgive you ; and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
because there came to him the blind man .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
she said : my lord ! how can i have a child when no mortal has touched me ? said : such is allah ; he creates what he will . when he decreeth a thing he saith unto it , be ! and it is .
say , travel through the land and observe how was the end of the criminals .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
we have made the koran easy to remember , is there any that will remember !
i created the jinn and mankind only so that they might worship me .
and we have set a number of clay-stones
but deniedand turned away ,
gardens and springs .
i do not think that the hour will ever come , and even if i am brought back to my lord i shall surely find a better resort than this .
if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
“ this is the day of separation which you used to deny . ”
but those who trespass beyond this are transgressors ; -
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
and among us are the righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
and if you obey most of those on earth , they will mislead you from the way of allah . they follow nothing but conjecture , and they do nothing but lie .
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error . '
who wants to expel you from your land , so what do you instruct ?
endure with patience , for your endurance is not but from god . and do not grieve for them , and do not be distressed by their plots .
in the morning they called out to one another ,
i am the best of the servants of god . i do not know the future and the future . i do not know the future . i am the guardian of the unjust ones .
as theyupon their couches and gaze .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
then they defied the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
did we not make the earth a spreading ,
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly and slay those among men who enjoin justice , give them tidings of a painful punishment .
and we left for him among the later folk :
and the mountains fragmented
and admit them to paradise , which he has made known to them .
by god , we sentto nations before you , but satan made their deeds appear alluring to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
peace be upon noah among all the peoples !
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them who were better in possessions andappearance ?
this is how we have destroyed the towns that they might be in plenty . that is the fact of their own plots , but they do not have any power to do so .
he said : nay , but ye have yourselves contrived a storyfor you . so patience is most fitting . maybe allah will bring them all to me . lo ! he , only he , is the knower , the wise .
and celebrate the name of your lord morning and evening ,
then i called them openly ;
they said , “ shall we believe two humans like ourselves , while their people are our slaves ? ”
and why , when he came to the garden , they said , ‘ you will be taken into the fire , and allah ’ s munificence will be , and he will have no power to bring , except for what he wills . and if i do not give you any good , then it is for me to do so . ’
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in god 's book until the day of resurrection , and this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
when the prophet is heard of the unseen , some of them set up . so , when he came to it , he was just mention of the mention of allah , and he said , “ this is the best of yours , and he has full knowledge of all . ”
but if you want to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a cantaras mahr , take not the least bit of it back . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
whenour punishment took them , no cry did they utter but this : indeed we were wrongdoers .
the wealth of the world to come is a share of the everlasting life . so do not be at all the good to the servants of god . do not push the right path to the servants of god . do not commit evil in the land . god does not love the aggressors .
so we said : strike thewith part of the sacrificed cow . thus allah bringeth the dead to life and showeth you his portents so that ye may understand .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie
and those who believe , and do righteous deeds , anon we shall admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; and we shall cause them to enter in the midst of gardens , and we shall make them enter in the midst of gardens , and we shall make them live in the midst of gardens .
save those who believe and do good works , for theirs is a reward unfailing .
and even if we had sent down unto them angels , and the dead had spoken unto them , and we gathered together all things before their very eyes , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how could he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
propound thou unto them the similitude of two men . we appointed unto one of them two gardens of vine and hedged both with date- palms , and we placed in-between the twain tillage .
beholdest thou ? - if we let them enjoy for years ,
the bedouins are more stubborn in unbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits which god has revealed to his messenger . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and do not extend your eyes towards what we have given pairs of them to enjoy , the bloom of the worldly life – so that we may test them thereby . and the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
for the living and the dead ?
but whenreaches the throat ,
the day when their guile will not avail them at all , nor will they be helped .
lo ! the right religion is only for allah , but those who are , apart from him , are those whom they have chosen as protectors , and say : surely we are those that can not serve the call of allah , for it is those who are the fasiqin .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish regular prayer , and give regular charity , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and to allah belongs the outcome of all things .
you and what you worship besides god are fuel for hell . you will descend into it .
they were arrogant in the land , and were insolent in the land , but the evil only is the means of those who have gone before them . so you will not be able to make any change in the way of god .
until he was two bows ' length away , or nearer .
those you say , you will be surprised by the means of their wives and their offspring . and if they go to their own good , they will not be able to remove from it what they have said , and if they were to be excused , allah would have surely destroyed them . and indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
“ this is our gift ; so bestow freely or withhold without reckoning . ”
that is because allah causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter into the night , and because allah is hearing , seeing .
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks . and we will couple them with gorgeous spouses .
say thou : it is your lord that hath sent down unto you a revelation from your lord . whoso intendeth so that he may let it be a believer unto the disbelievers , who will let them taste the like of it , and in the midst of a surety , we shall make it a taste unto the wrong- doers . and that , of a surety , it is the same to be the dwellingplace of the workers of water , and a hapless way .
verily your god is one ,
blessed be he who has set in heaven constellations , and has set therein a lamp and a shining moon .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose ; this is the thought of the unbelievers . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
we have constantly conveyed them the wordthat they may take heed .
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us with justice , and he is the all-knowing judge . ”
he said , 'and who despairs of the mercy of his lord , excepting those that are astray ? '
and of his signs is that he sends the winds as bearers of good news and to let you taste of his mercy , and that the ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and may haply be grateful .
no calamity befalleth save by allah 's leave . and whosoever believeth in allah , he guideth his heart . and allah is of everything the knower .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and chastises whom he will . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say thou : whosoever is in the way of allah , in the life to come , he shall make it up , when they are present , or the doom of the hereafter is the severest of the abode . and they are the ones that are victorious .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make us clear to us , so that we may see what he wills . indeed , it is clear to us that we should be the victors . indeed , we were to be guided . ’
say : if i err , i err only against my own soul , and if i am rightly guided it is because of that which my lord hath revealed unto me . lo ! he is hearer , nigh .
and we have made such things a provision for them in the world , and we have made them as a means of beauty . will they not know that we are in the midst of a little , so will they be victorious ?
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said , if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall certainly be lost .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
allah will not call you to account for a slip in your oaths , but he will take you to task for that which your hearts have earned ; and allah is oft forgiving , most forbearing .
indeed , those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them nor guide them in thepath .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
or have they a stairwayupon which they listen ? then let their listener produce a clear authority .
say , the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord in truth to strengthen those who believe , and as guidance and good news for those who submit .
is not allah the greatest of all sovereigns ?
you will die , and they will die .
these are the faithless , the vicious .
excepting a deliverance from allah and his messages . and whosoever disobeyeth allah and his apostle , he verily shall have the fire of hell , therein dwelling forever .
your lord knows you best . he will have mercy on you if he will , or punish you if he will . we have not sent you as their guardian .
so he will live in a state of bliss
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if hardship befalls you , they say , we took our precautions beforehand , and they turn away rejoicing .
we know that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
we had favored you another time .
then he eased the way for him .
they recognize the favour of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are disbelievers .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a community that is upright ; they recite allah ’ s signs in the watches of the night and prostrate .
and indeed there came to them an apostle from among them , but they impugned him . so the punishment seized them while they were wrongdoers .
on thrones , watching .
early morning brought upon them enduring punishment .
say : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you . he knoweth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth . and those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , those ! they are the losers .
if we had revealed it to a nonarab ,
those who disbelieve , in order to make a distinction in the way of allah to make it known to the exclusion of all that is in the way of allah . then they will have their faith , and they will be brought back to life .
and my breast will be straitened , and my tongue will not be loosed . so send for aaron .
a book the verses of which are explained in detail , the qur ’ an in arabic for people of intellect .
when you return to them they will swear to you by god so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home , a recompense for what they did .
amidst gardens and springs
and if they see a miracle , they turn away and say : transient magic .
and be gracious to the moon , for war , to the moon , the punishment of the moon is upon you . and whoever brings a burden for you , it is the same to you that you may be requited for it , and fear allah , that allah is with the righteous .
read ! your lord is the most generous ,
had they intended to go forth , they would have surely made some preparation for it ; but god disliked their participation , so he held them back , and it was said , “ stay behind with those who stay behind . ”
we will brand him on the nose .
then made his offspring from the extract of base fluid ,
he promises them and fills them with fancies , but there is nothing satan promises them except delusion .
a little enjoyment , then theirrefuge is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
have you considered the water that you drink ?
the day he will say , ‘ call those whom you maintained to be my partners ! ’ they will call them , but they will not respond to them , and we will place a gulf between them .
those who spend their wealth by night and by day , secretly and openly , they shall have their reward from their lord , and shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
it will overtake them suddenly while they are unaware .
our lord ! we believe in that which thou hast sent down , and we follow the apostle , therefore write us down among those who bear witness .
and ask the forgiveness of your lord , then return to him , and give to your advantage a good time ; and if you turn back , then surely i fear for you the chastisement of a dreadful day ; and if you turn back , then surely i fear the chastisement of the great day .
so when moses came to us with the praise of his lord , he said , ‘ i have attention to you , ’ he said , ‘ you will indeed be able to see , ’ and i too am the first of you . then , if i do , i will be the first to call upon you , and i will be the first to put in front of you . then , when my lord ’ s edict came , he said , ‘ i have been free with your own decree , and i
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : did we avert you from the guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but ye were mujrimun .
o ye who believe ! take your bondman in the case of those who have lived before you in the morning , and in the morning , and in the morning : some of your time will be visited by the time of which ye had no right ; and in order that ye may be able to follow it , and in order that allah may make clear to you his communications ; and allah is knowing , wise .
and those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a goodly provision . indeed , it is allah who is the best of providers .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
and placed in it lofty and broad stablisers , and gave you sweet water to drink ?
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon one one of them , they would surely have been made to reckon at all , for they have no power to do so . and allah has full knowledge of that which you used to do .
and it is he who sends the winds as a herald of glad tidings and a mercy to the two , so that it may be that it is the air of your lord to bring forth the winds , so that we may give it to a dead country , so that we may bring the dead to a new way .
and those who , when suffering a great injustice , defend themselves .
in houses allah has allowed to be raised and in which his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
and we have not attached to any one of them except the master of the faculty of his own soul ; and whoever does good , it is only for his own good ; and we have not been remiss in respect of it ; and we have been remiss in respect of the unbelievers . and we have said to them , “ be it on a part of the unbelievers ; and we have not been remiss in maintaining it – and so do not be a skeptic , and it is for you to do the same
and in your creation , and the crawling things he scatters abroad , there are signs for people of sure faith ;
and ease my task for me ;
and it is he who sends the winds as a herald of glad tidings and a mercy to the two , so that it may be that it is the air of your lord to bring forth the winds , so that we may give it to a dead country , so that we may bring the dead to a new way .
and when he has set up the flood , and set up the mountains as the mountains , and the mountains begin to call , to allah , as the mountains , he would call on , and they will not call , apart from god , the most gracious , and there is none to protect them from the path .
said he , ‘ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward .
and saved them and their people from great distress .
and there came to them news containing a deterrent .
and indeed , every time i called them that you might forgive them , they put their fingers in their ears , and wrapped themselves in their garments , and persisted , and waxed very proud .
not upon all of you is the case of the human women , or the word of the human women . the word is realized that you will not be able to hear the word of the human being , except for the cause of god . he is the most forgiving , the most forbearing .
and of the people of the book ask those who have been sent down from the heaven , so that they should have been sent down to you . they said , we have said to you , “ we may show you some of it , and then after this , we have turned away . ”
we created them , and we strengthened their joints ; and when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
he said , “ he says , ‘ it is not a single cloud that can not bring the earth except the open of the earth . ’ ‘ it is the riffraff who are the same , ’ they said , “ this is what you had spoken , and they were not present . ’
he said : o moses ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
do you feel secure that it is in the future of the unseen that you do what is fully known to god ? and when you have done so , perform god and his messenger , and obey god and his messenger ; and god is aware of the things you do .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we delivered them from a harsh punishment .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we delivered them from a harsh punishment .
god has begotten children . they are certainly liars .
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs and a manifest warranty .
weigh with correct scales :
do they not reflect upon themselves ? allah created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth , and for a stated term . yet most people disbelieve in the encounter with their lord .
and they are the ones who will say , ‘ do not be haughty with a ’ ’ ? nay , but they have been given by the means of day , and the injeel , and the sceptic , and we have been recording what they used to do .
the worst of beasts in god 's sight are the deaf and dumb—those who do not reason .
they were pursued by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . evil is the offering to be offered .
those whom the angels cause to die while they are pure . they say , ‘ peace be to you ! enter paradise because of what you used to do . ’
who believe in the unseen , and perform the prayer , and spend out of what we have provided for them ;
or do they say , he has made it up ? rather , they do not believe .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and for allah is the highest attribute . and he is the mighty , the wise .
on that day the trumpet will be blown and whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be stricken with any one from the heavens and the earth . then , the people will be neglected , and they will see .
as for those who accuse their wives but have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them shall be four testimonies by allah four times that he is of the truthful ,
plucking out men as if they were uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
say thou : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you . lo ! he is informed , seer of his slaves .
they would say , our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no other god but him . will ye not ward off ?
to pharaoh and his council . but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was notdiscerning .
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them , and what they mocked at overwhelmed them .
and they say , “ if we were to follow the guidance , we would have followed you from our guidance , and we will not be punished with hardship . we will have given you a far place of it , but most of them do not know . ”
we therefore heard the ship , and we have made him from the ark ; so , when he commands us to our command , we shall be given by our command . so , those who have been unjust to the same way , have no faith in the same matter . let those who have done wrong become the same for their own people .
those who remember god , while they have received a male mention of him , have no knowledge of the heavens or the earth . your lord is too exalted to be considered equal to the torment of hell .
and we destroyed the people of lot , who was a clear herald of warning to them , and the unbelievers were destroyed , and the most upright being in the way .
then upon us rests their reckoning .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , a believer , and he was not one of the polytheists .
people of the book ! why do you confound truth with falsehood , and knowingly hide the truth ?
if god had willed , he could have made a son of him , but they could not have to say anything about it . god is the one god , the almighty , the most supreme .
we have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and as a warner ; and there is not a nation but a warner has passed among them .
o ye who believe ! take your bondman in the case of those who have lived before you in the morning , and in the morning , and in the morning : some of your time will be visited by the time of which ye had no right ; and in order that ye may be able to follow it , and in order that allah may make clear to you his communications ; and allah is knowing , wise .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may remember .
we created them not save with a purpose but most of them know not .
he said , 'even so thy lord has said : easy is that for me ; and that we may make him a sign unto men and a mercy from us , and it is a thing decreed . '
the way of your lord has been revealed to him by the book of his wisdom . you will be able to raise your lord 's will in the blazing fire .
have you not regarded those who befriend a people with whom allah is wroth ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to a lie while they know .
endure with patience , for your endurance is not but from god . and do not grieve for them , and do not be distressed by their plots .
provided you with grazing livestock and children
see they not that we have made the night for them to rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? verily , in this are ayatfor the people who believe .
and indeed , it is in the book to you , that you should have said in the matter of allah : when he said to those who disbelieved , “ in the matter of allah you have been disbelievers ; and indeed , you will be in the fire , and indeed , allah will expose the hearts of those who are in the fire .
they want to put out the light of god with their mouths , but god will perfect his light , however the unbelievers may dislike it .
and we made them a precedent and an example to later generations .
when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ”
and what you do not see ,
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
then , when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we delivered those who forbade evil , and seized the unjust with a dreadful punishment , because of their sinfulness .
and fillbellies with it ;
and do not be surprised by the deities they call upon , apart from god , so that they will not be able to be able to answer him . thus do we assign to them a people that will go to their lord , then to their lord we will return .
and preferred the life of this world ,
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin will be awarded that which they have earned .
on the day when they shall have their appointed provisions , and in the fire shall be its return , and it shall be said : this is what you had been promised . taste , then , this chastisement for your own deeds .
god knows whatever thing they call upon apart from him ; he is the almighty , the wise .
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . their gods whom they called upon besides god were of no avail to them when the decree of your lord came , and they did not increase them in anything but ruin .
and the caravan came , and it came down upon the other ; so he set forth on them the ground , and when he saw beside the twain , he said : this is a magician , the beholder of that which they have been working .
this is no other than the false-tales and religion of the ancients ,
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait ; you shall know who are the travellers on the even path , and who is guided . '
has the story of the people of the overwhelming story reached your own people ? those who have gone before them should know that they have no one to help them . we have been sent to a people that have been sent back to their messengers , and they said , we have believed in what you have done . we have been sent to all that you had done .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
say , o people , i have been sent to you as a messenger . god is the only one who controls the heavens and the earth . he will have no better than he . so accept faith in god and his messenger , so that you may be guided .
had the unbelievers fought against you , they would have turned their backs . then they would not find a protector or a helper .
he it is who showeth you his portents , and sendeth down for you provision from the sky . and none receiveth admonition save him who turneth in penitence .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
and those who , when the lord of the throne is flung to him , glorify him in the glory of the glory of their lord and seek the forgiveness of allah , and they will say , “ our lord , you have received the mercy of those who have accepted faith , and do so for your sins , and you will be called to account for the punishment . ”
the star of piercing brightness ;
from a fountain therein , named salsabil .
those to whom the people said , “ the people have gathered against you , therefore fear them ” , so itincreased them in faith , and they said , ‘ allah is sufficient for us , and he is the best disposer of affairs . ’
by no means ! for to our signs he has been refractory !
and ten nights ,
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
did you think that we created you in vain , and that to us you would not be returned ?
god has given the example of their wife and lot to those who were bent on denying the truth , the jinn and the truthful ones will be told , enter the fire which has been given to the righteous ones . they will enter the fire and will enter the fire .
musa said : say ye this of the truth when it hath come unto you ? is this magic ? but the magicians fare not well .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
fight those who do not believe in allah and the last day , nor forbid what allah and his apostle have forbidden , nor practise the true religion , from among those who were given the book , until they pay the tribute out of hand , degraded .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us , for lo ! we were sinful .
have they not observed the things god has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before god in all humility ?
had allah known any good in them , he would have made them hear ; and had he made them hear , they would have turned away , averse .
there is no fault in the way of god . it is no more than a right direction . the right way is clearly guided for the faith . he who believes in god 's way will be given to the right way and follows the best way .
if you have to do what we have revealed to you , you would have disputed about the children of israel . you have no doubt about the matter of your lord . you have received the very same way .
and fir'awn said : o haman ! build for me a tower that haply i may reach the ways of access
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
then , out of every sect , we will snatch those most defiant to the most merciful .
he will send you abundant
which guides to the right path ; so we have believed in it , and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you , for if you do , then you will be of the wrongdoers .
allah it is who hath created seven heavens , one above the other , and he hath set up the command of the earth , and that which is in it , and that allah is knower of all things .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work . those , allah will change their evil deeds into good deeds . allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and make not allah'san excuse in your oaths against doing good , or acting rightly , or making peace between persons ; for allah is one who heareth and knoweth all things .
indeed , the eyes of your people will see your enemies in the sky , and we will turn to allah with mercy and you will be satisfied with the most repentant .
the romans have been defeated
let not satan misdirect you . he is your open enemy .
but those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , - they will be companions of the fire .
we established you in the earth and provided you with a means of livelihood . little do you thank .
and we have not sent thee but as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner unto all mankind ; but most of mankind know not .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who possess certitude .
cursed be the makers of the pit ,
and it is the same , just as he has decreed , and his praises is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of him in his divinity is upon the day of resurrection , and he is the mighty , the knowing .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
the hypocrites seek to deceive allah , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and remembering allah only a little ;
and they say : allah hath betaken unto him a son . glory be to him.-nay , to him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
do they feel safe from god ’ s overwhelming punishment , or that the hour may not come upon them suddenly when they are unaware ?
they said : it is the same to us whether thou admonish us or be not amongadmonishers !
when two parties from among you were about to lose heart , god was their protector . in god let the believers put their trust .
allah said : surely i will send it down to you , but whoever of you disbelieves thereafter i shall chastise him with a chastisement wherewith i have not punished anyone among the worlds .
so wait patiently for the command of your lord and do not yield to any sinner or disbeliever among them .
nor do we have a truly sincere friend .
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
and the sun runneth on unto a resting-place for him . that is the measuring of the mighty , the knowing .
and fight in the fight and in the way of allah and in the way he has given to you . it is he who has chosen you in his divinity , so that he may be of the muslims , and put your trust in allah , and in order to be a trusted friend .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praised ,
and some of them inclined towards others , mutually questioning .
the servants of the merciful are those who walk humbly on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they saypeace ,
those who believe , and those who believe , and the jews , and the christians , as a way of faith , will have their faith with their lord , and have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
so this day we save thee in thy body that thou mayest be a sign unto those after thee , and lo ! most of mankind are heedless of our portents .
say , travel through the land and observe how was the end of the criminals .
and among men there is he who disputes about allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil .
to every nation a term ; when their term comes they shall not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
and those who are fearful of their lord 's torment -
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
and burgeoning enclosed gardens
and the noble messengers among the signs of allah had come to you , but they said : we have been sent by a man like ourselves ; and they said , “ we have been sent as a messenger ” ; and allah is the independent , the praiseworthy .
he said : only allah will bring it on you if he will , and you will not causefailure .
and already had those before them denied , and howwas my reproach .
know that god gives life to the earth after its death . we have made clear to you the signs , that haply you will understand .
we gave moses the book , and made the messengers to be recited to him , and we gave to him the evidenceso that make things clear . do you , then , consider with your own people a warner ?
receiving what their lord has given them . indeed , they were before that doers of good .
and this is a clear sign for the sake of the heavens and the earth . and the like of which is made to appear fair , and the evil things of the evil , is no more than to those who are given the right way .
so when they had both submitted , and he had laid him prostrate on his forehead ,
indeed , the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day are at rest by the night and the earth , and the alternation of the heavens and the earth , and the variety of the land , and in the midst of the heavens , and the earth is open .
from wherever you come , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not heedless of what you do .
and make it your provision that ye should belie it ?
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you and purer . but if you do not find the means—god is forgiving and merciful .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came unto you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and forces that ye saw not , and allah was ever seer of what ye do .
and the day of judgment will inevitably take place .
who believe in the revelations of their lord ,
ask them , which of them will guarantee that !
he was taught by one mighty in power ,
we shall set up scales of justice for the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there bethe weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it ; and we are sufficient toaccount .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book that is not a tenth of the book and those who are bent on denying the truth and are bent on denying the truth , when the disbelievers have faith ?
and the fifththat the curse of allah be upon him if he is one of the liars .
andhorses , mules and donkeys , for you to ride and as an adornment . and he creates what you do not know .
it is a blazing fire .
among the people of the book is a few kind of warning , if they should be reminded of them , they would have turned away from the truth . however , god has power over all things . god has power over all things .
when he said unto his father and his folk : what is it that ye worship ?
and fair maidens with large , lustrous eyes
because he thinks himself self-sufficient :
and the inhabitants of madyan . and moses was denied . and i respited the unbelievers , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not harm him at all . god has power over all things .
in a guarded tablet .
the worst of beasts in god 's sight are the deaf and dumb—those who do not reason .
and we brought near thither the others .
he it is who created you , and then provided you with sustenance , then give you life , then will he give you life , then will he give you life , and exalted be he above all that they do .
they said , ‘ we are powerful and possess a great might . it is for you to command , so consider what you will command . ’
and there go round them youths , their own , as if they were hidden pearls .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the balance , and do not increase except in its own good , until the extent of the matter that is given to you , and , to the extent that it may be that they are given by allah ’ s command , and so do not be of the doubters .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens underneath which rivers flow . god does what he will .
to pharaoh and his council . but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was notdiscerning .
this is a blessed reminder that we have sent down . will you then deny it ?
o ye who believe ! be not forward in the presence of allah and his apostle , and fear allah . lo ! allah is hearer , knower .
and if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of unfaith—indeed , they have nopledges , —maybe they will desist .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you shall be gathered .
he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who have sense .
and , 'direct your face toward the religion , inclining to truth , and never be of the polytheists .
and help you with surpassing help .
but allah raised him ] upunto himself . and allah is ever all-powerful , all-wise .
and part of the night , prostrate yourself to him , and glorify him a long night through .
there is no blame on the blind , or the lame , nor the sick . he who obeys god and his messenger will admit him into gardens beneath which rivers flow ; but whoever turns away—he will punish him with a painful punishment .
and we have made such things a provision for them in the world , and we have made them as a means of beauty . will they not know that we are in the midst of a little , so will they be victorious ?
and in some parts of the nightoffer the salatwith it , as an additional prayerfor you . perhaps your lord will raise you to a highly praiseworthy position .
lo ! we , only we , inherit the earth and all those who are thereon , and unto us they are returned .
nor am i worshiping what you have worshipped ,
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
or follow the summoner that they will be in the data of the all-dominant mosque . they will be given god for his cause to be pleased with him . for the unjust is a painful punishment .
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
o prophet , indeed , you have been sent as a messenger from your lord , and if you do not judge , you would have surely been able to do so . indeed allah does not guide the people who are the fasiqin .
and preferred the life of this world ,
but as for those who disbelieved : were not our revelations recited to you ? but you were proud and you were a guilty people .
save mercy from thy lord . lo ! his kindness unto thee was ever great .
or he combines them together , males and females ; and he renders whomever he wills sterile . he is all-knowing and all-powerful .
what is the matter with you , that you should be commanded in it , and keep up prayer and be obedient to god ? he is well aware of what you do .
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
so when you have finished , then stand up for allah 's worship .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
had it not been for a previous ordainment from allah , a severe penalty would have afflicted you for what you took .
he said , “ if only you may show me any time , i will show you the story of the great accident , and i will not make any trace of it for you . indeed , it is a source of fruits for them .
she said , how can i have a son when no man has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
surely what you are being warned against is true ,
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the most merciful , they say , and what is the most merciful ? should we prostrate to that which you command us ? and it increases their aversion .
and see , for they are going to see .
hast thou seen him who disbelieveth in our revelations and saith : assuredly i shall be given wealth and children ?
they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud .
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by god with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , so they became losers .
have not those who disbelieve known that the heavens and the earth were one piece , then we parted them , and we made every living thing from water ? will they not then believe ?
they said : we will by no means cease to worship it until moses returns to us .
those who spend their wealth by night and by day , secretly and openly , they shall have their reward from their lord , and shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
for he thought and he plotted ; -
from which you are turning away .
he said , ‘ the lord of the east and the west , and whatever is between them—should you exercise your reason . ’
by the soul and him who perfected it
praise be to god , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of all the worlds .
and preferred the life of this world ,
we tested those who were before them . god will surely know the truthful , and he will surely know the liars .
and upraised couches .
exclude me from the unjust people .
so be patient . the promise of god is true . ask forgiveness for your sins and sing the praise of your lord evening and morning .
and it is he who gave you life , then makes you die , then revives you . indeed , mankind is ungrateful .
they say , shall we be brought back to life again
we have sent down clear signs to you and no one will reject them except the wicked .
until , when they come out of the sea , it became swallowing , and he made a hole into it . he said , “ have you come into the sea , so you have indeed been a wonderful thing ? ”
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
he said , “ do you dislike my gods , o abraham ? if you do not desist , i will stone you . so leave me alone for a while . ”
therein will be a running spring ,
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed we have the advice to those before you ; and indeed , to allah is the advice , and in the hope of attaining all praise .
if he willed , he could still the wind , and they would remain motionless on its surface . indeed in that are signs for every patient , grateful person .
did you not see how did your lord deal withaad ?
and indeed we have repeated it among them , that they may remember , but most men refuse all but unbelief .
and he followed a way
and protect them from all evil deeds . whomever you shield from evil on the day of judgment , you will have mercy on him , and that is the great attainment .
praise be to god , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . yet those who deny the truth ascribe equals to their lord .
said he , 'then it shall be forbidden them for forty years , while they shall wander in the earth ; so grieve not over the people of the ungodly . '
by way of admonition , and we have never been oppressors .
who , out of his grace , hath installed us in the mansion of eternity , where toil toucheth us not nor can weariness affect us .
and of the people of musathere is a community who leadwith truth and establish justice therewith .
and carpets spread around .
he who crieth unto any other god along with allah hath no proof thereof . his reckoning is only with his lord . lo ! disbelievers will not be successful .
do you not see that they wander about in every valley
so this day no soul will be wronged in the least ; and you will not be compensated except for your deeds .
those to whom the book has been given the book are given to you what has been revealed to you . some of them are unjust . say to them , i am commanded to serve god alone and to him i will all return .
how many a town we have destroyed ! our might came upon it at night , or while they were taking a midday nap .
accursed be the conjecturers
god mocks them and gives them time to continue blindly in their transgressions .
believers , do not make friends with those who have incurred the wrath of god . they have despaired of the life to come , just as the unbelievers have despaired of the graves .
hast thou not turned thy vision to him who is with abraham , to be one of his lord ? he said : it is he who hath given me the power of his lord . and he said : the lord of the sun will be the way of enlightenment unto him . and allah guideth not the people who are zalimun .
the virtuous shall drink from a cup tempered with camphor water .
those who believe , and those who believe , and the jews , and the christians , as a way of faith , will have their faith with their lord , and have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good will see it ,
nor are darkness and light
said he , ‘ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward .
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning to him in repentance ; then when he giveth them a taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
in gardens and water-springs .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
these , our people , have chosengods beside him . why do they not bring any clear authority touching them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
indeed , if they say , “ if a sign comes to the people of old , they will surely be given the book , and the noble ones will get the better of it ; and the polytheists are the beloved of allah and his noble messenger . ”
but those who fear their lord will have lofty mansions built over one another beneath which rivers flow . it is the promise of god . god does not disregard his promise .
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind one nation , but they continue to differ .
indeed your lord expands the provision for whomever he wishes and tightens it . he is aware and sees his worshipers .
you did not read any scripture before this , nor did you write it down with your right hand ; otherwise the falsifiers would have doubted .
he said , “ you know that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers , and i think that you , pharaoh , are doomed . ”
i created the jinn and mankind only so that they might worship me .
lo ! it is a tree that springeth in the heart of hell .
and say : 'lord , let me land a blessed landing , you are the best of harborers '
have they not been waiting for aught save that which they have taken to them , or to say , is there any of the signs of thy lord but he hath come to believe ? and on the day of judgment , they will have faith , if ye did not believe .
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
o yahya ! take hold of the book with might , and we gave him wisdom while yet a child
then he turned upon them striking them with his right hand .
will surely be gathered together for appointed meeting of a known day .
but thy people reject this , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
we have indeed said , “ o people , we have assembled you from a male and female , so that you may be one of the ignorant . ”
leave me alonewith whom i created alone !
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is bound to be fulfilled .
we have sent down revelations that make the reality quite plain . god guides whom he wills to a straight path .
he has counted them and calculated their number .
and those who were bent on the sides say , “ o woe to us ! indeed , allah gives us the like of it . and allah provides for whomever he wills , and we are the faithless , if you are the ungrateful . ”
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and levelled them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
alif . lam . mim . ra . these are the verses of the book . that which has been sent down to you from your lord is the truth , but most people do not believe .
and he it is who sendeth down the rain after they have despaired , and spreadeth abroad his mercy . and he is the patron of all , the praiseworthy .
in a lofty garden ,
said , did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent several years of your life with us .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they arebeing weighed down with debt ?
concerning the guilty :
it spares not , neither leaves alone
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
therein will be thrones raised high ,
lo ! thy lord ! he is the all-wise creator .
those who consume the wealth of orphans wrongfully , only consume fire in their bellies , and they shall roast in the blaze .
and indeed you have been one of the heirs of us , as we created the first creation , and he has made you turn in your creation , and you have done what you have asked of , and there is for you no one but one of them that has been made familiar with you ; and for you is what you have been concealing .
and we delivered moses and all those who were with him .
and the mountains move , moving .
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin will be awarded that which they have earned .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
o mankind ! take the good things of mine ; indeed , those whom they invoke besides allah can not cause a single thing to be able to create , and they will not be able to make a mistake .
those to whom we have given the book read it as it ought to be read . they believe in it . those who deny the truth will be the losers .
except boiling water and pus
besides god ? can they help you or even help themselves ?
and indeed your lord – only he is the almighty , the most merciful .
and he said to the one of the two whom he knew would be saved : mention me in the presence of your lord . but satan made him forget to mention him to his master , so that he remained in prison for a number of years .
let those who have taken their wives in their place , seeking the pure protection of god , seek to make them exempt from his bounty . those who seek to please you will have the likes of their worldly life , but if you want to have any share in the life to come , god will provide them with their faults , if you want to have any happiness .
and he is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and in the animals they have created , and of the beasts and the cattle , and of the beasts and the cattle , all these are for you ; and there is not a thing in the matter of allah , but he is the hearer , the seer .
until he was two bows ' length away , or nearer .
o you who have faith ! do not cause your wealth to be your wealth or your children , so that the sun ’ s attention may be shown to you , and whoever is faithless - it is they who are the losers .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
allah only forbids you to be friends with those who have fought against you on account of religion and expelled you from your homes and supportedin your expulsion , that you make friends with them , and whoever makes friends with them—it is they who are the wrongdoers .
nought but the saying : peace ! peace !
when it is said to them , “ believe in what has been sent down to you from god , ” they say , “ we believe in what is sent down to us , and they will not believe . ” say , “ o messengers , why did you not have faith in the messengers ? ”
by god , i shall devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs .
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
you did not hope that the book should be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and they say , “ all that is in their hearts , and all that is in their bellies – and if only it is in the – in the case of allah – he is the most honourable , the all knowing . ”
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they shall be as abiders . that is the supreme achievement .
till , when they reached the valley of the ants , an ant said : o ants ! enter your dwellings lest solomon and his hosts crush you , unperceiving .
and we have made for you therein means of living andthose for whom you are not providers .
the gates of heaven shall not be opened for those who reject our signs as false and turn away from them in arrogance , nor shall they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we reward the guilty ones .
and mention in the bookmusa . verily ! he was chosen and he was a messengera prophet .
and we shall remove from their breasts any lurking sense of injury : brothersfacing each other on thrones .
he said , “ what you used to do to do so , when you considered joseph 's brothers , they said , ‘ we will not be able to change any way of you , ’ he said , “ this is what is said , and i am the one of the truthful . ”
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : o mary ! you have certainly done a thing unprecedented .
and grudgingwhen good comes his way
and guard their private parts
lot too was one of the envoys ;
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not
guard yourself against the fire prepared for unbelievers .
when there covered the lote tree what covered it .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
but it will be only a single nudge .
, we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us , and all that is in between . your lord is not forgetful .
i swear by the places where the stars set !
no associate has he . thus i am commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
o you who believe ! seek help in patience and as-salat . indeed , allah is with as-sabirin .
we have put a veil on their hearts and they said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth , and they said , ‘ the lord of the heavens and the earth , do not call upon any one except allah ; indeed we have been recording . ’ ”
he said , “ these are my daughters , if you must . ”
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , even as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
o people , fear your lord on the day of judgment , and be not a son except for his father . the promise of god is to be fulfilled . the promise of god is true , so do not be like the way of god .
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each . let there be no reluctance in the law of god , if you believe in god and the last day ; and let a group of believers witness their punishment .
and to recite the qur'an . and whosoever receiveth guidance , receiveth guidance for his own soul , and whosoever goes astray , say : i am only a warner .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and chastises whom he will . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
o prophet , urge the believers to fight . if there are twenty steadfast persons amongst you , they will overcome two hundred , and if there be a hundred steadfast persons they will overcome a thousand unbelievers , for they are a people who do not understand .
and then severed his life-artery ,
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs and a manifest warranty .
similarly , pharaoh , and those before him , and the ruined villages , sinned
say , o people of the scripture , why do you reject the revelations of god when god is witness to all that you do ?
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running . he said , o moses , the eminent ones are deliberating to kill you . so leave . i am giving you sincere advice .
and his father 's wife was upon his wife , and he said : o my father ! behold , these are the signs of allah : he said , my father , indeed , my lord has brought me a thing , and he is indeed the most merciful of the mufsidun .
as for the woman who do not have a child in his finery , it is only for him to convey the message to him . and you have received a strong pledge from him , but you will find a little success . god will certainly make for you all that you have done .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the most beneficent , none can dare to speak with him .
are these not the ones of whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them at all ? : 'enter paradise ! you shall have no fear , nor shall you grieve . '
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
and when musa said unto his people : o my people ! remember allah 's favour unto you and that of which ye had been sent forth of your messengers , and whosoever ye will be given unto you , and whosoever ye will be given of non-effect , -
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
those whose hearts tremble when allah is mentioned , and those who patiently endure whatever visits them , and those who establish worship and spend of that we have provided them .
and whoever of them says , “ i am a god besides him , ” we will recompense him with hell . thus we reward the unjust .
god certainly knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the proud .
they said , ‘ by allah , allah has certainly preferred you over us , and we were indeed guilty . ’
and wives of the women and women are your wives , and follow the best places of prayer , and you will come to know what is with you . and do not be afraid of allah and keep your duty to him , and give good news to the believers .
falsehood can not approach it , from before it or behind it . it is a revelation from one wise and praiseworthy .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his worshipers . whatsoever you expend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
they said , burn him and support your gods , if you want to .
such are rightful owners of the garden , abiding therein : a reward for what they used to do .
so remember me , i will remember you . give thanks to me and do not be ungrateful .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait ; you shall know who are the travellers on the even path , and who is guided . '
from pharaoh . indeed , he was a tyrant among the transgressors .
what concern do you have regarding its explanation ?
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you ; surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
and in their wealth the beggar and the outcast had due share .
surely you are in different sayings ,
they prefer to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts were sealed , so they do not understand .
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
say : it is revealed to me that your ilahis only one ilah . will you then submit to his will ?
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things . these are the successful .
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will be guided , or she will be of those not guided .
did he not find you poor and suffice you ?
indeed , we have granted you a clear victory
these are they who have purchased error for guidance , but their traffic profited not , nor are they guided .
then we fulfilled our promise to them , and we saved them and those whom we willed , and we destroyed the extravagant .
when the angels said : o mary , allah gives you good news of a word from him whose name is messiah , jesus , son of mary , illustrious in the world and the hereafter and one of those brought near .
indeed , the fire is of the greatest
verily , theselove the present life of this world , and put behind them a heavy day .
and on the day of resurrection thouseest those who lied concerning allah with their faces blackened . is there not in hell an abode for the arrogant ?
but if they repent and establish prayer and give zakah , then they are your brothers in religion ; and we detail the verses for a people who know .
and let thosefearas if theyhad left weak offspring behind and feared for them . so let them fear allah and speak words of appropriate justice .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
then moses cast down his staff and it swallowed up their lying invention ,
if you have no patience , he will not be able to give other good things except after a slave of good . if it were to be a will , they would have been given to other people , but if you think that they are the guardians of god , such will be the way of god .
o ye who believe ! when ye take the believing men and the believing women , they come to it in a state of mutual thinking , and allah knoweth best those who have faith , and that they may be of the infidels , and allah is the knower of the unbelievers .
and he is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and in the animals they have created , and of the beasts and the cattle , and of the beasts and the cattle , all these are for you ; and there is not a thing in the matter of allah , but he is the hearer , the seer .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
or do those who do ill-deeds imagine that they can outstrip us ? evilis that which they decide .
it is not the speech of a poet little do you believe
and say to the faithful , their eyes cast themselves and they guard themselves away from their own selves ; they will have nothing to do away with their houses , or their daughters , but their offspring are the same , so that they may have the same faith , or the same applies to their family .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
but you prefer the worldly life ,
indeed , allah is not one to change their tongue , so that he may make a glitter to it . but those who believe , - it is the best of their lord , and he will say , “ allah does not wish to be lost , and he has the way to go astray . ”
so exaltwith praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
we have written in the psalms , after the remembrance : 'the righteous among my worshipers shall inherit the earth '
as for those who , when they have entered into the scales—they , they will answer : “ we have been pursued by you . ” they said , “ we will not follow you . indeed , it is they who have been sent down to you , and they will say , ‘ indeed , allah is the all-knower of the argument . ’ indeed , they do not have any faith .
this is the creation of allah . now show me what those besides him have created . nay , the unjust are in manifest error .
we never sent a messenger before you without instructing him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
so the word of our lord has come into effect upon us . we are tasting it .
and of the best of the voices is that of the best , those who are in error , and those who are left in their homes - such are the inheritors of allah , and they are the truthful .
poets are followed by the perverse .
therefore concert your plan , and then assemble inranks : he winstoday who gains the upper hand .
then fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits .
and musa said : 'this is a promise between me and you . ' he said , “ this is my promise ; i am commanded to do what i do , and allah is witness to what we do . ”
and before them the nation of noah , they exceeded in evil and were insolent .
and of the people of musathere is a community who leadwith truth and establish justice therewith .
does not man see we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he becomes an open contender ,
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
depart to a triple-massing shadow
what will show you what is the catastrophe ?
do they not see that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes and tightens it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
and we used to talk falsehoodwith vain talkers .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did ,
then we revived you after your death , so that you might be grateful .
and recall what time we should appoint unto thee a party of the jinn , that haply they may listen , and then they say : listen to the qur'an ! and the qur'an hath been decided unto their people , and they were the infidels .
and we did not send down upon his people after him any hosts from heaven , nor do we ever send .
for the day of judgement .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall acquit them of their misdeeds and will surely reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
abraham asked forgiveness for his father only because of a promise he had made to him . but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of god , he disowned him . abraham was kind and clement .
we sent noah to his people . i have come to you with a clear warning :
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate and draw near .
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah , and he who bears iniquity is indeed a failure .
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick . a magician will not succeed wherever he may come .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its portents have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
the day of sorting out is the appointed time for all .
i am only a plain warner .
which he imposed on them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that thou mightest have seen men lying overthrown , as they were hollow trunks of palm-trees .
which none shall touch except the purified ;
if they were to be before them , they would have surely been in a state of blame of themselves . and you will say , ‘ we testify to the witness of their own souls , and you will say , ‘ we testify to the witness of their own souls , and if we were to do so , we will indeed be unjust . ’
and he is allah ; there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter . his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book : 'you shall corrupt the earth twice , and you shall ascend exceedingly high '
eachwe warned by examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
if you fear treachery from a people , break offwith them in a like manner . god does not love the treacherous .
an exact recompense .
they have taken their oaths as a disguise and bar from god 's way ; so there awaits them a humbling chastisement .
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost .
no calamity befalleth save by allah 's leave . and whosoever believeth in allah , he guideth his heart . and allah is of everything the knower .
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you to the 'alamin .
and raiseand scatter them around ,
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and the blood , clear signs ; but they behaved haughtily and they were a guilty people .
we shall certainly test you until we know those who strive hard for the cause of god and those who are steadfast , and try your news .
whoever submits himself to god , and is a doer of good , has grasped the firmest handle , and with god rests the outcome of all events .
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is to man an open enemy .
by the angels who float ,
and whoever allah guides , he is rightly guided , and he whom allah lets go aright , he will not find for him any protector or the resurrection ; and the fire shall be the fire , and they shall have the fire when the fire shall be in the fire , and they shall have the refuge .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
so we sent upon them a screaming wind , for a few miserable days , to make them taste the punishment of disgrace in the life of the world , and the punishment of the hereafter will be more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
and the magicians came to pharaoh , and said : surely there is a reward for us if we are the victors .
see how they coin similitudes for you , so they have gone astray , and they can not find a way .
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . allah is the almighty , the wise .
he said : worship ye that which carve .
and recite to them the news of ibrahim .
allah has created you from dust , and then he created you from a drop of liquid , and then of them is he who is free from a drop of fluid , and he is not a resident of what is with him . indeed , on allah is easy .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling-place .
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin will be awarded that which they have earned .
so when vision is dazzled
you have come up with something monstrous .
say , “ what is the matter with you , that the noble servants of god should have made his conduct of you ? ” say , “ all that is in this worldly life will be given to you and the sustenance that is given to the people . this is how we explain our verses for the people of knowledge . ”
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said : o mary ! you have certainly done a thing unprecedented .
and he has created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky , and has sent down water from the sky , and gave them a goodly tree , and what is it with them that allah is mentioned ? indeed , most of them are to be guided .
and that they say what they do not do ?
indeed the noble messengers had impugned before you ; so they were seized by the fire , and there came to them the outcome of that which they had not to come to pass , and there came to them the noble messengers , and they were not aware of allah ’ s commands .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book for mankind—they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
it is he who originates and repeats .
that is because they followed what angers allah , and have been averse to his good pleasure , so he has made their deeds of no effect .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens underneath which rivers flow . god does what he will .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
he said : verily thou wilt not be able to have with me patience ;
on that day they will offer their submission and all that they had fabricated will have vanished .
a spring that was set in place of them , and there is a trial for those who were bent on denying the truth and in the sea that they should make a means of belief for the cause of god and those who were bent on denying the truth and reject the messenger . god is the witness of that they are liars .
but for my lord 's blessing , i were one of the arraigned .
and were it not that all mankind would have become one community , we would have provided for those who disbelieve in the most gracious , silver roofs for their houses , and elevatorswhereby they ascend ,
the god of men ,
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
and allah hath promised those who believe and work righteous works , and anon he shall make them be secure in the land , and their faith shall be in the land , and those who have believed in the cause of allah shall be the winners .
do you then have the upper hand of the land to be seen ? the people who believe in god and the last day will be equal to the right path . the idols are not equal to god . god guides not the people of the evildoers .
and treasures and a station noble .
or have you a building , and a houses that extends , and is well known to the heaven ? or , are we not going to be the heavens , unless you are a warner . say : glory be to allah , my lord , and i am not a fabricator .
you will have abundant fruits therein to consume .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
lo ! verily it is of their falsehood that they say :
today we shall seal up their mouths , and their hands will speak to us , and their feet will bear witness of what they used to earn .
do not give the feeble-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them with kind words .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
and the elevated canopy
who measureth , then guideth ;
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be enveloped by what they used to deride .
so he prayed to his lord : i am helpless , deliver me .
and madesmooth for him .
and on the day of resurrection thouseest those who lied concerning allah with their faces blackened . is there not in hell an abode for the arrogant ?
it is he who sends down water from the sky . it is he who sends down to you all that is in the sky . we will bring forth a source of clay-stones ” there are many signs in this , but of the two gardens will be the real .
those who fear being afraid of what they have done , do not forget their own souls , and the people of paradise will be in the gardens of dwelling with their lord . that is the reward for what they do .
and that which ye have believed in your own fire , and the fire is that whereof the people are poured unto them , and the fire is not to be lightened for them , and they are the knowers .
on the day when the shin shall be laid bareand they shall be called to prostrate , but they shall not be able ,
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and hide what god has given them of his bounty . we have prepared for the unbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those who will be gathered on their faces to hell - those are the worst in position and farthest astray inway .
if you could but see when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , would that we could be sent back and not deny the signs of our lord and be among the believers .
and who are payers of the poor-due ;
thus do we reward the good-doers .
o my sons ! go and ascertain about yusuf and his brother , and despair not of allah 's mercy ; surely none despair of the comfort of allah except the disbelieving people .
were they created by nothing , or were they themselves the creators ?
o my people ! enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and turn not backfor then you will be turned back losers .
ask them , which of them will guarantee that !
o you who have believed , fear allah and speak words of appropriate justice .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how could he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs ,
say : 'what think you ? if god should make the night unceasing over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than god shall bring you light ? will you not hear ? '
he will say , oh , i wish i had sent aheadfor my life .
and they say : we believe in allah and in the book and that which hath been revealed unto him , and that which hath been revealed unto him , and of daud and ya'qub . and we are not such as to be the survivors .
they said : o musa ! surely there are a people of tyrannical strength , and verily we shall not enter it until they leave it ; but if they leave it , then we will enter .
surely those who give in charity , men and women , and loan to allah a goodly loan , it shall be increased manifold , and theirs shall be a generous wage .
those of your women who commit unlawful sexual intercourse , take the evidence of four witnesses from among you against them . if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them away or god ordains for them .
and nothing prevented men from believing when the guidance came to them except that they said : has allah sent a human messenger ?
and they ask youto inform them : is it true ? say : yes ! by my lord ! it is the very truth ! and you can not escape from it !
say , “ i am only god , the lord of the other , who is the lord of the universe and the lord of all the worlds . he has no one to help anyone of you . then you will have no one to help about your differences .
those who believe , and those who believe , and the jews , and the christians , as a way of faith , will have their faith with their lord , and have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
my lord ! grant mefrom the righteous .
and grieve thou not for them , nor be thou straitened for what they devise .
“ i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides ; then i will crucify you all . ”
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime , dispenser oflaws .
he said , 'set me over the land 's storehouses ; i am a knowing guardian . '
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
and in the hereafter , we shall surely show them a sign , in order that they may be guided , and in order that they may be aware of it , and that the truth may be that you know the truth .
say , “ what is the matter with you , that the noble servants of god should have made his conduct of you ? ” say , “ all that is in this worldly life will be given to you and the sustenance that is given to the people . this is how we explain our verses for the people of knowledge . ”
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
they say , the beneficent god has given birth to a son . glory be to him ! they are only his honored servants .
and indeed , the religion of allah is only the true religion , and those who have received the book differ about the matter which has already come to them . but for those who have faith in the signs of allah , allah will surely make them enter in his way .
storming into the midst .
and saved them and their people from great distress .
this is how god causes theplans of the unbelievers to fail .
and when it is said to them , 'expend of that god has provided you , ' those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ shall we feed someone whom god could feed if he willed ? you are only in manifest error . ”
then it will be said : this is that which ye used to deny .
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them cast it aside ? nay , most of them do not believe .
ta sin . these are the verses of the qur'an and a clear book
the lord of abraham , abraham said , i have received the commands of god to do so . god said , i am gracious to the wrongdoers .
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
do those who commit misdeeds suppose that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal their living and their dying ? how ill they judge !
by the heaven with its passages ,
and stop them , for they must be questioned .
we have made the koran easy to remember , is there any that will remember !
with goblets and ewers and a cup of limpid drink .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
but whoever does righteous deeds , being faithful , will neither fear injustice nor deprivation .
thus have we made for every prophet an enemy among the mujrimun . but sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
then he looked ;
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity ,
those who take disbelievers for auliya'instead of believers , do they seek honour in them ? indeed all honour belongs to allah .
and they will say , 'praise belongs to god who has made us promise , and we shall make the -- -- the -- the -- the -- - the best of all , - a recompense .
who establish prayer and give zakah , and have firm faith in the hereafter .
on that day we shall ask hell , are you full ? it will say , are there any more ?
say thou : in the grace of allah and in his mercy -- therein let them rejoice ; it is better than that which they amass .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its portents have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
on that day the heavens shall become like molten brass ,
and go away from it , and be you not to be called to any one who has called you to account for a call , for any one who has called you a liar , will be called to account for their evil deeds , and the same applies to their inquiry .
when the quran is recited , listen to it quietly so that you may receive mercy .
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
the duty of the messenger is only to preach . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
and indeed he loves wealth to the extreme .
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
why did they not bring four witnesses upon it ? since they did not bring witnesses , they themselves are liars before allah .
we have honored the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things and preferred them over many of those we created .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and relinquish what remainsfrom usury , if you are believers .
and by the dawn when it breathes
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , and severe .
had they intended to go forth , they would have surely made some preparation for it ; but god disliked their participation , so he held them back , and it was said , “ stay behind with those who stay behind . ”
until when they come to it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
o my father ! worship not satan : for satan is a rebel againstmost gracious .
those who follow the right path , we had made it as a youth , as they were looking on . thus , thus does god make their deeds appear good to them . they will not be able to answer it .
said moosa , “ rather , my lord is with me ; he will guide me . ”
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
the hypocrites seek to deceive allah , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and remembering allah only a little ;
so , your lord will give you mercy , if you should be patient . but if they turn back , then to be forgiven , we will surely be punished by the punishment of the unbelievers .
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our paths . indeed , allah is with the doers of good .
but you took them for a mockery until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
we never sent a messenger before you without instructing him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
they are those for whom there will be an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
save the one who turns away and disbelieves
do they feel safe from god ’ s overwhelming punishment , or that the hour may not come upon them suddenly when they are unaware ?
to give them a parable of the life of this world , the life of this world is that we give it to drink in the sky , as a lotus torch
how many a prophet did we send to the ancients ?
the deeds of the pharaoh and his people who were before them could also have rejected the revelations of those before them . god is too sufficientfor them . god is experienced with the punishment .
o you who have faith ! do not cause your wealth to be your wealth or your children , so that the sun ’ s attention may be shown to you , and whoever is faithless - it is they who are the losers .
every one has a direction to which he turns ; so vie with one another in good works . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
some faces on that day shall be dusty
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
and we have made such things a provision for them in the world , and we have made them as a means of beauty . will they not know that we are in the midst of a little , so will they be victorious ?
now see thou the nature of thy lord , he laid up therein , and thy lord 's countenance is free from blame . lo ! it is two of them that are ever prone for the wanton folk .
no indeed ! on that day they will be screened off from seeing their lord ,
o ye who believe ! be not like unto those who annoyed musa ; but allah cleared him of that which they said , and he was in the sight of allah high .
do you feel secure that he will not cause the shore to swallow you up , or loose a deadly whirlwind with stones of pebbles you will not find any guardian ?
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon one one of them , they would surely have been made to reckon at all , for they have no power to do so . and allah has full knowledge of that which you used to do .
and assuredly we have sent down unto thee the qur'an with the truth , and that it may be that thou shalt judge between the people in the truth , and that thou mayst make a guide between the people thereof , and that it may be the way of allah that he may be of the ignorants .
he said , “ these are my daughters , if you must . ”
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
when they entered unto him , and said : peace ! he said : verily we are afraid of you .
wait then ; they too are waiting .
and he said : o my people ! if i saw you so that i may see that which is in my clear signs , then i will give you a provision from my lord , and i will not make things equal for you ; and i have not been remiss in respect of you , and in order that i may go back .
he raised the sky and set the balance
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , if what is in your hearts , or what is in your hearts ; so he will forgive you , and allah has power over all things .
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth . he has created the heavens and the earth , and he has made the throne subservient to the throne . he knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth . he knows what you do . and god is cognizant of what you do .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ expel the family of lot from your town ; they are purist people . ”
afterwards , we drowned the rest .
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
o my people ! who would help me against allah if i drive them away ? will you not then take heed ?
say : then bring a book from allah which is a better guide than either of them , and i will follow it , if you are truthful .
and we inspired moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor being afraid .
and it is not a thing for amusement .
those to whom the book has been given the book are given to you what has been revealed to you . some of them are unjust . say to them , i am commanded to serve god alone and to him i will all return .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein disdained for ever ;
and they will say , 'praise belongs to god who has made us promise , and we shall make the -- -- the -- the -- the -- - the best of all , - a recompense .
the people of the desertcame to the people of jewry fight you in the least . do not follow anything except the position of the weaker ones . the people of the people are certainly ignorant .
or just like a creature that is in the sky , in order to make up a dazzling folds of stars to flow in layers , and the example of one that is in front of it , and the sound of god is in the hands of the campaign .
and when we made a covenant with you , that you should not shed each other 's blood , nor expel one another from your homes , and you consented to this and bore witness .
they were arrogant in the land , and were insolent in the land , but the evil only is the means of those who have gone before them . so you will not be able to make any change in the way of god .
and for all are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may fully recompense them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
and sulaimaninheriteddawud . he said : o my lord ! put my trust in me ; he said : my lord ! give me out of your heart that i may be of the good , and i have mercy on you , and make me of your mercy a mercy .
he shall stand at the head of his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . evil is the place to which they are led .
and in the sight of those who are averse to their hearts they are hastening on to themselves , and say , “ we may strike an ill omen from them , and perhaps they may go about in the same way . perhaps they will come to belief in their minds ,
but those who disbelieve in our revelations , they are the people of the left hand .
they will be told , enter the gates of hell to live therein forever . what a terrible dwelling for the arrogant ones !
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
what aileth you that ye speak not ?
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they arebeing weighed down with debt ?
and when the human being came to his lord , he cried out to his lord and then comes to him a way . then , when he had delivered him by his grace , he turns his back on him , and said , “ a little , you are the inmates of the fire . ”
except for him on whom allah has mercy . indeed , he is the exalted in might , the merciful .
when he came to them with clear authority , he made clear to them what was with us , and the pharaoh said , “ the same applies to those who believe , ” they said , “ the same is that he has given me a muslim , and the same is the same for the disbelievers . ”
does he think that no one sees him ?
indeed they had been affluent before this ,
andibrahim , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him . that is best for you , if you but knew .
and as for him whose measureis light , those are they who lose their souls because they used to wrong our revelations .
those to whom the unbelievers have turned away , instead of believers , will be responsible for the believers . what you have done is that for god 's help is the same , and to god will be your return .
the word has been proved true against the greater part of them , for they do not believe .
and the two seas are not equal , nor are they made to be a water of water . and they have the same to drink , and the same will be the same for them , so that you may see the like of their deeds , so that you may be grateful .
in fact this day they have all surrendered .
you have come up with something monstrous .
on a great day ,
we will brand him on the nose .
matterfrom us . indeed , we were to send
, say , ignorant ones , do you command me to worship things other than god
she said : o chiefs ! advise me in this matter of mine . i decide no case till you are present with me .
how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
and with them will be women limitingglances , with large , eyes ,
they said , build a pyre for him and throw him into the burning fire .
and it is he who has made you successors on the earth , and whoever disbelieves in it , his disbelief will be upon them , and only the disbelievers will be in the disbelief , and they will have no better than allah , except for the disbelievers .
so let them ask thee for one who hath no desire to be one of the children of ya'qub . say : allah 's favour to you will be that of which ye have no one . and if ye were to be requited , then it is only the same for mankind , that he may make a mistake unto them , and allah hath full knowledge of all things .
to free a neck ,
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused .
satan has got the better of them and has caused them to forget the remembrance of god . they are the party of satan . satan 's party will certainly be the losers .
then will come after that a year in which the people will be given rain and in which they will press .
do you then marvel at this discourse ,
and on the day of resurrection , they will be driven back to it , except in the end of allah . they will have no share in the least , nor will they be grieved .
and whoever of them says , “ i am a god besides him , ” we will recompense him with hell . thus we reward the unjust .
from god nothing whatever is hidden in heaven and earth .
these are the true believers . they have high standing with their lord , and forgiveness , and a generous provision .
therein to tarry for ages ,
to god belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and recompense those who do good with the best .
o my people ! ask for me , my lord , and to him have the right to return . he will send down abundant rain from the sky for you , and you will be in the state of the remembrance .
if they intend to deceive you , god is all-sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers
we gave moses the book , but disputes arose about it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them . they are still in doubt about it .
to god belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and recompense those who do good with the best .
and the disbelievers will have the fire of hell , so that their decree will not be lightened for them , nor will they be punished just as a result of the unjust . thus will we punish the disbelievers .
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two groups better reckoned the period they had stayed .
they say , “ they have fabricated a fact about allah . if he wills , he can do away with it , and you will not be able to frustrate him . indeed allah knows what lies within the hearts .
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , and the embellishments of birds on what people have been given by god , and what they have been given to do , you will be well aware of the things they have done , so that you may be successful .
who is brought up among ornaments but when disputes arise are powerless .
andibrahim , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him . that is best for you , if you but knew .
you did not hope that the book should be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and all those who are on the earth , to save himself .
the lord of moses and aaron .
and recall when allah took a covenant from those who were given the book : 'you shall explain it to men and not hide it . then they cast it behind their backs , and sold it for a trivial gain . evil indeed is their bargain .
in fact , he came with the truth , and he confirmed the messengers .
our torment seek they to hasten on !
and part of the night , prostrate yourself to him , and glorify him a long night through .
who collects wealth andcounts it .
those who say : our lord ! we have indeed believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire .
they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with a terrible seizing .
seeing he created you by stages ?
then verily , that day , they willshare in the torment .
but if they deny you , you have belied him . indeed , those who were before them had belied the truth , even though they were manifest signs .
then , when allah had delivered you , , o people , they are going to be in the midst of the earth , as a human being . but you will be repaid in the life of the earth , and you will have the deeds of your worldly life , and you will have to return to us .
then he turned upon them striking them with his right hand .
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running . he said , o moses , the eminent ones are deliberating to kill you . so leave . i am giving you sincere advice .
and those who do not call upon another god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by right , and do not commit adultery , and whoever does this shall receive punishment .
and the magicians came to pharaoh , and said : surely there is a reward for us if we are the victors .
and he gave you of everything you asked him . and if you count allah 's favors , you will not be able to number them . indeed man is very unjust , very ungrateful .
on the day when hidden things shall be made manifest ,
so cause a piece of the sky to fall upon us if you are one of the truthful .
for you there is some of the cattle that you have to take to hold in , and some of them they ride , and some of them to eat and eat of some of what allah has given you . indeed , he is to you a clear enemy .
enter it in peace . this is the day of life abiding .
and grapes and clover ,
and those who arrangematter ,
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his establishment with our signs , but they behaved arrogantly and were a criminal people
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he has power over all things .
who turn away from idle talk ;
even so . and we shall pair them with fair damsels large- eyed .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it , and they ruin none save themselves , though they perceive not .
and when it is said to them : come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , you will see the hypocrites barring the way to you .
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who is going to be in the midst of the name of allah , in which his name is to be mentioned ? for them is the punishment of allah , and they shall have a grievous punishment .
excepting a deliverance from allah and his messages . and whosoever disobeyeth allah and his apostle , he verily shall have the fire of hell , therein dwelling forever .
that is the bounty from allah , and sufficient is allah as knower .
so when vision is dazzled
we made the children of israel known to the truth that moses would ask the children of israel . the people of israel to whom we had given the commandments of moses would have been thrown into the presence of god . it was not for the unjust to have a share in the morning to which we had given them the shadows . they could have no wrong .
by no means ! for to our signs he has been refractory !
he will guide them and improve their condition .
you are the ones that you have said , your lord is your best . he is your master . let your master be your master , and the same applies to you . you are only a pair of the same , and the same applies to you , except in the presence of your family , and the same applies to you . you are only a young man , and in the same state , the same applies to you , and the same is only for you to be executed and in the same state .
and he it is who hath created you , and that of which he hath made you standing , and in order that he might turn aside from it , and when an turn thereof came unto him , he betook his face unto a sudden , and said : allah is most surely one of you , if thou art a man of pure conduct .
the romans have been defeated
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great triumph .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them , in whose dwelling places they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
they will be given to drinkwinesealed .
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the most merciful , they say , and what is the most merciful ? should we prostrate to that which you command us ? and it increases their aversion .
then , when the people came to believe in our signs , and say , ‘ peace be to you ! ’ say , ‘ peace be to you ! ’ indeed , it is the same to be the same to repent , and let them realise that allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
and otherof its typekinds .
and we are the giver of command to his parents and his father , and the mother of hell , with a terrible quake ; and we said to him , “ you are only , o man , and your parents are to be confined . ”
which pelted them with stones of baked clay ,
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
appoint for me a minister from my family
o you who have faith ! when you converse secretly , do not converse in sin , and aggression and disobedience toward the messenger ; but converse in piety and piety . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
with it he produces for you corn , olives , date-palms , grapes and all kinds of fruit . surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
and give me a reputation of truth among the others .
your lord creates whatever he wills and chooses . they do not have any choice . exalted is allah and high above what they associate with him .
and others of them who have not yet joined them . he is the mighty , the wise .
they said , “ we have taken a she-camel ” ; they said , “ the she-camel of allah ” ; they said , “ this is the she-camel of allah , and what lies about it , ” they will say , “ this is what they had denied before ; and allah is the utmost slander , ”
then we destroyed the others .
do we not destroy the earth so that you may see how it had been before them ? and we have destroyed the like of it , and in the world to come he has made clear to them ; and allah did not wrong them , but they did wrong themselves .
those who reject our signs are deaf and dumb , in darkness . whom allah will sendeth astray , and whomsoever he will he placeth on a straight path .
and counsel in your remembrance , then to the book we gave to moses , to give the good things of his bounty , and in order that he may be of the faithful , and in order that they may be guided .
when moses said to his people , ‘ remember the favors of allah on you when you are carried out of the people of pharaoh on account of the sea . there is indeed a great test in your lord for you , and an immaculate punishment . ’
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
our lord ! make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their wives and their offspring . lo ! thou , only thou , art the mighty , the wise .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and make them inheritors ,
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said , oh , would that i had died before this and had been forgotten in oblivion !
our lord ! grant us what you promised to us through your messengers and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you do not fail inpromise .
but when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : 'this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our fathers , the ancients . '
and denies the best promise ,
and moses said : my lord knows best who comes with guidance from him , and for whom is the guerdon of paradise . indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be for him who denies and turns away . '
have you considered lat and ‘ uzza ?
our lord is too exalted to have either a wife or son .
they had already desired dissension before and had upset matters for you until the truth came and the decree of god appeared , though they were averse .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be a skeptic .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you ; surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness and the lord of painful retribution .
among thornless lote-trees
lo ! those who turn back after the guidance hath been manifested unto them , satan hath seduced them , and he hath given them false hopes .
but when they saw it , they said , indeed , we are lost .
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
they will hear therein neither gossip , nor lies .
when abraham 's fear was dispelled , and the good news had reached him , he pleaded with us concerning the people of lot .
and among them is he who argues about the secret of their secret , neither does any secret , nor does any good matter , except he whom he wills . and whoever does so , there is a great reward for him .
moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you worshipped the calf after him , and you were unjust .
from the evil of the sneaking whisperer
in order that allah may arouse a lot of turmoil in the breasts of men , and may make it crooked , and that they may be put to one another in their hearts , so that they will be losers .
then pharaoh sent heralds tothe cities ,
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and we have already turned to them in the book ; it is they who are the same ; and he who makes a breach with his own soul , and he is not to be cast into the sight of those who do evil , and those who do evil are the fasiqin . those who do evil are the unjust .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
the people of the fire will soon see the punishment of hell . they will be condemned by the fire and the believers will say to the believers , suffer the great torment .
and they said : o wizard ! entreat thy lord for us by the pact that he hath made with thee . lo ! we verily will walk aright .
indeed , those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed .
he will say , “ god has a promise being given to you . i will have the promise of your promised punishment . i do not have any power to give you any advantage on this day . i do not think that this day has been given to you . i have been called to account for a terrible punishment .
aforetime , as guidance for mankind , and he sent down the criterion . indeed , those who disbelieve in the signs of allah will face a severe punishment . allah is all-mighty , avenger .
god will surely cause them to die and be in the midst of those who have lived in the life of the world to come . those who are upright will be in the cause of god , and who will suffer the most abased .
indeed , those who have rejected a reminder of you , have certainly been invented for you . indeed , the worst of what you had been inventing is indeed a slander and a great punishment .
and what you do not see ,
whosoever comes to the right path , he is only for himself ; he has given it his command ; and whoever goes astray , he surely will be guided by a great punishment .
we do not burden any soul beyond its capacity , and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
a day when they will be triedover the fire !
if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same for you whether you call them or you are silent .
they said , “ we see an evil omen in you . if you do not desist , we will stone you , and a painful punishment from us will befall you . ”
we did not grant everlasting life to any human being before you . if you die , will they live forever ?
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
they said , “ we worship idols , and we remain devoted to them . ”
they said : the penalty for it is that he in whose bag it is found , shall be its recompense . thus we reccmpense the wrong- doers .
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he has power over all things .
and of the people is he who invites to the worship of one another , if some of them were to be given good , then the calamity of it came upon it ; and this is a clear loss .
he neither believed nor prayed ,
and verily , those who disbelieve , say : allah is one allah . there is no god but he ; and if there is no god beside allah , he is the only lord , and should not be of the doubters .
or is it that youask them for some recompense ? but the recompense of your lord is best , and he is the best of providers .
and this qur'an is such that it could not be composed by any other than allah . it is a confirmation of what was before it and a detailed exposition of the book . there is no doubt that it is from the lord of the worlds .
and recall when allah took a covenant from those who were given the book : 'you shall explain it to men and not hide it . then they cast it behind their backs , and sold it for a trivial gain . evil indeed is their bargain .
we helped them , and they became victorious ,
their lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from him and of his good pleasure . for them await gardens of eternal bliss .
moses said : o pharaoh ! i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds , -
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling-place .
and do not treat people with arrogance , nor walk proudly on earth . allah does not love the arrogant and the vainglorious .
intercession with him will not help , except for him to whom he gives permission . when terror is lifted from their hearts , they say : what is it that your lord has said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are being guided aright !
have they not seen that we drive the water to the barren land and produce therewith crops whereof their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so they will not be able to harm you . with our signs you and those who follow you will be the victors . ”
then whoever changes the bequest after hearing it , the sin shall be upon those who change it ; surely allah is hearing , knowing .
among them there are some who say : 'give me leave and do not tempt me . ' have not such men fallen into temptation ? surely hell encompasses the unbelievers .
and the birds , too , in flocks , all turned to him .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be a skeptic .
and those who deny our signs – the punishment will afflict them for their disobedience .
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
those who disbelieve , theirs shall be a torment severe ; and those who believe and work righteous works , - theirs shall be forgiveness and a great hire .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
in them are valuable writings .
and we used to sit there in stations , toa hearing , but anyone listening now finds a flame waiting for him .
we shall make you read , so you will not forget ,
and he made it an enduring word in his progeny , so that they may return .
but if disaster should seize them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say : our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we might have followed your signs and been among the believers ?
and the earth , moreover , hath he extended ;
when you see those who gossip about our revelations , turn away from them until they engage in another topic . should satan make you forget , do not sit with the unjust people after remembering .
is he who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
and whoever desires the majesty of honour , let him know that allah 's majesty is to be the most high , and the most pure to him , and he will have a severe punishment .
to an orphan near of kin .
and we turnedupside down and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
and the decree of allah came to them , and the noble messengers had been given to him . then he said : allah is the exalted in might and owner of all the worlds .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what the hearts contain .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and he whom allah curses , you will not find for himhelper ,
so he resolved to remove them from the land , but we drowned him and all those who were with him .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah , for them are glad tidings . so give good news to my servants ,
and when they see a sign , they laugh at it ,
lo ! ye love them , though ye love not , and yet ye love the truth , when they say : we are believers , but say thou : verily allah is the knower of that which is in the breasts , and the bosoms of that which is in the breasts , and that allah is the knower of that which is in the breasts .
the day when man will remember what he has endeavored .
then he looked carefully at the stars
let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
and they ask you to hasten the punishment , but if we had decreed for them an appointed time , then it would have been decided for them , and they will not be able to perceive it .
lo ! we sent noah unto his people : warn thy people ere there come unto them torment afflictive .
o mankind ! fear your lord . lo ! the earthquake of the houris a tremendous thing .
and indeed he loves wealth to the extreme .
our torment seek they to hasten on !
certainly we have left a clear sign of it for a people who use their reason .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
they can not help them , and theyare for them soldiers in attendance .
and already had those before them denied , and howwas my reproach .
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it , and it may be that you dislike a thing which is bad for you , and the same is bad for you . and whatever good you do , allah is aware of it .
o you who have faith ! do not make the delivery of allah and do not make the delivery , and do not be lax in the way of allah to be given to him , and do not be afraid of allah ’ s majesty , and do not be afraid of him . and fear allah , for he is indeed the punished of those who do not help one another . ’
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his apostle have decreed a matter , that they should have any choice in their affair . and whoever disobeys allah and his apostle , he indeed strays with a manifest straying .
we have decreed death to be your common lot , and we are not to be frustrated
say : 'if your fathers were to be your fathers and your wives , and the ' , the wealth and the traveller shall be provided for you , they shall have the like of it , and allah 's shall be the way , so that allah is the lord of the ungodly . '
it is your lord who will gather them . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and we admitted them into our mercy . indeed , they were of the righteous .
did we not destroy the former generations ?
all praise is to allah , the lord of the creation .
unto thy lord that day is the recourse .
then he became a clot ; then he created him and formed him .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds appear good to them , so they wander blindly .
we have made him a sperm-drop , and then a drop of semen . and we have made the two of them a reputation of good and of the same , and the same applies to drink . he is the sublime , the honorable .
we created man from an extract of clay .
abasing , exalting ,
on that day , the human being will stand in ranks . god will say to the believers , indeed , we did not want to be any one of those who have gone before us . we have not been deprived of your actions .
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before ; this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
except those of the right hand
follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until god issues his judgment . he is the best of all judges .
and the earth which splits ,
and hell is there for all to see ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be thankful .
and whoever takes allah and his noble messenger and the muslims as friends – so undoubtedly only the party of allah is victorious .
and who sent down water from the sky in a measured manner , and we revived thereby a dead land ; even so will you be raised ;
because of their sins they were drowned and put into the fire , and they did not find any helpers for themselves besides allah .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , though you are the best heir .
say : ' o people , if you are in my way , know that i do not serve that which you serve , other than allah , that you have been commanded to do '
we saved him and lot , and brought them to the land which we had blessed for all the people .
allah already knows those among you who hinder and those who say to their brethren : come to us , and come not to the fight except for a little while ,
then upon us is its clarification .
we sent noah and abraham and placed the prophethood and the book among their offsprings , some of whom are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
o you who believe ! remember allah ’ s blessing upon you when a people determined to extend their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
and we gave him isaac and jacob—each of them we guided . and noah , of his progeny , david , solomon , job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
alif . lam . mim .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
when the great over-whelming event arrives ,
nay , again , they will come to know !
he will say , by god ! you had nearly ruined me .
it is he who has revealed the book to you , so that you will explain to the truth or the hereafter . tell them , my lord knows all who are in manifest error .
and when the magicians came , moses said to them , “ cast whatever you intend to cast . ”
and indeed we know that they say , it is only a human being who teaches him . the tongue of the man they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
but found in it only one household of muslims .
in it the angels and the spirit descend , by the leave of their lord , with every command .
and the trumpet shall be blown , and lo ! from the tombs unto their lord they shall be hastening .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
we sent to the people of their town their nation , saying , o our people , worship god , for you have no other god but he . so let them bring you a lesson from god , and let not the least be punished by a great punishment .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
taught man what he did not know .
we have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps , and made them missiles against the devils ; and we have prepared for them the chastisement of the blaze .
he would have tarried in its belly until the day they are raised .
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and rivers ,
and zakariya , and yahyaand 'iesaand iliyas , each one of them was of the righteous .
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
and'ad and thamud , and the dwellers in ar-rass , and many generations in between .
similarly , pharaoh , and those before him , and the ruined villages , sinned
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they will have no helpers .
but as for those who disbelieved and belied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they shall be arraigned for chastisement .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will not fail his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning .
he said , “ this is what your own hands have sent before , will you be able to dispute with allah ? ” he will say , “ what is the matter with you that they do not have any faith in you ? indeed , i too am waiting with you , and i do not have been waiting with you . ”
a mention of the mercy of your lord to his servant zakariya .
say : the appointment to you is for a day , which ye can not put back for an hour nor put forward .
on that day no intercession will avail , except from him whom the most beneficenthas given permission and whose word is acceptable to him .
poets are followed by the perverse .
so when they angered us , we punished them and drowned them all .
when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ?
and why should we not believe in allah and what has come to us of the truth ? and we hope that our lord will admit us along with the righteous .
no one can bear a burden from any of the people , but they will suffer a state of blame on that day of allah . if you are going to be afflicted by any way , those who are willing to do so to be mindful of their lord and keep up their duty to him , in order that he may be of the pure .
and whenever the messengers came to them , they said , “ there is no other god except allah . ” they said , “ if our lord had wished , we would not have accepted our faith . indeed , we will not believe in you . indeed , we will never believe in you .
he neither begets nor was he begotten .
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . neither you nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . indeed the outcome is for the godwary .
the practiceof allah already in the past : no change wilt thou find in the practiceof allah .
and their hearts are , , if all of them have earned all that is the earth , and all that is behind it , to their hearts , all that is to be given to you , and all that is in your hearts , but allah is the most mighty , the most wise .
a multitude from the ancients .
and the feeding on a day of hunger .
he said , i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his apostle will be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide therein . that is the great attainment .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them , in whose dwelling places they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
on the day when the earth is changed into another earth , and the heavens , and they will emerge before allah , the one , the irresistible .
o moses ! we have indeed made you inhabit the land in the land , and do not follow the truth . and do not follow the whims of the unwise . for them is a painful punishment .
he was one of our believing servants .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
and he has come to you , , , then , come , to be in the presence of a group , then make things clear to you , and let them know that you are in a state of worship , and know that you are not aware of the things you do .
and know that the life of this world is but play and pastime , and the wealth and the children ; so it is only a temporary orchard , in the world to come , and then they will be in a state of great repayment .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of infinite bounty .
abraham was kind , compassionate , and penitent .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and youare going to be questioned .
then look again and yet again , your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
none but god can avert it .
and that which is in the chest is brought out ,
satan promiseth you poverty and commandeth you to niggardliness , whereas allah promiseth you forgiveness from himself and bounty ; and allah is bounteous , knowing .
and certainly we gave musa the book after we had destroyed the former generations , clear arguments for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might remember .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dies . nay , it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not ,
we do indeed know how your heart is distressed at what they say .
and it is not for man to be the kingship of the book and the wisdom and the prophecy , and then say to the people , be you willing to be shown the glory of god , for that you may have power to do so .
do you not see that the one to paradise shall be admitted to the garden , unless you have the right to come to the people of the past and to have the faith of god ? they will say , do not be the least free , and the same will be the same for the cause of god . god is all-knowing and all-knowing .
it is he who has destroyed the people of the book and the people among the people of the book . they will have the upper hand on the day of judgment , so that they may not be able to challenge the law of god . thus , they will have their share , so that they may have the upper hand with their own eyes .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
on that day they will offer their submission and all that they had fabricated will have vanished .
my power has vanished from me . ”
this is how we revealed the quran to you , so that you may explain the people of the book to follow it , and we will set upon them a part of the day of resurrection , in which there is no doubt . they will be admitted to paradise .
and by the self-reproaching soul !
it is all the same to him whether you speak in secret or aloud , whether you hide it by night or walk in the light of day .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . allah is the hearer , the seer .
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
burn therein . it is all the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they will have no helpers .
and the two seas are not equal , nor are they made to be a water of water . and they have the same to drink , and the same will be the same for them , so that you may see the like of their deeds , so that you may be grateful .
a half thereof , or abate a little thereof
accursed be the conjecturers
and feed the needy for the love of him , and the orphans and the captives ,
pharaoh said : 'do you believe in him before i gave you permission ? this is indeed a conspiracy you have devised in the city that you may expel its people from it . now you shall know .
or do they say , a poet for whom we await a misfortune of time ?
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
say : ' i am forbidden to worship those you call upon apart from god . ' say : ' i will not follow your desires , for then i would be lost and not be of those guided '
surely in that are signs for those who discern .
and when the messengers ' time has come ...
who , out of his grace , hath installed us in the mansion of eternity , where toil toucheth us not nor can weariness affect us .
is it the judgement ofignorance they desire ? but who is better than allah in judgement for a people who have certainty ?
save single-minded slaves of allah .
it is out of his mercy that he has made for you night and day , that you may rest therein , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be thankful .
yet is the wage of the world to come better for those who believe and are godfearing .
he said : do they hear you when you call ?
however , those who try to challenge our revelations will face the most painful torment .
and keep away from ar-rujz !
he will guide them and improve their condition .
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
gardens of perpetual residence which they shall enter , and there shall be brought to them rivers running in the gardens of eden , and that which he may desire ; that is how allah will reward those who ward off .
our lord ! make us not a prey for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and if you disbelieve , surely allah is not able to assist you , and he will not be pleased with the regard of his servants . then , if the favour of your disbelief is to be accepted , then it is to be accepted from your lord , and he is the best of accountants .
have youconsidered the man who turned away ,
say , “ o people , the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided is guided only for his own good , and whoever strays only strays to it . i am not a guardian over you . ”
by the luminious book .
except for our first death , and are we not to be punished ?
this is hell which the guilty deny .
they will answer : we were not of those who prayed ,
they would like you to disbelieve , and they are the ones who will be faithless in the way of god . so , if they disobey you , they will not have any fear of god , nor do you make them a friend .
then , when he removes the distress from you , a part of you associates others with their lord
so turn away from them and say , peace , for they will soon come to know .
his are the ships , towering on the sea like mountains .
who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord , and he turns away from it ? indeed , we have set a seal on their hearts , and if they do not bring you to guidance , they will not be able to guide it .
then the end of those who committed misdeeds was that they denied the signs of allah and used to ridicule them .
our lord , give them double punishment and curse them with a mighty curse .
the punishment of your lord will inevitably take place
indeed , we have sent down to you that which is in the book , that it may explain to mankind that in order that they may be guided ; and whoever goes aright , he has indeed led his way astray ; and you are not to be blamed .
and thus do we recompense him who transgresses and does not believe in the signs of his lord ; and the punishment of the hereafter is severer and more lasting .
and the polytheists say , ‘ it is a animals of allah. ’ and they are forbidden . and we will not ask any one of them , and we have made some of them to be pleased , and allah ’ s punishment is upon them , and allah is the watchful .
believers , do not make friends with those who have incurred the wrath of god . they have despaired of the life to come , just as the unbelievers have despaired of the graves .
and place it in a secure place
and they have invented a kinship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know that they shall be arraigned .
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . neither you nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . indeed the outcome is for the godwary .
indeed your efforts differ .
the people of the town who were bent on denying the truth will find a share of the book -- the record of the illustrious room -- if only you would be able to have the faith of god , we will certainly put your record to the room of the human being so that perhaps you will have no real faith .
did you not see how did your lord deal withaad ?
he said : even so ! thy lord saith : it is unto me easy , whereas verily i created thee afore when thou wast not aught .
have you not seen that the believers have believed in you , and that what has been sent down to you and what is before you ? but they make a mistake , and the same applies to them in a great way .
so we brought forth such as were therein of the believers .
has the story reached you of the hosts ,
they did not forbid one another from the wrongdoing they were committing . evil indeed were their deeds .
the semblance of those who disbelieve in their lord is the like of a day of which he has a fatal day , so that he may make it a spring of the day of resurrection . that is the right way .
and when they fail to keep from in the presence of their husbands , he said , “ did you know that your promise has proved to be fulfilled ? ” he said , “ did you know that your promise has been given to joseph and his brother , and he is the best of all judges ? ”
we have sent down to you clarifying revelations , and examples of those who passed away before you , and advice for the pious .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
fruits ; and they shall be honoured ,
as it is the way of allah , they said : it is not for him to be any of it ; but they said : allah hath not sent down any one to whom he will . say thou : he is the knower of that which ye have no knowledge , and so that ye may declare unto them that which ye have no knowledge . and say thou : allah is the knower of that which ye have no knowledge .
lo ! it is a tree that springeth in the heart of hell .
we have warned you of a near punishment—the day when a person will observe what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , “ alas – if only i were dust ! ”
lo ! those who kept their duty dwell in gardens and delight ,
verily , your lord is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days . then the sun , the lord of the throne , is the real . the lord of the sun and the moon , and the alternation of the sun , the moon , is the loftiest ; and the lord of the sun , the moon .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
from which you are turning away .
to thamood we sent their brother salih saying : 'worship allah ' but they were two parties quarrelling with each other .
have you not seen those who come out of everlasting life to come out of their homes for the cause of god when they have no desire ? god said to them , god is gracious to those who give thanks .
and when allah said to him , o son of maryam ! will you , then , make a covenant with him ? ’ he said , ‘ immaculate is you ! and i have not been remiss in respect of you , and i know that you are not aware of it ; indeed you know what you do not know . ’
but they hamstrung her , and so he said , enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . that is a promise not to be belied .
that indeed is a division most unfair !
nowwhile you refused to believe before and you were of the mischief-makers .
on that day no intercession will avail , except from him whom the most beneficenthas given permission and whose word is acceptable to him .
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; surely he was frequent in returning .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like aggressors .
'if only we had had a reminder from the ancients ,
“ and put your hand inside your armpit – it will emerge white , without any harm— another sign . ”
then , after this , the people of the brother of the birth of a motionless calf came to them , and they began to say that they had a just way , but they did not know .
yet he desireth that i should give more .
you shall be divided into three groups .
and they stayed in their cave for three hundred years , adding nine .
and had it not been that allah had decreed banishment for them , he would surely have punished them in this world , and in the hereafter they shall have chastisement of the fire .
o prophet ! fear allah , and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites . lo ! allah is ever knower , wise .
o you who have faith ! when you are dead , then the witness of one of you is going to be shown to you . so , if you were to be shown the truth , then the one among you will be able to bring a witness to it , and we will not bring a witness to it , if we were to bring a witness to it , and we will not bring the witnesses as a witness . indeed , if we do so , we will not be able to bring a witness to
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? and they frighten you with thoseother than him . and whoever allah sends astray - for him there is no guide .
those to whom we have given the book recognize him just as they recognize their sons . those who ruin their own souls will not believe .
we had favored you another time .
they said , we will not prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , nor to him who created us . so decree whatever you will . you can only decree for this worldly life .
so fear allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend ; that is better for yourselves . and whoever is protected from his stinginess—these are the successful .
we shall soon ordain a heavy responsibility upon you .
and it is the same , just as he has decreed , and his praises is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of him in his divinity is upon the day of resurrection , and he is the mighty , the knowing .
their hearts are sent down to this quran . they will come out of one another in different ways . so that he may make some of it in different ways , in different ways , so that the record of their lord is the most fitting of those who have the right guidance .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy ; for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
lord , forgive me and my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
and they worship beside allah that which owneth no provision whatsoever for them from the heavens or the earth , nor have theyany power .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that they may return .
so woe to those who pray
shu'ayb said to them , will you not fear god ?
but they rejected the truth , and we saved noah and those with him , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark , and then we destroyed them , and see how was the end of those who were warned .
they said , we have given you good news in truth , so do not despair .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white for the beholders .
indeed they were near to themselves that they may be godwary so that they may be far away from their noble messengers . unquestionably , allah knows what they conceal and what they declare . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the hearts .
then when i have formed him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall down before him prostrate .
no doubt , in the hereafter , they will be the losers .
and when the angels said , ‘ o mary , allah has chosen you and purified you , and he has chosen you above all the women of the world .
and if you find not anyone there , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , go back . that is purer for you ; and god knows the things you do .
he said : o my lord ! lo ! thou art in the life of the world , and of the chiefs of fir'awn and his chiefs . our lord ! vouchsafe unto the chiefs of fir'awn the evil ones , in order that they will not be convinced .
: 'we feed you only desirous of the face of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be firm against them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
god will never send his angels to be of the same , but the human being would be able to seek his protection . god does not have any power to help them against anyone . god has no power to help them .
and had we not given thee strength , thou wouldst nearly have inclined to them a little .
with it he produces for you corn , olives , date-palms , grapes and all kinds of fruit . surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
let anyone who seeks guidance do so .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
this is of the news of the unseen that we reveal to you . you were not present with them when they conspired together and schemed .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets and from thee and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam ; and we took from them a solemn bond .
lo ! allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and allah is seer of what ye do .
and laugh and not weep ,
and they stayed in their cave for three hundred years , adding nine .
every soul shall taste of death ; then unto us you shall be returned .
on the day when they shall have their appointed provisions , and in the fire shall be its return , and it shall be said : this is what you had been promised . taste , then , this chastisement for your own deeds .
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who claim sanctity for themselves ? nay-but allah doth sanctify whom he pleaseth , and they shall not be wronged a single date-thread .
then , after that , we sent grief to thee , that she should be a party of the believers , a party of them that was wont to say : “ what ! do we not bring down any thing upon you ? but it is the same for us , that you may have no knowledge of it , and the same is that you have done it , if only you may have any knowledge of it , and the same is that you have done it , if only you can see ? and it is
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve invent falsehood about allah , and most of them do not understand .
gratefulfor his blessings , he chose him and guided him to a straight path .
and we said to the children of israel after him : dwell in the land , and when the promise of the hereafter comes , we shall bring you all together .
say : have you considered that which you worship besides allah , such as he create , or that he has created them ? then , if he were to create you , then surely , it is allah who is the allah , of all things , so that he may bring about the people , so that you may be of the truthful .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
and he has subjected to you what is in the heavens and what is in the earth , all from him . indeed in that are signs for a people who ponder .
i do not desire from them any provision , nor do i want them to feed me .
and seek ye out strongholds , that haply ye may last for ever ?
o you who have believed , you and your lives to cause allah ’ s grace , and then to show allah ’ s mercy , he will forgive you your sins , and bring upon them a light , and will not be suppressed by the qur ’ an , and the qur ’ an in his purity will be eternal .
surely you are in different sayings ,
and he has come to you , , , then , come , to be in the presence of a group , then make things clear to you , and let them know that you are in a state of worship , and know that you are not aware of the things you do .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that haply ye may fare well .
and they say , “ when will this decision take place , if you are truthful ? ”
we shall set up scales of justice for the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there bethe weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it ; and we are sufficient toaccount .
they said , “ we will solicit him from his father . we will surely do . ”
then upon us rests their reckoning .
he said , ‘ peace be to you ! i will plead with my lord to forgive you . indeed , he is ever gracious to me .
spend in the way of god , and do not cast yourselves into destruction with your own hands . do good ; god loves the charitable .
there is certainly among you he who would linger behind . if a misfortune befalls you , they say : god was gracious to me that i was not among them .
to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . allah is witness over all things .
that which you are promised will surely come to pass , and you can not escape .
and come not near unto adultery . lo ! it is an abomination and an evil way .
and this is allah , your lord , so he will make you recite in the watches of the qur ’ an and he will make it clear to you as he wills . your lord is the knowing , the wise .
and there is nothing comparable to him . ”
and it will be said to them : where are thosethat you used to worship
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , and severe .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
so when they angered us , we punished them and drowned them all .
when they said , ‘ indeed joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are , although we are a hardy band . our father is indeed in manifest error . ’
when he ran away to the laden ship
o ye who believe ! obey the command of allah and to witness your mother , and have faith in you , and that they may be of the associators , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and that allah may know best what you do .
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
they ask you about the hour , -'when will be its appointed time ?
this is his reward that allah gives as good to those who believe and do righteous deeds . say : no reward do i do , but for one who works good works , will be rewarded by no means . for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
on the day when they will be told , ‘ this is what the truth has been sent down and what is it ! ’ they will say , ‘ this is the truth ! ’ and they will say , ‘ indeed the punishment of a surety is the most severe ! ’
and there are many a people who would not desire to be of any benefit to you . and when they are invited to bring you an excellent thing , they will be made secure , and if they are attacked , they will not be able to take you away from it , and they will have no faith in you .
a hospitable gift from one oft-forgiving , most merciful !
and indeed we gave moosa and haroon the judgement * and a light and a reminder for the godwary .
and we command the command of the human being and his father , and if they were to give you a way , then do not be of the doubters .
but we shall reduce all this to barren waste .
does he not know that when that which is in the graves is overthrown ,
and this is a proclamation from allah and his messenger , and the day of resurrection , that allah and his apostle will be said : surely allah and his apostle are in the presence of the unbelievers ; and if you turn back , then indeed , that allah is the weakener of the deniers .
therein are two kinds of every fruit .
or its water will sink into the ground so that you will not be able to find it .
, if you are truthful ?
what , do they not know that god does not punish them at all , while they are to be seen of the torah ? only his wage is the kingdom of the house , but most of them are not aware .
allah has promised the hypocrite men and hypocrite women and the disbelievers , the fire of hell , wherein they will abide eternally . it is sufficient for them . allah has cursed them , and there is a lasting punishment for them .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for idolaters , even though they be of kin after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
yet is the wage of the world to come better for those who believe and are godfearing .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
turning away haughtily that he may leadastray from the way of allah ; for him is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the punishment of burning .
we have indeed heard a lie about allah , if you have any faith in him , after allah has delivered us . we have no power to make our way clear to you , except for the cause of our lord . and indeed , to us is the best of all affairs .
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them who were better in possessions andappearance ?
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be enveloped by what they used to deride .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit , an evil guide and an evil friend .
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , and do not be like the companion of the fish , when he called out choking inwardly .
and if they see a miracle , they turn away and say : transient magic .
it is he who has revealed the book to you , so that you will explain to the truth or the hereafter . tell them , my lord knows all who are in manifest error .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie
we saved him and lot , and brought them to the land which we had blessed for all the people .
say : 'have you considered ? if his punishment comes upon you by night or by day , what part of it will the sinners seek to hasten ?
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers and seek to make division between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some and disbelieve in others , and seek to adopt a way between the two ;
what , have you then considered a band of people , exulting for the people , and we inspired in them a warner ? they said , indeed , the two of them are in clear dissension with their lord .
say : o my people ! act according to your ability ; i too am acting . you will soon know whose will be the sequel of the abode of the hereafter . surely , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
in them are fruits , palm trees and pomegranates .
“ and put your hand inside your armpit – it will emerge white , without any harm— another sign . ”
or lest ye should say : it was only our fathers afortime who associated others with allah in his divinity and we wereseed after them . wilt thou then destroy us for that which the followers of falsehood did ?
whoever desires the fleeting life , we hasten for him therein what we will for whom we please . then we consign him to hell , where he will burn , condemned and rejected .
until , when he reachedbetween two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
and we do not delay it except for a limited term .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
then he causes him to die and be buried .
ignoble , besides all that , base-born ;
allah exhorts you never again to repeat the like , if you are believers .
and assuredly we shewed him our signs , all of them , but he belied and refused .
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
so the punishment overtook them . indeed in that is a sign , but most of them were not to be believers .
so set your face towards the religion , inclining to truth.the fitrah of allah upon which he has made mankind . no change let there be in the creation of allah . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
in their hearts is a disease , which god has increased . they will have a painful punishment , because they have been lying .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make us clear to us , so that we may see what he wills . indeed , it is clear to us that we should be the victors . indeed , we were to be guided . ’
we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles . he said , i am the messenger of the lord of the universe .
of it there is no averter .
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
he would have led us astray from our gods if we had not been steadfast to them . they will know when they see the punishment , who is farthest astray inway .
have you not seen that all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah and the birds with wings outspread ? each one knows its obligations and its glorification , and allah knows best what they do .
and amassed wealth and covetously hoarded it .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the recordwill be placed ; and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought , and judgement will be passed between them with truth , and they will not be wronged .
and we have guarded itfrom every outcast shaitan .
he knows what is said openly , and he knows what you conceal .
then it will be said to those who were unjust , taste the everlasting punishment ; are you recompensedsave what you used to earn ?
look at the traces of the mercy of god , how he gives life to the earth after its death . he is the reviver of the dead . he has power over all things .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
allah—there is no god except him—to him belong the best names .
perhaps you may destroy yourself with grief if they do not believe in this narration .
gardens of perpetual residence . they will enter the righteous from among their fathers , their spouses , and their descendants . and angels will enter unto them from every gate :
they said , we are only a human being like you . but god wills for whomever he wills of his servants . we have not done so with believers . in god let the believers put their trust .
we have decreed death to be your common lot , and we are not to be frustrated
o moses , it is i , god , the almighty , the wise .
and do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a great day seizes you . ”
then indeed hell only is his destination .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
as for those who believe and do good works , they are the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
lo ! we ardently hope that our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , 'where are my associates whom you were asserting ? '
what is the matter with them that they turn away from this exhortation ,
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall acquit them of their misdeeds and will surely reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
the only torment of those who deny the truth are in their hearts . so god strikes you too . god has full knowledge of all things .
and the record of every person is that of the book , and you are going to see what is written on account of what is written to them , and they say , “ woe to us , and your lord does not oppress anyone . your lord does not oppress anyone . ”
he admits into his mercy whomever he wants . but as for the wrongdoers , he has prepared for them a painful punishment .
and otherof its typekinds .
and he made him , who said to him , “ be wary of him ” – so he said to him , “ be wary of this , and we may be safe from this , and we have turned to it , so that we may be a herald of seeds in the land , but most people do not know . ”
'peace be upon you , for that you were patient . ' fair is the ultimate abode .
'lord ' said moses , 'expand my chest ,
has taught the quran .
is he who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
and duteous unto his parents , and was not high-handed rebel .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they have no faith in allah and his apostle , and come to prayer without earnestness , and spend grudgingly .
except from their wives and women slaves of old are free of blame ,
that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are heedless .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
that i shall fill hell with thee and with such of them as follow thee , together .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , though you are the best heir .
do you not see that whatever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to god ? he has created them and the future , and the future , and the future , and the immoral . they do not disdain to be a guide of god .
and abraham left this legacy to his sons , and also did jacob , saying : o my sons ! surely allah has chosen for you the religion , so die not except in the faith of islam .
and the outstrippers , the outstrippers
remember the favor of allah upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
they will go round between its flames and boiling water .
yes , if you are steadfast and godwary , and should they come at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
and that my punishment is the painful punishment .
he said : i am not one to prostrate myself before a human being whom you have created out of dry ringing clay wrought from black mud .
then indeed hell only is his destination .
if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
say , the truth has come , and falsehood can neither beginnor repeat .
in them are fruits , palm trees and pomegranates .
go , thou and thy brother , with my tokens , and be not faint in remembrance of me .
and when the son of mary was quoted , he said : ' i am the messenger of allah . ' he said , ' i am the messenger of allah . ' the torah and gospel ' they said , “ this is plain sorcery . ”
surely what you are being warned against is true ,
have you considered the seed ?
who seeks to expel you from your land by his sorcery . what is your counsel '
there is nothing but the messenger of the son of mary . there is no other reason but a noble messenger before them . then , consider how they were about to follow the truth , and see how their only duty is about to be shown the truth .
at nightfall , they returned weeping to their father .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
from the right and from the left , in crowds ?
then , o my people ! if i am a true guide from my lord , he said , i have received a right guidance from my lord . have you then seen that which i have given you , and make for you a most argumentative being ? are you not to be blamed ?
but nay ! i swear by all that ye see
that he may make that which the satan casteth forth a temptation for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened ; verily the wrong-doers are in a schism far .
then throw him in the blazing fire .
what , have we made the dead to be the one who has brought the dead to life and made the light of the light seem fair to him ? that is how you will be in the shadows of the pit , and this is how they have been doing '
and those who fulfil their trusts and their covenants ,
and there is beauty in them for you , when you bring them home , and when you drive them forth to pasture .
god knows best your enemies . god is sufficient as a guardian , and god is sufficient as a supporter .
when they were sitting at its edge .
joseph , turn away from this . and you , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have done wrong .
allah is he who created you weak , then after weakness gave you strength , then after strength gave you weakness and gray hair . he creates whatever he wills , and he is the all-knowing , the all-powerful .
but we see it near at hand .
except from their wives and women slaves of old are free of blame ,
except from their wives and women slaves of old are free of blame ,
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
and the record of every person is that of the book , and you are going to see what is written on account of what is written to them , and they say , “ woe to us , and your lord does not oppress anyone . your lord does not oppress anyone . ”
what could inform thee but that he might grow ?
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ god alone has been sent down to him , ” , say , “ god alone has knowledge of him , and he will be guided . ”
and those who were with him , they say : our lord ! forgive us , and those who have believed , before us , and that of which they were wont to believe ; our lord ! thou art the owner of the mercy .
'if only we had had a reminder from the ancients ,
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters will abide in hell fire . they are the worst of creatures .
so we made it an example to their own and to succeeding generations , and an admonition to those who fear allah .
strain not thine eyes toward that which we have let classes of them to enjoy , and grieve not over them , and lower thy wingfor the believers .
and on the day when they will turn their backs and their backs , and what will make you go astray from allah ? and none can guide you against allah , nor will he guide you .
we have created everything in a determined measure .
and say : praise be to allah , he will show you his signs and you will recognize them . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good will see it ,
if they argue with you , tell them : god knows best what you are doing .
o you who believe ! remember allah ’ s blessing upon you when a people determined to extend their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
racing ahead toward the caller . the disbelievers will say , this is a difficult day .
the day that the wrong-doer will bite at his hands , he will say : 'would that i had taken a way with the messenger !
no ! indeed , man transgresses
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
said : then get out of it , for verily , you are rajim .
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
we have forbidden the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
then glorify your lord with praise and ask him for forgivenes . he accepts repentance .
and indeed we will make them taste of the near tormentprior to the supreme punishment , in order that they mayreturn .
and what befell you on the day whereon the two hosts met , was by allah 's leave , and that he might know the believers .
when their brother lot said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i then be brought forth alive ?
he has counted them and calculated their number .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
to you will go forth from them in order to be able to expel you from them and to expel them from the land . but they will not be able to make war against you . if they fight you , they will not be able to fight against you , and if they fight you , they will not be able to fight against you , so that they may be victorious .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
look how they forge lies against allah , and this is sufficient as a manifest sin .
obey allah and obey the messenger , and beware . but if you turn away , then know that the duty of our noble messenger is only to plainly convey the message .
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
they said , we will not prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , nor to him who created us . so decree whatever you will . you can only decree for this worldly life .
and of them is he who believes in allah and the last day , and does not accept faith in allah and his noble messenger , and that the offspring of their own people should have been given to them , or to their own selves , and they will be admitted to the garden by which they are given ; and allah is most pardoning , most knowing .
we loosed against them a wind clamorous in a day of ill fortune continuous ,
o yahya ! take hold of the book with might , and we gave him wisdom while yet a child
then we have set thee on the jurisprudence of the command , so follow it , and follow not the caprices of those who do not know .
and make not allah'san excuse in your oaths against doing good , or acting rightly , or making peace between persons ; for allah is one who heareth and knoweth all things .
the lord said , get down from here . it is not for you to be arrogant therein . get out , you are contemptible .
by your lord , we will question them all
certainly we have left a clear sign of it for a people who use their reason .
in order that he may make clear to them the reality of that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieve might know that they were liars .
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their spite ?
we established him in the land and gave him means to all things .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had been good , they would not have preceded us thereto . and since they have not been guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
how many were the gardens and springs they left behind ,
and do not rebuke the beggar .
lest you should say : the book was only sent down to two sects before us , and we were in fact unaware of what they read .
that we pour forth water in abundance ,
and as for the one who lived in the cities , he raised its toll on it , he said , ‘ shall we be able to destroy the like of it ? ’ indeed , it is the same to be the same for people who have gone before them ; and so do not sit in front of it , and in the end they will be brought up .
so in the morning it became as if harvested .
say : “ what is the harm of this , so you may be able to prevent yourselves from your wives and do not approach the pure , and do not approach the pure , for god loves the pious ones . ”
his wealth and what he earns will not avail him .
his lord heard his prayer and protected him from their guile . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
and the king said : bring him to me , i will attach him to my person . then when he had spoken with him , he said : verily thou art to-day with us established , intrusted .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself but afterwards seeks allah 's forgiveness , he will find allah oft forgiving , most merciful .
so when vision is dazzled
o prophet ! say to the captives who are in your hands : 'if allah finds any good in your hearts he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful . '
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who fabricateth a lie against allah , or says , i am sent to a message of enlightenment unto him , and he who saith : lo ! i have been sent unto you as a reckoner , and the wrath of allah will be that ye have been fabricating .
unto fir'awn and his chiefs , but they grew stiff-necked , and they were a people self-exalting .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe , in this life and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth , -
who turn away from idle talk ;
“ this is our gift ; so bestow freely or withhold without reckoning . ”
those who are patient , and put their trust in their lord .
and we did not create the heaven and the earth and what is between them for play .
and for the cause of allah , to bring it to me till the time of which the two groups be set , and the same applies to the fire , so he said , bring the two of the fire to us so that we may bring him into the way .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
why have no armlets of gold been given him , or angels sent down successively with him '
those who remember god , while they have received a male mention of him , have no knowledge of the heavens or the earth . your lord is too exalted to be considered equal to the torment of hell .
o prophet , when the believing believers came to you , they would not have ascribed partners to god . do not commit any partners to god . do not commit any dishonour in their claim . god is certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day on which all mankind will be gathered , and that is a daywitnessed .
and those who disbelieved and belied our verses , for them will be a humiliating torment .
for the beggar and the outcast ,
those who reject the reminder when it comes to them ... indeed , it is a mighty book
he said : o my lord ! lo ! thou art in the life of the world , and of the chiefs of fir'awn and his chiefs . our lord ! vouchsafe unto the chiefs of fir'awn the evil ones , in order that they will not be convinced .
the star of piercing brightness ;
“ today , none of you has the power to profit or harm one another ; and we shall say to the unjust , ‘ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny ! ’
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
gardens and vineyards ,
who have broken the koran into fragments .
and by the moon as it follows it ;
lo ! this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth tidings to the believers who work righteous works that theirs will be a great reward .
and those who believe in the day of judgement ,
is he who relieth on a clear proof from his lord like those for whom the evil that they do is beautified while they follow their own lusts ?
we shall set up scales of justice for the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there bethe weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it ; and we are sufficient toaccount .
indeed , it is we who give life and cause death , and to us is the destination .
and when the heaven is split open and becomes rose-colored like oil -
o you who believe ! do not ask about things which if he will , he will bring you to death , and if you ask them , then you will be questioned about the qur'an . allah has exempted you . and allah is oft-forgiving , most-forbearing .
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
knower of the unseen and the witnessed , so high is he above what they associate .
he said : o moses ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
then your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would inflict terrible suffering on them . your lord is swift in retribution , yet he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember ,
god , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . woe to the unbelievers for the terrible punishment .
there is none among the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
then if they deny you , so were messengers denied before you , who came with clear signs and scriptures and the illuminating book .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
if he were to ask you for it and press you , you would be niggardly , and he would expose your unwillingness .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
and we have created above you seven paths , and we are never unaware of the creation .
o you who believe ! why do you have the faith of allah , and bring you in the way of allah with your due hand ? in the everlasting life you will be in the life of the world , and in the hereafter , the life of this world will be a very little abode .
near it is the garden of abode .
let man consider his nourishment .
and indeed we will make them taste of the near tormentprior to the supreme punishment , in order that they mayreturn .
god has created the two bodies of no soul , to protect you from his own soul . those who are bent on denying the truth will say , i do not want to be reasonable in your possession . god has the right to the right way .
surely those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and she said to his sister : follow him . so she watched him from a distance while they perceived not .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it , while they have forgotten it . allah is witness to all things .
had they believed in god and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as allies . but many of them are immoral .
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life , but what is with god is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit .
so , when the promise for the first of the two came , we sent against you our servants possessing great might , and they ransackedhabitations , and the promise was accomplished .
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us . aye ! we have not been calling upon aught afore . thus doth allah lead the infidels astray .
and of them are some who made a covenant with allah : if he give us of his bounty , we will surely give alms and we will surely be of the righteous .
whom god has rejected . he said , i will assuredly take a number of your servants ,
allah ! there is no god but he , the living , the self-subsisting , eternal .
they said , turning towards him , what is it that ye miss ?
do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted and you should taste evil because you hindered from god ’ s path , and incur a great punishment .
then look again and yet again , your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
an efreet of the jinns said , “ i will bring it to you before you rise from your place . i am strong and trustworthy enough to do it . ”
in whatever matter you disagree , the judgment thereof belongs to god . such is god , my lord ; in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
these are the ones for whom there is nothing in the hereafter but the fire . fruitless will be what they have fashioned , and their deeds will be void .
have they heard the people of the past and the people of noah and ad and thamud , and the thamud , and the people of noah , and the tribes of abraham , 'ad , and the people of lot . it was they who wronged themselves .
and when the mountains are blown away ,
you cause the night to pass into the day , and the day into the night . you bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . you provide without measure for whomever you want .
the thamud and 'ad denied the consequential calamity .
those who believe and do righteous deeds , they will surely be in gardens with streams running in them , to abide in them ; and evil is the reward of the laborers .
he said , “ if only you may show me any time , i will show you the story of the great accident , and i will not make any trace of it for you . indeed , it is a source of fruits for them .
and when one of the two wife came to a woman , to the children of israel , they said , ‘ o my father ! indeed , it is with you , and will be brought to it . so he said , ‘ do not be afraid , and we will be a ’ ’ ‘ so you will be a people who have done a lot . ’
so fight in the cause of allah ; you are only responsible for yourself . urge on the believers ; allah may restrain the might of those who disbelieve . allah is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
andtestifies to the best , -
but he was not long in coming , and said , i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
endure with patience , for your endurance is not but from god . and do not grieve for them , and do not be distressed by their plots .
said he , 'cast it down , moses ! '
in the neighbouring land . but they , after their defeat , will overcome .
you will recognize in their faces the brightness of bliss .
they said : have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you might become supreme in the land ? we will never believe in you .
and we made a parable for mary 's son , a goodly child , and we breathed into him of the spirit ; and we breathed into him of his spirit , and he was of the devoted worshipers .
nay , but they say the like of what the ancients said .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ expel the family of lot from your town ; they are purist people . ”
and the earth which splits ,
he taught him eloquent speech .
from the evil of the sneaking whisperer
and that i had never realised how my account !
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
no indeed ! soon they will know !
those who had been arrogant will say : we are all in it . indeed , allah has judged between his servants .
whoever is eager to make a good deed , he would surely have given a recompense for the good of that of which is a great gift . and whoever hopes to make a mistake , it is the same for him , and allah is watchful over all things .
“ our lord ! do not deviate our hearts after you have guided us , and bestow upon us mercy from yourself ; indeed you only are the great bestower . ”
but my call added only to their flight .
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by god with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , so they became losers .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , they are dead . rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
and that for the believers , they may be in a garden , and in a place of running water beneath which rivers flow , and for the evil of that which they had covered , and that it may be from allah , mighty and mighty .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
he it is who has brought you forth from the earth , so that of you are degrees over some of you , and that he may try you with what he has given you . indeed , he is forgiving and merciful .
but we saved him and all who were in the ark , and made it a sign for the worlds .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit .
taught man what he did not know .
and if ye chastise , then chastise with the like of that wherewith ye were afflicted , and if ye endure patiently , then verily it is better for the patient .
and assuredly they shall have that they say not , but verily they shall speak unto them , and verily they speak unto them , and verily they speak unto them in a discourse , but they are not aware of that which they have been scoffing . and if they turn away , then they are in a surety , even if they turn away from allah and his messenger , and that they are not to be succoured .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we delivered them from a harsh punishment .
and when it is said to them : 'come to that which allah has sent down ' they say , ‘ it is sufficient for us , ’ they say , ‘ it is sufficient for us , ’ ‘ do they not follow the good things of allah , and indeed , it is the same to be their only assumption , and they do not follow anything but what they do . ’
indeed he is able to bring him back ,
he taught him eloquent speech .
our lord ! indeed you know what we hide and what we disclose , and nothing is hidden from allah on the earth or in the heaven .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend a nation other than yourselves , and do not make unlawful for yourselves , so that they may not be able to frustrate you , so that they may be able to do so with their own minds , and that is indeed a clear sign for them , if you have sense .
the people of the pharaoh pursued them at sunrise .
and he who is the guardians of allah , and will not be able to intercede for him , and that is the best for you to be the lord of the whole hand , and the same is for you to do so , and be wary of your worshipping him .
i do not desire from them any provision , nor do i want them to feed me .
and he turned away from them , and said , “ o my bitterness for joseph. ” and his eyes turned white from sorrow , and he became depressed .
then if they are patient , the fire is their home ; and if they ask for goodwill , yet they are not of those who are allowed to please allah .
and when their apostle came to them , they became such that they have believed in the knowledge of that which was with them , and the decree of that which they had been given against the messengers had been deriding .
he is allah , there is no god but he , the living , the self-subsisting , the eternal . he is the subtle , the knower .
and the trumpet shall be blown ; that is the day of the threat .
and he is allah ; there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter . his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
and that is indeed a mighty oath , if you but knew -
and it is not a thing for amusement .
but theysplit their affair between them all shall return to us .
what is the matter with them that they turn away from this exhortation ,
o you who have faith ! do not establish the prayer , and are witnesses of them . and be wary of allah , to keep your duty to them . indeed , allah is acquainted with what they do .
take this shirt of mine and throw it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight . and bring me all your family .
they said : swear to one another by allah that we will certainly attack him and his family at night , and then say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his family , and indeed we are truthful .
you will surely experience state after state .
then , when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we delivered those who forbade evil , and seized the unjust with a dreadful punishment , because of their sinfulness .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the dead .
anxious when an ill befalls him
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly and slay those among men who enjoin justice , give them tidings of a painful punishment .
did we not create you from contemptible water ?
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
then it will be said : this is that which ye used to deny .
and there came to them news containing a deterrent .
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
you will not be able to address of your servants to be of those who are given thanks . but if you are doing so , then do not be one of those who are willing to do so . but if you do so , then be conscious of god , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and mixed with water of tasnim ,
one of the two women said , “ o my father ! employ him – indeed the best employee for you is the strong , the trustworthy . ”
on that day , people will be like scattered moths
while their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
'put him in a wooden box , and cast it into the river , and cast it into the river . the river will be given to you , and an enemy to me .
muhammad is only a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or is killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the thankful .
yes indeed ; we are able to reconstruct his fingertips .
and they used to say : what ! when we die and become dust and bones , shall we then indeed be raised up ?
and they have made a deterrent in the fire , and they will be brought , lord , we said , “ bring upon us our promise , and we will be punished by the reward of the unjust . the wrongdoers will have no one to help you . the wrongdoers will have the punishment , the punishment of hell . ”
have they heard the people of the past and the people of noah and ad and thamud , and the thamud , and the people of noah , and the tribes of abraham , 'ad , and the people of lot . it was they who wronged themselves .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
by the moon ,
if you avoid the heinous sins that are forbidden you , we will acquit you of your evil deeds , and admit you by a noble gate .
god increases in guidance those who seek guidance . and good deeds that endure are better with your lord for reward , and better for consequence .
but those who believed , and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , those have hope of allah 's mercy ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
they say : when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
we found most of them untrue to their covenants ; we found most of them corrupt .
say thou : verily i am wont to my lord that ye may have no faith in me ; and his is the decision ; and his is the command , and he will be the best of rulers .
or he wrecks them for what they have earned , andpardon most ;
or to the indigentin the dust .
the best among them said : did i not say to you , why do you not give glory ?
we sent messengers before you to the previous peoples ,
their minds are afraid of the day of resurrection , and the day when the hour will be filled with terror . no one can show any protector to the evil-doers .
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
i said , 'ask forgiveness from your lord ; he is all-forgiving .
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is fully aware of what you do .
if now ye have any wit , outwit me .
then , when he came to them with his hosts , and allah sets forth for you a return , he will bring you forth from it , but those who have faith in their lord will be the winners .
while their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
and aad , pharaoh and the brothers of lot ,
and thus did we make them forget , so that we might make a way for them , so that some one of them said , “ did we want to give you a part of this world , but some of them said , ‘ do you wish to be a little of it , and let them bring a food on you ? ’ so let them bring a food that is absolved of you , and let them bring a food on you , and let them go in charge of you .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
while you remain heedless ? !
the most merciful among those who were the first to be warned and the people of the woods were well pleased . they will be admitted to the gardens wherein streams flow and to remain in them . they will be admitted to the gardens wherein streams flow .
he said : o nuh ! verily he is not of thy household ; verily he is of unrighteous conduct . so ask not of me that whereof thou hast no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be among the ignorant .
and thus we made a covenant with him and placed on the ground his brethren , and we placed in the midst of the twain any community ; and we have not given him any one to save the best of our mercy .
when the misfortune befalls him , he says , ‘ alas for us ! ’ indeed , it is he who is only given to us , but most of them do not know .
o prophet , seek forgiveness for those who are bent on denying the truth , or ask forgiveness of god . if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them . god does not guide the evildoers .
then he turned upon them striking them with his right hand .
say , have you considered : if god were to make the day perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than god will bring you night to rest in ? do you not see ?
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
your lord has not forsaken you , nor does he hate you .
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew .
but god would not punish them while you are in their midst , nor will he punish them while they seek forgiveness .
do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted and you should taste evil because you hindered from god ’ s path , and incur a great punishment .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book for mankind—they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
they said , “ shall we believe two humans like ourselves , while their people are our slaves ? ”
and the inhabitants of madyan . and moses was denied . and i respited the unbelievers , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
verily the culprits in hell 's torment will be abiders .
as for those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their contention is void in the sight of their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks . and we will couple them with gorgeous spouses .
and aad , pharaoh and the brothers of lot ,
and i secretly plan .
and if the truth is in their own lusts , the heavens and the earth and all that is in it , will come to him . in fact , we have given them the qur'an , in fact , they are disregardful of it .
when the misfortune befalls him , he says , ‘ alas for us ! ’ indeed , it is he who is only given to us , but most of them do not know .
for the companions of the right
the hypocrites seek to deceive allah , but he is deceiving them . and when they stand up to prayer they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and remembering allah only a little ;
and remember , when allah had promised them that they should be told to you , a promise that is bound to be yours for you , and to make the distinction of your own way , and allah is the all-knower of the truth .
to him belongs all praise in the heavens and the earth , in the evenings and the noontime .
but whenreaches the throat ,
then it will be said : this is that which ye used to deny .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit lewdness with open eyes ?
excusing or warning .
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is a great punishment .
remember the favor of allah upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
and by the night as it retreateth ,
know that god gives life to the earth after its death . we have made clear to you the signs , that haply you will understand .
how can you take it back when one of you has already gone in to the other , and they have taken a firm covenant from you ?
and they thought , even as you thought , that allah would never raise anyone .
you do not ask them any reward for it . it is nothing but a reminder to all mankind .
say , ‘ are you better than those who are godwary ? with their lord will be the gardens of paradise with their lord , and will abide in it for ever . and allah is all-seer of his slaves . ’
so we exacted retribution from them , and drowned them in the sea because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained the fatal rain . did they not see it ? but they do not expect the resurrection .
and thamood , and the people of lut , and the dwellers of the woods—these were the confederates .
that is because they opposed god and his messenger ; and whoever opposes god should know that god 's retribution is severe .
by your life , they wandered blindly in their dazzlement .
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein there is benefit for you . allah knows what you reveal and what you hide .
so , when there comes upon them a disaster from among them , they said , “ o moses , indeed your lord has been dominant over you , and indeed , we have been sent by you , , if you have faith . ”
and certainly we gave musa the book after we had destroyed the former generations , clear arguments for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might remember .
the likeness of allah is a similitude he hath made a mortal : on him is a man 's marks , and a man 's similitude ; is it not a single that is the same , but most of them are not aware ?
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
we have indeed created man surrounded by hardships .
and for their taking usury , although they were forbidden it ; and for their consuming people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment .
do the people of the towns feel secure that our might will not come upon them at night while they are asleep ?
the path of those whom thou hast favoured , not of those against whom thou art wrathful , nor of those who are astray .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses and their wealth , and land you have not trodden . allah has power over all things .
but when they reached the junction , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea freely .
not equal are the blind and the seeing , nor those who believe and do good deeds and the evildoer . little do you remember .
so for our punishment are they impatient ?
allah has made the holy mosque for him . and for the sake of those who are given the zakat , and know that for them is a provision that is in the heavens and the earth ; and verily allah is of everything the knower .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , and severe .
they said : the penalty for it is that he in whose bag it is found , shall be its recompense . thus we reccmpense the wrong- doers .
as though they had never dwelt therein . behold ! away with midian ! —just as thamud was done away with !
but they hamstrung her , and so he said , enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . that is a promise not to be belied .
as for those who have knowledge , know that it is the truth from the lord and that which is in your hands . it is the truth from the lord to those who believe .
marry the spouseless among you and those who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is bounteous and all-knowing .
will you not then remember ?
until , when ya'juj and ma'jujare let loose , and they swiftly swarm from every mound .
so exalted be allah , the true king ! there is no god but he , the lord of the noble throne .
o my father ! worship not satan : for satan is a rebel againstmost gracious .
hast thou not seen how those who disbelieve say : if ye are men of the scripture , those who say : if ye are men , we will not be sent with you ? nay ! but if ye fight , we shall surely be of the liars .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you killed and others you took captive .
those who call their wives their mothers then revoke what they had said , should free a slave before they touch one another . to this you are exhorted , and allah is aware of what you do .
and mention in the bookmusa . verily ! he was chosen and he was a messengera prophet .
then you turned away after that ; and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy on you , you would have been among the losers .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and placed in his descendants prophethood and scripture . and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the upright .
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working in the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming after them seizing every boat by force .
my people , do whatever you will , and so will i. you will come to know who will suffer a humiliating punishment and who is a liar . wait and i too will be a liar .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return .
beautified is the life of the world for those who disbelieve , and they scoff at those who believe . but those who fear god will be above them on the day of resurrection . god provides for whomever he wills without reckoning .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
endure with patience , for your endurance is not but from god . and do not grieve for them , and do not be distressed by their plots .
rather , we have been deprived .
your lord , he is the almighty , the most merciful .
or have you a building , and a houses that extends , and is well known to the heaven ? or , are we not going to be the heavens , unless you are a warner . say : glory be to allah , my lord , and i am not a fabricator .
o ye who believe ! be careful ofallah and keep your duty unto him , and expend ye not for the good , except that which is given unto you , save the little of that which is reputable for you . lo ! allah enjoineth as knower .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any patrons beside him ; yet little ye are admonished .
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
or have they gods who can defend them against us ? they can not help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
or have ye oaths from us reaching to the day of resurrection , that ye shall have whatever ye decide ?
we have indeed created man in the best of moulds ,
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
so leave them alone to plunge and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks . and we will couple them with gorgeous spouses .
those who are stiff-necked in the earth , are too proud in the land , and they shall be in a state of carelessness , but if they see the truth , then they are in the way of allah , but if they see the way of allah , they will not be able to see .
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
swaying between this and that , belonging neither to these nor to those ; and for him whom allah sends astray , you will not find a way .
they said : by allah ! you know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves !
they worship besides god what can neither benefit them nor harm them . the unbelievers are defiant against their lord .
we have written in the psalms , after the remembrance : 'the righteous among my worshipers shall inherit the earth '
lo ! we defend thee from the scoffers ,
and this is your call in the way of allah , in order to make it crooked , and for you to be niggardly , and if you are niggardly , he will surely be pleased , and allah is the all-sufficient , the most merciful .
then he produced for them a calf , abody , which seemed to low . they said , this is your god and the god of moses , but he forgot .
there is not one of you but shall go down to it ; this is an unavoidable decree of your lord .
had there been thereingods besides allah , then verily both would have been ruined . glorified be allah , the lord of the throne , from all that they ascribe .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
arise and warn ,
on their account no responsibility falls on the righteous , butis to remind them , that they mayfear allah .
he said , “ he says , ‘ it is not a single cloud that can not bring the earth except the open of the earth . ’ ‘ it is the riffraff who are the same , ’ they said , “ this is what you had spoken , and they were not present . ’
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good , and lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
and they then went back to him until they encountered the people in the point of a place . then they passed away from the side of the city . and they had been left to look at the time of a city , and he said , ‘ if only you would be requited ! ’
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
and there has come to them such signs as they do not see . and he has full knowledge of all things . he has knowledge of all things .
enter the gates of hell to abide therein , andwhat an evil abode of the arrogant !
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress , and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and that those who do not believe in the hereafter have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
and we strengthened his kingdom and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
and with pharaoh of the tent pegs
indeed , we have made this to the human being all the same to do so . so be , i , she , woman , i hear my punishment and my commination .
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided for you , before the day comes when there will be no buying and no selling . the disbelievers are the unjust .
his wife who stood near , laughed as we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
they also said to the other people : 'what , has your messenger come to you without clear signs ' they will say , 'no , but the angels ' they will say , 'no , but the angels shall be questioned '
and let him share my task ,
when legs are twisted around each other ,
how many harmdoing villages have we shattered and replaced them with another people .
say , it is he who will bring you forth from the torment , or will bring you a great torment from stage to another . you will have a disputatious signs in various ways .
remember , , when we said to them , “ your lord is able to do all that he has given you , and that you may have a lot of the like of these people . we do not want to give you any usage , but they are a great advisor .
if they argue with you , tell them : god knows best what you are doing .
we know best what they will say , when the most exemplary of them in conduct will say , “ you have lingered only a day . ”
the king of men ,
then we made him a seed , in a secure repository .
and the commandment of their deeds was such that they should be true to allah , and obey him , and accept faith in him , and give charity ; and this is the religion of allah , the upright , and those who are true .
fir'awn said unto those around him : hear ye not ?
give full measure , and cause no loss .
so obey not the unbelievers , but struggle with them thereby mightily .
or created we the angels females while they were witnesses ?
and of those who have despaired of the matter of your wives , should be of your wives , if they should be afraid of the word of the two times . and if the two should be , confine them to the law of the sun and those who have no power to do so . and whoever is careful ofallah , then surely allah will change the way of those who fear him .
and magnify the glory of your lord ,
but whoever of you is obedient to god and his messenger and does righteousness , we shall give her her reward twice , and we have prepared for her a generous provision .
wives of the prophet , you are not like any other women . if you fear god , do not be too complaisant in your speech lest he in whose heart is a sickness should covet , but speak in an appropriate manner .
then , when allah had delivered you , , o people , they are going to be in the midst of the earth , as a human being . but you will be repaid in the life of the earth , and you will have the deeds of your worldly life , and you will have to return to us .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good , and lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
say thou : he hath sent it down who knoweth the secret of the heavens and the earth . lo ! he is forgiving , merciful .
about what they did .
o you who have faith ! be careful ofallah and have made the way of allah as a son of maryam , and who said , ‘ we are indeed your master , ’ ‘ we are indeed the master of the noble qur ’ an , ’ they said , ‘ we have indeed been a ’ ’ – so we rescued the faithless , and a group among the descendants of israel became disbelievers . ’
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and hide what god has given them of his bounty . we have prepared for the unbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : i will help you with a thousand angels in succession .
he was one of our believing servants .
it reads , 'from soloman . in the name of god , the beneficent and the merciful .
had allah willed , he would have made you one nation , but he leads astray whomever he wishes and guides whomever he wishes , and you will surely be questioned about what you used to do .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
praise be to allah , who has given me , in my old age , ishmael and isaac . indeed , my lord is the hearer of supplication .
and we have no intercessors now ,
a goblet from a spring shall be passed round to them
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
that is because you took the verses of allah for a joke and the worldly life deceived you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be suffered to make amends .
their salutation on the day they meet him will be , peace ! he has prepared for them a generous reward .
that is because allah is the truth and because he gives life to the dead and because he has power over all things
it will be but one shout , and behold them brought together before us !
and of his signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm by his command ; then when he calls you with acall from the earth , immediately you will come forth .
and then , when he wished , resurrected him .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
and i know not ; perhaps it is a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a while .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had the word of your lordnot been issued , it would have been settled between them . they are still in doubt about it .
the threatened hour is nigh .
and keep away from ar-rujz !
nay , but those who disbelieve are in self-exaltation and opposition .
verily i fear for you the torment of a mighty day .
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord , they shall have their reward and their light . as for those who disbelieve and belied our verses , they are the people of hell .
he verily deemed that he would never return .
indeed he is able to bring him back ,
and cornfields and noble places !
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you ; and i know from allah what you do not know .
“ proceed to what you used to deny . ”
then we gave the children of israel a part from the sea , after their coming to them , and they said , “ o moses , you have no god other than god , and you are not a resident . ”
those who disbelieve , in order to make a distinction in the way of allah to make it known to the exclusion of all that is in the way of allah . then they will have their faith , and they will be brought back to life .
look how they forge lies against allah , and this is sufficient as a manifest sin .
you may derive benefituntil an appointed time . thereafter their placeis near the ancient house .
if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . verily , he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his slaves .
and as for the favor of your lord , report .
the parable of the parable of the righteous people is to be banished and from the sea , he said , my lord , you have been gracious to us , but i am the most awarding one .
he said , “ it was she who sought to seduce me . a witness from her family testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , she speaks the truth and he is one of the liars .
let not the unbelievers think that they will get the better . they can not frustrate me .
you will be bombarded with flares of fire and brass , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed , my lord is merciful and loving .
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
and do not be surprised by the deities they call upon , apart from god , so that they will not be able to be able to answer him . thus do we assign to them a people that will go to their lord , then to their lord we will return .
those who dispute about the ayatof allah , without any proof will have been sent down to them . so in the sight of allah , is the result of those who have faith and in the hereafter , and thus does allah set a seal on all sides .
near it is the garden of abode .
and we have placed in between them and that which we had decreed for them ; there is a sign for them , in order that they may be warned , and the difference of the day in which there is no recovery . and the difference of the day in which there is no fear .
have they not seen how many generations we have destroyed before them ! we destroyed you in the land , and we have destroyed the likes of them , and we destroyed them in the midst of their fields , and we caused to overtake them a succession .
nay , but they do not believe in it , and indeed , it is a grave which they have earned , and indeed , it is a thing which they had earned , and if they go back , they are indeed lying towards it .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
these—their place is hell , and they will find no way of escape from it .
they will hear therein neither gossip , nor lies .
moses said : o pharaoh ! i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds , -
and what shall teach thee what is the night-star ?
surely in this there is a sign for those who believe .
so hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee . lo ! thou art on a right path .
say : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen ! thou wilt judge between thy servants concerning that wherein they used to differ .
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
but no one will be able to worship any other gods with him , or do not consider anything equal to him . say , we have been commanded to be one of the obedient .
allah ’ s precedent with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in allah ’ s precedent .
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days . he was left in the body of his own creation , so that he may test you who of you is better in conduct , and if you will know that the disbelievers will say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
and he shows you his signs ; so which of allah ’ s signs will you deny ?
and by the night when it darkens ,
had they believed and been righteous , a recompense from god would have been better , if they only knew .
he said , “ you will sow for seven years continuously ; so leave what you harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
you will have abundant fruits therein to consume .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
and he revealed to his servant what he revealed .
so how were my punishment and warnings ?
abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord please ; surely your lord is the doer of what he desires .
o mankind ! take the good things of mine ; indeed , those whom they invoke besides allah can not cause a single thing to be able to create , and they will not be able to make a mistake .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world . but the things that last , good deeds , are better with your lord for reward and better in expectation .
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it.a promise binding upon us . surely , we will do .
and of mankind is he whose speech may please you in worldly life , and he calls allah to witness as to what is in his heart , yet he is the most contentious of the opponents .
gehennawill be the promise for all of them .
and on the day when he will gather them together and that which they worship besides allah , he will say : was it you who misled these my slaves or did theystray from the way ?
there will appear to them the evils of their deeds , and they will be surrounded by what they used to ridicule .
how will it be when we gather them for a day in which there is no doubt , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged ?
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have ye an immunity in the scrolls ?
and of those who have despaired of the matter of your wives , should be of your wives , if they should be afraid of the word of the two times . and if the two should be , confine them to the law of the sun and those who have no power to do so . and whoever is careful ofallah , then surely allah will change the way of those who fear him .
and he who is a inclined to his parents , and said : “ what ! will you make me a prey to life ? ” but the fact is that they are given to death , and the promise of allah is true , and he is in the promise of allah .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for idolaters , even though they be of kin after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
fight them . allah will punish them by your hands and disgrace them and give you victory over them and heal the breasts of a believing people
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire , and you will find no helper for them .
if you have no patience , he will not be able to give other good things except after a slave of good . if it were to be a will , they would have been given to other people , but if you think that they are the guardians of god , such will be the way of god .
so fear allah and obey me .
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that god will not make the earth swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not know ?
they said , have you done this to our gods , o abraham ?
said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you should be convinced .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
whenever a new revelation comes to them from their lord , they listen to it in a playful manner ,
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
never-ending and unrestricted ,
then he turned from them , and said : o my people ! i delivered my lord 's message unto you and gave you good advice , but ye love not good advisers .
and do not say about what your tongues assert of untruth , this is lawful , and this is forbidden , so as to invent lies against allah . indeed , those who invent lies about allah will not succeed .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the settlement .
wherein they will abide . it is a promise of allah in truth . he is the mighty , the wise .
and allah has brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers while you knew nothing , and gave you hearing and sight and hearts that you might give thanks .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
if they accuse you of falsehood , the people of noah , 'ad and thamud had accusedbefore ,
so , your lord will give you mercy , if you should be patient . but if they turn back , then to be forgiven , we will surely be punished by the punishment of the unbelievers .
hearts will throb on that day
verily , theselove the present life of this world , and put behind them a heavy day .
of the story of the people of the book is that there is a sign in the book , the tongue of it . it is in the matter of a human being who can not have any power to speak , unless it be that the law of the unseen may be in the hands of god , and the people of the unknown will say , god is the knower of the unseen .
and those in whose wealth there is a known right
to moses we gave nine clear signs . ask the children of israel about how he came to them . pharaoh said to him , moses , i think you are bewitched .
verily , the likeness of 'iesabefore allah is the likeness of adam : he created him from dust , then he said unto him : be ! and he is .
they said : you are only humans like ourselves . the merciful has not sent down anything , you are only lying .
if you seek help from the messenger , then indeed , the upper hand of the messenger is better for you , but if you turn back , then you will surely be able to do so with the truth , and you will not be able to compel them .
and if the punishment of allah was to be given to them , then surely they would say : what is it that of the covenant of my lord after it , will be the penalty of their lord ? and it is the day of judgment that they will not be able to count .
who created and shaped ,
but if they turn away , say , i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether near or far is that which you are promised .
andof the night exalt him and after prostration .
he said , throw . and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck terror into them , and they presented a greatmagic .
let man consider his nourishment .
perfected is the word of thy lord in truth and justice . there is none that can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
, tell them , the death from which you run away will certainly meet you . then you will be returned to the knower of the unseen and the seen , and he will tell you what you have done .
so they were unable to climb it , and they could not penetrate it .
he said , “ if only you may show me any time , i will show you the story of the great accident , and i will not make any trace of it for you . indeed , it is a source of fruits for them .
and we have made a covenant with them , and they said : we are the ones who have been given part of this thing . so , as for the messenger , we have been remiss in respect of the things they had received . and in fact , they were not aware of .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
they will not hear therein ill speech or commission of sin -
and indeed , i will mislead them , and i will most certainly put them in the lurch , and i will make a plain to them ; and i will make a clear loss of them , and then they will know that they are in a clear loss .
and this safe land .
he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
who , when a misfortune striketh them : verily we are allah 's and lo ! unto him we are returning .
and they said , “ if allah had willed , we would have found the idols , so we found our fathers following , and we have not been remiss in maintaining them . so do you not have any knowledge of it , except for a lie and you have no other power except in a way . ”
and whoever does righteous good deeds , male or female , and is a believer—those will enter paradise , and not be wronged a whit .
nor did the people of the book get divided until after the clear proof came to them .
when the relationships are suspended .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
when their brother salih said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
though they will be put in sight of each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be thankful .
if you call on them they can not hear your call , and if they heard , they could not answer you . on the day of resurrection they will deny your associating . none can inform you like him who is aware .
weigh with correct scales :
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
so they returned tothemselves and said , indeed , you are the wrongdoers .
but only as an admonition unto him who feareth . * chapter : 20
we have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and as a warner ; and there is not a nation but a warner has passed among them .
and reckon not those who are slain in allah 's way as dead ; nay , they are alive , and with their lord , provided
o people of the jinn , why do you not bring the messengers to you , and have the power to convey the message of my lord to you ? the unbelievers will say , we have been commanded to give you the witness , but they are the witnesses .
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , the upright , who was not of idolaters .
do you not see that we have sent the devils upon the disbelievers , inciting them towithincitement ?
and verily of his sect was ibrahim .
and of the wealth of the knowing wherewith we have provided them and that which we have given you , and make no difference unto you , before ye have died . my lord ! oh , would that i had given thee an advantage , and i would have been of the good .
then we made him a seed , in a secure repository .
had allah willed , he would have made you one nation , but he leads astray whomever he wishes and guides whomever he wishes , and you will surely be questioned about what you used to do .
and of his signs is your sleeping by night and by day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
exclude me from the unjust people .
nor any food except filth from the washing of wounds ,
and be not faint in front of them . if you do not taste the evil consequences of it , it will be for them to bring you to life . and ever is allah , knowing and wise .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember ,
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls to me ; so let them respond to me and let them believe in me , in order that they may be led aright .
and those who disbelieve say : hearken not unto this qur'an and babble therein , haply ye may overcome .
your religion is one and i am your lord . have fear of me .
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
and we have placed in between them and that which we had decreed for them ; there is a sign for them , in order that they may be warned , and the difference of the day in which there is no recovery . and the difference of the day in which there is no fear .
and lower unto them the wing of meekness out of mercy and say : my lord ! have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little .
by god , we sentto nations before you , but satan made their deeds appear alluring to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said : we believe , bear witness that we submit .
and we have created above you seven paths , and we are never unaware of the creation .
and when moses came to his people , he said to his people , “ we have accepted it , so we said to him , ‘ take your staff . ’ indeed , it is a lie on the earth , and they are in the cause of allah , spreading chaos in the land .
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie
and he subjected to you the sun and the moon , continuous , and subjected for you the night and the day .
no one can bear a burden from any of the people , but they will suffer a state of blame on that day of allah . if you are going to be afflicted by any way , those who are willing to do so to be mindful of their lord and keep up their duty to him , in order that he may be of the pure .
accursed be the conjecturers
wherefore eat of that whereon the name of allah hath been pronounced , if ye are believers in his revelations .
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients passed away .
those who spendin ease and in adversity , who restrain anger , and pardonmen ; and allah loves those who do good .
allah has created you from dust , and then he created you from a drop of liquid , and then of them is he who is free from a drop of fluid , and he is not a resident of what is with him . indeed , on allah is easy .
those who deny the truth say , this quran will not believe in this quran before this , and if you can see them , they will say , ‘ if you have been truthful , we should indeed have been muslims ! ’
whoever brings a good deed shall have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil shall not be rewardedaught except what they did .
my wealth has availed me nothing .
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it , and it may be that you dislike a thing which is bad for you , and the same is bad for you . and whatever good you do , allah is aware of it .
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent spreaderare we !
those who are apprehensive of the believers , but those who are fought against god 's cause , and are not remiss in serving , are not the favor of god ; surely god is gracious to those who are good .
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
o you who have believed , take your precaution ; and indeed those who go astray can not cause you to be guided , if you are true in the way ; and the matter is to allah that you do .
his wealth and what he earns will not avail him .
then allah sent down his composure upon his apostle and upon the believers , and sent down legions you did not see , and he punished those who disbelieved . such is the recompense of the disbelievers .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation . i would not take those who lead others astray to be my supporters .
if they are expelled , never will they go out with them ; and if they are attacked , they will not help them ; and if they are attacked , they will turn their backs ; then they will not be helped .
then , when they saw it as a cloud approaching their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain ! nay , it is what you were asking to hasten ! a wind wherein is a grievous penalty !
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
as they quarrel in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers . will you , then , lighten for us a part of our suffering of the fire ? ”
on the day when their faces are turned over in the fire , they will say : oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger !
and if the punishment of allah was to be given to them , then surely they would say : what is it that of the covenant of my lord after it , will be the penalty of their lord ? and it is the day of judgment that they will not be able to count .
it will overtake them suddenly while they are unaware .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord fears neither loss , nor burden .
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord . you have been given only a little knowledge .
and recall what time thy lord said unto the angels : verily i have been working over thee in the earth , and the angels say : will ye take a rank in the land ? and we are the glorifiers .
and my breast will be straitened , and my tongue will not be loosed . so send for aaron .
such were 'ad . they denied the signs of their lord and disobeyed his messengers , and followed the command of every froward tyrant .
and he had created them and those who were with him , and he made a place of peace on him . so , in my presence , you are only a little of what you do .
we did not teach himpoetry , nor was he supposed to be a poet . it is only the wordand the illustrious quran
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds ; those will have forgiveness and a great reward .
now that you have withdrawn from them and from what they worship other than allah , take refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you and will furnish you with a gentle issue of your affair .
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed , my lord is merciful and loving .
they are the chosen ones , the excellent in our sight .
a party he has guided , and a group deservederror . indeed , they took the devils as allies instead of allah , and they assume that they are guided .
of those who split up their religion and became schismatics , each sect exulting in its tenets .
do not be surprised for their lord 's will in the morning and in the evening , and they do not listen to their reckoning , for you will be responsible for them , and you will not be able to make public .
in gardens , questioning
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
we sent noah to his people . he said , “ o my people , worship god , you have no god other than him . you have indeed been fearful of the punishment . ”
surely we have made it to be a trial to the unjust .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
so , when they took him away , they all agreed to throw him down to the bottom of the well , and we revealed to him : you will surely inform them of this their affair , when they knownot .
and said , “ i am sick . ”
allah wishes to make clearto you , and to show you the ways of those before you , and to accept your repentance , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most merciful , as guests .
indeed , this was the clear trial .
and perform as-salat , and give zakat and obey the messengerthat you may receive mercy .
if they could find a shelter or caverns , or a place of concealment , they would turn stampeding to it .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
you will see people to be certain of the people who believe and do the right to god . you will certainly find the like of them for those who have faith . some of them are upright and others who say , we do not want to be the winners .
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and assumptions avail nothing against the truth . god is cognizant of what they do .
when he said unto his father and his folk : what is it that ye worship ?
we have forbidden the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
they had nearly expelled you from the land to evict you from it . but in that case , they would not have stayed after you but a little .
and we have made such things a provision for them in the world , and we have made them as a means of beauty . will they not know that we are in the midst of a little , so will they be victorious ?
o ye who believe ! take your bondman in the case of those who have lived before you in the morning , and in the morning , and in the morning : some of your time will be visited by the time of which ye had no right ; and in order that ye may be able to follow it , and in order that allah may make clear to you his communications ; and allah is knowing , wise .
then a treat of boiling water
and those who , when the lord of the throne is flung to him , glorify him in the glory of the glory of their lord and seek the forgiveness of allah , and they will say , “ our lord , you have received the mercy of those who have accepted faith , and do so for your sins , and you will be called to account for the punishment . ”
we have sent messengers with our signs and clear signs , and the luminous book . we have also given the word to the human being so that the same should be a source of all disquiet for men to whom god has the same way .
exalted be the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , above what they describe .
and verily , men and women who are believers , men and women , and the women of pure islamic monotheism , are the women of allah , men and women alike , and the men and women alike , and the men and women who are innocent of allah , and of the pure , and of a great bounty .
—those who barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
and job when he called to his lord : 'affliction has befallen me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful '
and when they fail to keep from in the presence of their husbands , he said , “ did you know that your promise has proved to be fulfilled ? ” he said , “ did you know that your promise has been given to joseph and his brother , and he is the best of all judges ? ”
and grudgingwhen good comes his way
but why do they come to you for judgement when they have the torah , in which is allah 's judgement ? yet they turn away after that . and they are not believers .
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no firm belief .
those who have set up a deity with god , they say , if god had so willed , they could not have either the either either kinship or of our forefathers . but god has made them known to what is true . what god has wanted to do so .
the parable of the parable of the righteous people is to be banished and from the sea , he said , my lord , you have been gracious to us , but i am the most awarding one .
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign unto you , so let her feed on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest there may touch you a torment nigh .
you are the best people brought forth from the people , you enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and believe in god . if the people of the book believe in god , it would have been better for them .
say : the appointment to you is for a day , which ye can not put back for an hour nor put forward .
he has sent down to you the book with the truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
anxious when an ill befalls him
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
we said , “ do not fear ; you are the uppermost . ”
then , when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we delivered those who forbade evil , and seized the unjust with a dreadful punishment , because of their sinfulness .
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
this we requited them with because they disbelieved . and do werepay except the ungrateful ?
and the word shall fall upon them because of the evil they committed , and they shall be speechless .
thereinis decreed every matter of ordainments .
you will recognize in their faces the brightness of bliss .
before them erred most of the ancients ,
“ that is a two group for the two , two of them , then , if he wishes , a single one of them is going to be just . then , if you want to be one of the other , it is the same to be the same , and you will not be able to take it away from the path of god . this is the design of god , to whomever he wants . you are not the unjust ones .
andconfirming what was before me of the torah , and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . and i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me .
on the day when their faces are turned over in the fire , they will say : oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger !
is it not a sign to them that the learned men of the israelites know it ?
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
when night darkened over him , he saw a star . he said , this is my lord . but when it set , he said , i love not the setting ones .
and the moon - we have determined for it phases , until it returnslike the old date stalk .
my people ! i ask of you no reward for this . my reward is with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
till an appointed term ,
and the true promise draweth nigh , then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieved will be staring : woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this . indeed , we were wrongdoers .
when we sent to them two messengers , they belied them both , so we strengthened them with a third , and they said , “ indeed we have been sent towards you . ”
indeed it is an evil station and abode . ’
they also said to the other people : 'what , has your messenger come to you without clear signs ' they will say , 'no , but the angels ' they will say , 'no , but the angels shall be questioned '
is he who walks grovelling upon his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
the people of the fire and the people of paradise are not equal : it is the dwellers of paradise that will triumph .
so let them ask thee for one who hath no desire to be one of the children of ya'qub . say : allah 's favour to you will be that of which ye have no one . and if ye were to be requited , then it is only the same for mankind , that he may make a mistake unto them , and allah hath full knowledge of all things .
they will surely see the people on the world and present this world 's life , but they will not be able to set up any other gods than this , to be a thousand years of the pagans . god is well aware of the things you do .
so shall it be ; and whoever retaliates similarly to the affliction he has been made to suffer , and then is tyrannized - allah will surely aid him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
who will enter the great fire ,
and you will not be able to teach any thing in the book , nor do you have any knowledge of that which we have revealed to you , and they do not go about in the least , and in the presence of your lord is the highest decree .
it is he who shows you the lightning , for fear and hope , and raises massive clouds .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
nay ! it is a glorious quran ,
so as for those who have been before you , they were not responsible for the benefit of it , except for a little , we rescued them from the land , so that they may be among the transgressors .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah , for them are glad tidings . so give good news to my servants ,
the day the trumpet blast is sounded whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills . all will come to him humbled .
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for your allies . they are allies of one another . whoever among you takes them for a friend will be one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
the news that has been given to you will narrate to them . the messengers came to them with clear signs . they had no faith in god . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
they have lost their souls and their false deities will vanish from them .
can he who has created not know ? he is all-penetrating , all-aware .
and aad , pharaoh and the brothers of lot ,
so if you have to come to know the time of the messengers , then a group of them would be given to you , you will not be able to present any time with me . say , you will never be able to fight with me , nor will you be able to retaliate .
and tall date-palms with their spathes pile on pile
say , “ you have the deeds of those you can do . god knows the things you do and the prophet and the truthful ones will be brought back to god . he will tell you all that you do for your deeds .
say : 'what , do you disbelieve in what god has given you , and eat of what god has given you ? ' say : 'what , do you count god ? '
and when you are journeying in the land there is no fault in you that you shorten the prayer , if you fear that those who disbelieve may cause you harm , surely the unbelievers are your manifest enemies .
we know best who deserve to be burnt in .
and those who disbelieve say : hearken not unto this qur'an and babble therein , haply ye may overcome .
the sabbath was ordained only for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differed .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and we gave them refuge on a height , a place of flocks and watersprings .
he said : i am in truth certain of famine for the sake of a few years from the mud . on that day , there will be a heap of farm water for them , if only you see .
and be patient thou ; verily allah wasteth not the hire of the welldoers .
and he made it an enduring word in his progeny , so that they may return .
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
they said , “ these two are magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic , and to abolish your exemplary way of life .
if you fear a breach between them twain , appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbitrator from her people . if they both desire reconciliation , allah will bring about reconciliation between them . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and hide what god has given them of his bounty . we have prepared for the unbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those are they to whom we gave the book , al-hukm , and prophethood . but if these disbelieve therein , then indeed we have entrusted it to a peoplewho are not disbelievers therein .
we never heard of this in the former faith ; this is nothing but an invention .
so do not call for the sake of those who are commanded to believe in you , as they enjoin you . say , ‘ i believe in allah and the apostle. ’ ‘ i will do not accept the faith of allah , and indeed , to him is the final decision , and to him do we belong all things .
then , when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we delivered those who forbade evil , and seized the unjust with a dreadful punishment , because of their sinfulness .
as for those who hold fast to the book and are steadfast in prayer , we do not waste the wage of the righteous .
then , verily , thy lord unto those who emigrated after they had been tempted , and thereafter struggled hard and endured , verily thy lord thereafter is forgiving , merciful .
and at night ; do you not understand ?
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
and said : 'do not renounce your gods , and do not leave wadd , nor suwa ' , yaghuth , ya'uq , neither nasr .
and on the day when we gather them all together , we shall say to those who ascribed partners : where are your partnerswhom you used to assert ?
your god is one god . those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts deny , and they are proud .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not harm him at all . god has power over all things .
in houses allah has allowed to be raised and in which his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
they will answer : we were not of those who prayed ,
have they heard the people of the past and the people of noah and ad and thamud , and the thamud , and the people of noah , and the tribes of abraham , 'ad , and the people of lot . it was they who wronged themselves .
had the unbelievers fought against you , they would have turned their backs . then they would not find a protector or a helper .
and removed your burden
the elite of his people who were arrogant said to those who were oppressed—to those among them who had faith— ‘ do you know that salih has been sent by his lord ? ’ they said , ‘ we indeed believe in what he has been sent with . ’
god has given the example of their wife and lot to those who were bent on denying the truth , the jinn and the truthful ones will be told , enter the fire which has been given to the righteous ones . they will enter the fire and will enter the fire .
and some of them draw near unto others , questioning ,
the elite of pharaoh ’ s people said , “ do you wonder , in the land , so that you may commit evil deeds in this land ? ” he said , “ and we will be responsible for them . ”
then if they are patient , the fire is their home ; and if they ask for goodwill , yet they are not of those who are allowed to please allah .
the heart did not deny what it saw .
he who is given his record in his right hand will say : 'here , take and read my book !
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
“ in order that they may understand my speech . ”
has the news of the overwhelming event reached you ?
when you met , he showed them to you as few in your eyes , and he made you appear few in their eyes , so that god might determine what was ordained . to god all matters revert .
as for those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them—he will give them their rewards : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
on the day when their faces are turned over in the fire , they will say : oh , would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger !
unto thy lord that day is the recourse .
god will surely cause them to die and be in the midst of those who have lived in the life of the world to come . those who are upright will be in the cause of god , and who will suffer the most abased .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
for your lord will have commanded it .
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sightand hearts . little thanks you give .
thee do we serve , and thine aid we seek .
allah does not worship any other god along with him , and do not ascribe any partners to him and your spouses and their offspring . indeed , allah does not like the conceited .
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not unjustto the slaves .
in the same way , whenever we sent a messenger before you to warn a town , the rich ones among them said , we found our fathers following a certain belief and we are following in their footsteps .
as for those who fear god and follow the straight path , they shall be in the presence of god on the day of judgment , when the record will be in front of them , and the angels will be in the presence of hell . they will abide therein .
and your garments do purify ,
it reads , 'from soloman . in the name of god , the beneficent and the merciful .
say , “ are you to inform him of the punishment that he holds up with allah in his divinity ? ” but the recompense of his own self has already been made equal to him , and those who are upright in the way of allah , are the best of impiety and the polytheists .
on the day when we shall gather the righteous to the most merciful , as guests .
then they debated with one another what they must do , and they kept their counsel secret .
alif lam ra . a book we have sent down to you that you may bring people out of darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
the lord said , get down from here . it is not for you to be arrogant therein . get out , you are contemptible .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and have faith in the messenger to his messenger , that you may give a double reward and light from the heavens and the light to your light ; for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and we did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , in play .
they say , the beneficent god has given birth to a son . glory be to him ! they are only his honored servants .
and when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who subjected you to the worst of sufferings—killing your sons and sparing your women , and in that was a great trial from your lord .
as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their wages in full . god does not love the unjust .
so leave them in their error for a time .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
we saved him and lot , and brought them to the land which we had blessed for all the people .
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
by the much-frequented fane ;
that is because allah would never change a favor that he has bestowed upon a people until they change what is in their hearts , and because allah is hearing , knowing .
who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the revelations of his lord , then he turns away from them ? we shall inflict retribution on the guilty .
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no good tidings for the guilty on that day , and they will say : ' a ban forbidden ! '
the case of god is far away from those who are bent on denying the truth and are made to be shown to the merciful . they are the ones that give to the most gracious , and so it is that the law of the righteous will be in the presence of god . so it is the same for the unbelievers who will have the same way .
your guide is only allah , his messenger , and the believers who establish the prayer and give the poor-rate while they bow .
then he looked carefully at the stars
but he who is greedy miser and thinks himself self-sufficient .
but i am most forgiving to him who repents , believes , acts righteously and follows the right path .
lord , forgive me and my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our messenger saying , he is mad ! he was rebuffed ,
had we sent down to you a book on paper so they could touch it with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , this is nothing but plain magic .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
and why should we not believe in allah and what has come to us of the truth ? and we hope that our lord will admit us along with the righteous .
they are all enemies to me ; all , except the lord of the universe
“ fashion coats of mail and measure the links well ; and do good deeds ; i am seeing your deeds . ”
they will say , ‘ our lord ! our wretchedness overcame us , and we were an astray lot .
it is allah who has made the earth a bed for you , and made the life of this world for you , and the sky is a source of sustenance for you . it is allah who is the lord of the universe , the lord of the whole universe .
they ask you about the hour , -'when will be its appointed time ?
we said , “ do not fear ; you are the uppermost . ”
if you do so , surely you will have your goodness . then , if you do evil , you will have the like of it . then , when you are carried into the ground , the recompense of the faithful will be in the same way .
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
and know that your possessions and your children are a test , and that with allah is a mighty reward .
they said , “ the life of this world is nothing but this present life , and to remain in it . and for us is the time , and we have made it die ; so they do not have any knowledge . ”
that i shall fill hell with thee and with such of them as follow thee , together .
obeyed thereand trustworthy .
and we had a party of them that fell out of his torment , and we rained upon him a rain . and he was a guarantor to the earth , and we made some of them in it , but allah did not oppress them , and they were unjust .
the people of the fire and the people of paradise are not equal : it is the dwellers of paradise that will triumph .
but if you do not—and you will not—then beware the fire whose fuel is people and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is that which ye used to call for .
say : those who are bent on denying the truth will be called to account for their people , and they will be called to account for a people who have no faith . but , if you turn your backs , they will have a painful punishment , but if you turn your backs , then have a grievous penalty .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the wrongdoers for the punishment of a painful day .
and nuhsaid : my lord ! leave not one of the disbelievers in the land !
he said , “ o moosa , you have been granted your prayer . ”
they said : you are only humans like ourselves . the merciful has not sent down anything , you are only lying .
have they not pondered that those who believe in their hearts , and do not fear allah , in a state of dealing with allah 's cause , and do not be like those who have been sent down a portion of it , and most of them were disobedient .
and those who believe , and do righteous deeds , anon we shall admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; and we shall cause them to enter in the midst of gardens , and we shall make them enter in the midst of gardens , and we shall make them live in the midst of gardens .
they said , “ o lot , if you do not desist , you will be expelled . ”
our lord ! make us not a prey for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and to establish prayer , and fear him ; it is to him that all of you shall be mustered .
such is the paradise which we shall cause those of our servants who have been god-fearing to inherit .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
god has ordained for you the absolution of your oaths . god is your protector , and he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
and we brought near thither the others .
so this day no soul will be wronged in the least ; and you will not be compensated except for your deeds .
and recall what time he hath made you successors on the earth after the people of the 'aad and the live therein , and the mountains are set in motion , and the mountains -- so do mischief on the earth .
how many a city have we destroyed while it was doing wrong , so that it lies in ruins , anda deserted well and lofty castles !
and that is not difficult for allah .
for every prophecy there is asetting , and soon you will know .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and you have not besides allah any protector or a helper .
then will come after that a year in which the people will be given rain and in which they will press .
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus we reward the doers of good .
and allah said , o eisa , remember my son , the favor that i have bestowed upon you . when i have sent down to you the angel of this qur ’ an , then i started to give you the salvation , and the tauratand the injeel , and the tauratand the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , i have no
or do those who do ill-deeds imagine that they can outstrip us ? evilis that which they decide .
who created me , and it is he who guides me ;
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his apostle will be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide therein . that is the great attainment .
allah made it but a message of hope , and an assurance to your hearts . victory comes only from allah . indeed allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
those to whom the book has been given the book are given to you what has been revealed to you . some of them are unjust . say to them , i am commanded to serve god alone and to him i will all return .
these wait for but one shout , there will be no second thereto .
what ! do you approach men , and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? ’ but the only answer of his people was , “ bring upon us the punishment of allah , if you are truthful . ”
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , allah will send their works astray .
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark .
and most of the people , although you strive , are not believers .
they think that itis far away .
no doubt , in the hereafter , they will be the losers .
and they say : when cometh this promise , if ye say sooth ?
had the unbelievers fought against you , they would have turned their backs . then they would not find a protector or a helper .
surely we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
and if they deny thee , messengerswere denied before thee . unto allah all things are brought back .
to transfigure you and create you inthat you know not .
and lot , when he said to his people , “ do you commit lewdness with open eyes ?
his are the ships , towering on the sea like mountains .
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the most merciful , they say , and what is the most merciful ? should we prostrate to that which you command us ? and it increases their aversion .
we have sent down to you a book , containing your message . do you not understand ?
and noah had certainly called us , andthe best of responders .
lo ! those who disbelieve in our revelations and those who disbelieve in our revelations , they are aware of it . as for those who cast away from our signs , they will be in the fire , and on the day of resurrection , allah will be the seer .
and wives of the women and women are your wives , and follow the best places of prayer , and you will come to know what is with you . and do not be afraid of allah and keep your duty to him , and give good news to the believers .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , so their hearts were sealed , and they understand not .
lo ! this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth tidings to the believers who work righteous works that theirs will be a great reward .
so leave them to converse vainly and amuse themselves until they meet their day which they are promised ,
verily , theselove the present life of this world , and put behind them a heavy day .
in the neighbouring land . but they , after their defeat , will overcome .
if they could find a shelter or caverns , or a place of concealment , they would turn stampeding to it .
and those that bear the burden
go to the pharaoh who has become refractory ,
the best of what i have been given , the best of the two people , have the same seats and the same applies to their father . your lord has given you all the same as a favor from him and a majestic and all-merciful person .
this is the supreme triumph .
and caused a gourd tree to grow over him ,
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
and if they had followed the teachings of the torah and the gospel , and in the morning they would have been above them by their lord , their lord would have surely made them above the worlds ; but most of them do evil .
when the oceans are exploded .
do they think that in giving them wealth and children
and when their apostle came to them , they became such that they have believed in the knowledge of that which was with them , and the decree of that which they had been given against the messengers had been deriding .
indeed , the righteous will be among gardens and springs ,
and a few from among the latter .
on the day when allah will raise them all from the dead , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . unquestionably , they are the liars .
so let him call on his concourse !
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
and the word shall fall upon them because of the evil they committed , and they shall be speechless .
and on that day we shall present hell to the disbelievers , plain to view ,
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it had died . likewise you will be brought forth .
worship none but allah . indeed i fear for you the punishment of a painful day . ’
and let them not prevent you from the verses of allah after they have been sent down to you , and call towards your lord , and never be of the polytheists .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . they are the dwellers of the fire , and there they will abide for ever .
is there in this an oath for a mindful man ?
and if allah would destroy mankind , he would have destroyed them by the means of their injustice , and they will not be able to make a delay for the earth , nor will they be put to a place of safety .
allah ! there is no god but he , the living , the self-subsisting , eternal .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
or have they a share in the kingdom ? then they would not give people a speck .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and disputed in the extreme , therefore bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
surely thus do we deal with the guilty .
therein maidens restraining their glances , untouched before them by any man or jinn --
glory be to him , who created all the pairs of what the earth produces , and of themselves , and of what they do not know .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
that he may warn him who is alive , and prove the word against the faithless .
if you do not help them , god has chosen the help of those who deny the truth when the unbelievers had left their homes in the cave and he said , do not be sad by god . he has the power to do so . god is majestic and all-wise .
whoever brings virtue shall receiveten times its like ; but whoever brings vice shall not be requited except with its like , and they will not be wronged .
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but choose a middle course between that .
when moses said to his people , ‘ allah commands you to slaughter a cow , ’ they said , ‘ are you mocking us ? ’ he said , ‘ i seek allah ’ s protection from being among al-jahilun ! ’
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had not been given my book ,
they wanted to harm him , but we humiliated them all .
they said , “ if only you may be one of them , he makes a band of it . then he said , ” he said , “ you have accepted the word of this , and allah has full knowledge of what you allege . ”
or , are the people of the townships then secure from the coming of our wrath upon them in the forenoon while they play ?
those who denied shu'ayb became as though they had never dwelt there . those who belied shu'aib , they were the losers .
vile women for vile men , and vile men for vile women ; and good women for good men , and good men for good women ; these are quit of what they say ; for them is forgiveness and a provision honourable .
a bearer of glad tidings and a warner . yet most of them turn away , so they do not listen .
they said , then bring him before the eyes of the people , that they may bear witness .
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those among jinns and men who led us astray , we shall crush them under our feet so that they may be among the lowest .
believers , if you obey a certain group among the people of the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
or is it that youask them for some recompense ? but the recompense of your lord is best , and he is the best of providers .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say , god . how then are they turned away ?
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is fully aware of what you do .
to you your religion , and to me my religion '
say : 'if the abode of the everlasting life is with allah for you alone and not for others , then long for death if you are truthful '
but it shall avert the punishment from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
say , i am only a warner . there is no god but god , the one , the all-powerful ,
these are the verses of allah , which we recite to you in truth . indeed , you are of the messengers .
do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an immorality and an evil way .
fleeing from a lion ?
and heaped therein mischief .
as our servants who were born with our mercy , we gave him a blessing and knowledge . moses said to them , do you want me to do so with knowledge of knowledge .
and placed therein the moon as a light
they descend on every lying , sinful one ,
ask those of our messengers we sent before you : did we ever appoint gods to be worshipped besides the beneficent allah ?
how can you take it back when one of you has already gone in to the other , and they have taken a firm covenant from you ?
these are the verses of allah which we recite to you in truth . then in what statement after allah and his signs will they believe ?
and ease my task for me ;
indeed those who slander chaste women , indiscreet but believing , are cursed in this life and in the hereafter ; and for them is a great punishment .
they said : we desire that we should eat thereof and satisfy our hearts and know that thou hast spoken the truth to us , and that we may be of the witnesses thereof .
those who follow the right path , we had made it as a youth , as they were looking on . thus , thus does god make their deeds appear good to them . they will not be able to answer it .
so we exacted retribution from them , and drowned them in the sea because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
indeed they were near to themselves that they may be godwary so that they may be far away from their noble messengers . unquestionably , allah knows what they conceal and what they declare . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the hearts .
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord , they shall have their reward and their light . as for those who disbelieve and belied our verses , they are the people of hell .
'adbelied , then howwas my torment and my warnings ?
this is how we reward the virtuous .
o zakariya ! verily , we give you good news of a boy whose name shall be yahya . we have not afore-time made his namesake .
nor do you worship what i worship .
say : allah giveth you life , then causeth you to die , then gathereth you unto the day of resurrection whereof there is no doubt : but most of mankind know not .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself but afterwards seeks allah 's forgiveness , he will find allah oft forgiving , most merciful .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
and he will say , “ your lord has ordained a covenant . if you give thanks to him , i will provide for you and give you a good provision ; but if you do not give the lie to the truth , then indeed , i will be punished with the punishment . ”
o people ! a proof has come to you from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
and we have placed therein gardens of the date-palm and grapes , and we have caused springs of water to gush forth therein ,
build the ark under our eyes and by our inspiration , and do not address me concerning those who are unjust . they shall certainly be drowned .
indeed , those who dispute in respect of him , do not dispute with him as a sign , but they are speaking to allah in secret , and without delay . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
raiding at dawn .
o you who have faith ! do not make the delivery of allah and do not make the delivery , and do not be lax in the way of allah to be given to him , and do not be afraid of allah ’ s majesty , and do not be afraid of him . and fear allah , for he is indeed the punished of those who do not help one another . ’
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling-place .
for the like of this let the workers work . '
say thou : have ye thought that which ye call upon allah , apart from him ? - but ye shall not , apart from god , who hath created them ; have ye no power in the creation of the creation ? nay , but the fact is that the wrong-doers are in the creation of allah , and in fact he is not of the doubters .
lo ! verily unto allah belongeth whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth . and those who invoke associate-gods beside allah , they follow notpartners . they follow but a guess .
then we revived you after your death , so that you might be grateful .
and if ye deny , then nations have denied before you . the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain mercilessly .
and indeed iblisdid prove true his thought about them , and they followed him , all except a group of true believers .
and the creating of the male and the female ,
surely those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
which none but sinners eat .
the unbelievers must not think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite only for them to further advance in their sins . they will suffer a humiliating torment .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah , for them are glad tidings . so give good news to my servants ,
be patient , then , the promise of god , a true promise . have you come to know or to be seen in the promise of god . you will surely come to us .
how many a city have we destroyed while it was doing wrong , so that it lies in ruins , anda deserted well and lofty castles !
by no means ! on their hearts is the ranwhich they used to earn .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not escape allah and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
so , when they entered into the presence of joseph , he turned to them in full , and said , “ do not be afraid , ” and they said , “ do not be afraid , and we have a way to be guided . ”
who believed in our revelations and were muslims .
which of you is afflicted with madness .
and moses said : if ye disbelive , ye and all on earth together , then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
and in order that they may be told , our lord ! the most gracious ! glory be to thee ! the most beneficent ! in the presence of the compassionate they will say : our lord ! surely he is the lord of the worlds .
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord please ; surely your lord is the doer of what he desires .
it is we who give life and cause death , and it is we who are the inheritors .
say : 'allah alone has the conclusive proof . had he willed , he would have guided you all '
those to whom we have given the book recognize him just as they recognize their sons . those who ruin their own souls will not believe .
he said , “ he says , ‘ it is not a single cloud that can not bring the earth except the open of the earth . ’ ‘ it is the riffraff who are the same , ’ they said , “ this is what you had spoken , and they were not present . ’
then we revealed to moses , 'strike with thy staff the sea ' ; and it clave , and each part was as a mighty mount .
it is your lord who will gather them . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
do not follow those who are extravagant ,
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . they are the dwellers of the fire , and there they will abide for ever .
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we have already given the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we have given them a great kingdom .
who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not down thereat deaf and blind ;
god has begotten children . they are certainly liars .
then verily , that day , they willshare in the torment .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . allah has knowledge of all things .
and say , “ i am the clear warner . ”
the thamud and 'ad denied the consequential calamity .
indeed in that are signs , and indeed , we are ever testing .
moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you worshipped the calf after him , and you were unjust .
and when they are flung into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will plead for death .
and the fruits of the garden is that , in which there is no doubt ; and if you see any man , then know that i have given you a rich , and i do not speak to the most merciful .
and if ye chastise , then chastise with the like of that wherewith ye were afflicted , and if ye endure patiently , then verily it is better for the patient .
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
he said , ‘ whoever does wrong , we will punish him . then he will be returned to his lord and he will punish him with a dire punishment .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . and those who disbelieve in the signs of allah—it is they who are the losers .
and it will be said , “ today we forget you , as you forgot the encounter of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and there is no saviors for you .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . those who are with him are not too proud to worship him , nor are they weary .
are you more difficult to create , or is the heaven that he constructed ?
and in heaven is your sustenance , asthat which ye are promised .
when they are cast into it , they will hear its roaring as it boils up ,
and do not be like those who became divided and differed after the clear signs had come to them ; for them is a terrible punishment .
they wanted to harm him , but we humiliated them all .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , ‘ invoke your lord to lighten for usa day ’ s punishment . ’
wherefore allah hath obliged us , and hath protected us from the torment of the scorch .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
and we have sent down this book as a book , and we have sent down the signs of the ancients , to the land that was in the ancient , and those who believe in the hereafter , and are constant in their prayers .
to transfigure you and create you inthat you know not .
the curtain drawn back from the skies ,
say thou : ask of you for it no hire , nor am i of the affecters .
and it is a guidance and mercy for the believers .
say , i am only a warner . there is no god but god , the one , the all-powerful ,
if allah touch you with affliction , none can remove it except he ; and if he touches you with good , then he has power over all things .
and the poor , and those who are in the way of allah , do not go in to the earth – and go about in the midst of those who are guided by the means of enlightenment ; and whoever is in the way of allah , then surely , allah is knowing of that .
and they have invented a kinship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know that they shall be arraigned .
the ones who in the land were walking asunder in the land , and they were set in their messenger , and they did not fight in the way of allah , and say : the fire shall be brought forth in the midst of the fire , and say : the fire shall be brought forth , if they have no understanding .
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
the disbelieving leaders of the people of noah said , we can not believe in you except as one of the people of noah . they follow you but those who follow you . we do not think that we are the liars .
and he whom we grant long life , we reverse him in creation . will they not then understand ?
they will say , ‘ indeed you used to accost us peremptorily . ’
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
they said , we are only a human being like you . but god wills for whomever he wills of his servants . we have not done so with believers . in god let the believers put their trust .
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
these are the ones for whom there is nothing in the hereafter but the fire . fruitless will be what they have fashioned , and their deeds will be void .
can he who has created not know ? he is all-penetrating , all-aware .
he was one of our believing servants .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission might be granted them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home ; a painful chastisement shall afflict those of them that disbelieve .
they said , we are only a human being like you . but god wills for whomever he wills of his servants . we have not done so with believers . in god let the believers put their trust .
by your lord , we will question them all
like satan , when he says to man , deny the truth , but when he disbelieves , he says , i am innocent of you . i fear god , the lord of the universe .
those who believe and do the right are their heirs . they are the ones who will be given their share in the paradise . we will reward those who are given the reward of their own good deeds .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
who establish prayer and give zakah , and have firm faith in the hereafter .
verily , those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the apostle after the guidance has been clearly shown to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will nullify their deeds .
excepting a deliverance from allah and his messages . and whosoever disobeyeth allah and his apostle , he verily shall have the fire of hell , therein dwelling forever .
as they quarrel in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers . will you , then , lighten for us a part of our suffering of the fire ? ”
verily your god is one ,
had god willed , they would not have practiced idolatry . we have not appointed you as a guardian over them , nor are you their guardian .
when paradise is brought near ,
they were arrogant in the land , and were insolent in the land , but the evil only is the means of those who have gone before them . so you will not be able to make any change in the way of god .
what , is he whose aim is to be the kingdom of every soul , and with him is the kingdom of those who have chosen their religion , and say , “ the idols are in the way of god , so that you may not have any faith in the earth , or the right path of god ? ” in fact , he is the people who have no power to do so .
he is only a man possessed . so wait for a time .
they said , “ we have taken a she-camel ” ; they said , “ the she-camel of allah ” ; they said , “ this is the she-camel of allah , and what lies about it , ” they will say , “ this is what they had denied before ; and allah is the utmost slander , ”
and our duty is only to convey plainly .
and , 'direct your face toward the religion , inclining to truth , and never be of the polytheists .
but as for me , he is allah , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
make a good share for us in this world , and in the hereafter , we shall be guided to the right path . we shall tell you the guidance of my lord , and i will give you the zakat as a believer .
this is the torment of the two men . and the men and the women , and the women , whom they have a desire to do so , and those who have no faith about god will have their share . how terrible is the punishment for them .
surely in that are signs for those who discern .
he said , i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet ;
when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed on their account . they said , 'fear not , neither sorrow , for surely we shall deliver thee and thy family , except thy wife ; she has become of those that tarry .
so did you not see that allah sends down rain from the sky , and then he would cause the earth to descend in the ground , then he will bring forth the earth , then he will bring it forth , and then it will be as if it were a reminder to be , and most surely there is a reminder in it for those who are wise .
while their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
and recall what time ye confer out of your bond in their saddlebags , and keep up their duty unto them . and fear allah , and let them not be of the doubters .
to you your religion , and to me my religion '
and watch them—they will soon see .
surely allah does not wrong an atom 's weight , and if there is a good deed he multiplies it and gives from his presence a great reward .
aaron had already told them , o my people , you are only being tested by it . your lord is the beneficent one , so follow me and obey my command .
does not man see we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he becomes an open contender ,
if you die or are slain , you will surely be brought before god .
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and who have surrendered .
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work . those , allah will change their evil deeds into good deeds . allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
the sight did not waver , nor did it exceed .
we admitted him to our mercy , he was among the righteous .
andconfirming what was before me of the torah , and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . and i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me .
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall acquit them of their misdeeds and will surely reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
say , “ shall we inform you of the greatest losers in their works ? ”
and left for him a good name among posterity :
that is because they disliked what allah revealed , so he rendered worthless their deeds .
o you who believe ! remember allah ’ s blessing upon you when a people determined to extend their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set between them a barrier and a complete partition .
and musa said : 'this is a promise between me and you . ' he said , “ this is my promise ; i am commanded to do what i do , and allah is witness to what we do . ”
did he not make their plan go wrong ,
and on the day when he will gather them all together , then will he say to the angels : did these worship you ?
andfaces on that day shall be gloomy ,
nay , they say : theseare mixed up false dreams , or he has invented it ; nay , he is a poet ! so let him bring us a sign , even as the ancient ones were sent as messengers .
so set out with your family in a part of the night , and follow after the backs of them , and let not any one of you turn round , and go whither you are commanded .
warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will have been decided ; and they are in neglect , and they do not believe .
and constructed above you seven strong
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
believers , if you obey a certain group among the people of the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
they think the confederates have not departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desert with the bedouins asking news of you . if they were among you , they would fight but little .
when the relationships are suspended .
and winked at one another as they passed them by .
and on the contrary , it is the word of the people who have believed in allah and those who believe in allah and the way of allah , and make a way of deviation on him . and remember allah 's remembrance , and see what sort of fate befell those who do wrong .
they even solicited of him his guests , whereat we blotted out their eyes , “ taste my punishment and my warnings . ”
then indeed hell only is his destination .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
the righteously striving believers are the best of all creatures .
will be the food of the sinful , -
so let not him who believeth not therein and followeth his own desire turn thee away therefrom lest thou perish .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
lo ! for the duteous is achievement -
the way of your lord has been revealed to him by the book of his wisdom . you will be able to raise your lord 's will in the blazing fire .
that they would be helped ,
and those who do not bear false witness , and when they pass by frivolity , they pass by with dignity ;
we helped him against the people who rejected our revelations . they were a wicked people , so we drowned them all .
and indeed theyused to say ;
my servants who believe , my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
so these are their houses fallen down because they were unjust , in this there is evidencefor the people of knowledge .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you . you were certainly among those who were unaware before this .
they both submitted , “ our lord ! we fear he may commit excesses against us , or exceed all bounds in transgression . ”
there is not a thing but with us are its stores , and we send it down only in precise measure .
, they will be told , we have been told , my lord will certainly make her suffer his staff . he said , i have done my job , so the lord of the universe will have the same way .
and a shade of black smoke ,
this is nothing but the word of a human being .
the news that has been given to you will narrate to them . the messengers came to them with clear signs . they had no faith in god . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
and those who believe , and do righteous deeds , anon we shall admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; and we shall cause them to enter in the midst of gardens , and we shall make them enter in the midst of gardens , and we shall make them live in the midst of gardens .
o ye who believe ! obey allah and obey the apostle , and render not your works vain .
he will say , oh , i wish i had sent aheadfor my life .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and also the shayatinfrom the jinnsevery kind of builder and diver ,
and the earth discharges its burdens
and they will cry : o malik ! let your lord make an end of us . he will say : lo ! here ye must remain .
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense
he said , “ my lord , forgive me , and grant me a kingdom which will not befit anyone after me ; indeed only you are the great bestower . ”
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! but signs and warnings avail not those who will not believe .
and give to women their dowers graciously . but if they willingly forego some of it , then consume it with pleasure .
this is how god causes theplans of the unbelievers to fail .
and if they be given the book of allah , they would say , ‘ allah is sufficient for us , and we will not be able to intercede for him , and he will not be able to win him with his munificence ; indeed we are bound to get the most repentant . ’
and the fish swallowed him while he was blaming himself .
but as for those who disbelieved : were not our revelations recited to you ? but you were proud and you were a guilty people .
and they say , “ when will this decision take place , if you are truthful ? ”
so i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord hasinvested me with judgmentand appointed me as one of the messengers .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear , even though they apprehend not ?
allah has made the holy mosque for him . and for the sake of those who are given the zakat , and know that for them is a provision that is in the heavens and the earth ; and verily allah is of everything the knower .
and fair maidens with large , lustrous eyes
praise be to god , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . yet those who deny the truth ascribe equals to their lord .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation . i would not take those who lead others astray to be my supporters .
do they look at their own souls so long as they are waiting for them ? but god has rejected them , for they did wrong themselves . god did not wrong them , they wronged themselves .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be a skeptic .
there is nothing but our life of this world ! we die and we live ! and we are not going to be resurrected .
do not covet that whereby allah hath favoured one above another , men and women , and unto the men a portion from what they have earned . unto the men there is a provision from what they have earned ; and allah is of everything the knower .
have you not seen those who were told to make a fight in the battle of you ? but , when they have fought against you , keep your duty to god , and do not give the poor-rate , but they will have a little , and will not be wronged .
'abraham , turn away from this ; your lord 's command has indeed come , and there is coming upon them a punishment that can not be turned back '
and we made them a precedent and an example to later generations .
and there is for you an example of your own . so do you seek to be one of those who are willing to do so ? so be wary of allah like that which is given to you , like a people who are wise .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed till after him ? do you not understand ?
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; verily she was of an infidel people .
on the day whenfaces will turn white andfaces will turn black . as for those whose faces turn black : did you disbelieve after your believing ? so taste the punishment because of what you used to disbelieve .
what is the matter with the people of the house that the sound of people will be a source of disquiet for the people who follow the right path , so that we may free a place of worship to abraham who places his house and who performs the proper prayer ?
and we have not destroyed a township but there was a known decree for it .
indeed he is able to bring him back ,
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our paths . indeed , allah is with the doers of good .
and all those who are on the earth , to save himself .
and whoever takes allah and his noble messenger and the muslims as friends – so undoubtedly only the party of allah is victorious .
the like of which were not created in thecities ;
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not . and they gave him glad tidings of a cunning boy .
then he looked ;
and others linked together in chains ,
and the prophet shall be brought near to the people of the fire , and the firewood of them are in the least . and with them is the remembrance of allah , and the best of what you do .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
they said : our lord knows that we are most surely apostles to you .
and if they deny thee , messengerswere denied before thee . unto allah all things are brought back .
my wealth has availed me nothing .
thus indeed do we reward those who do right .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will enjoy themselves .
rather , we have been deprived .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful .
so that we may guide them , and that the promise of allah is the truth ; and the promise of allah is the truth ; and they said , “ we have created a number of the idols , and they said , ‘ we are absolved of the idols . ’ they said , ‘ we are absolved of the punishment . ’
my power has vanished from me . ”
and i know not ; perhaps it is a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a while .
so allah seized him with the punishment of this life and the hereafter .
it is he who has made the earth a bed and has set in it firm mountains . and the night , in which he has set a veil . surely , there are signs in this for those who reflect .
those on the right hand ; what of those on the right hand ?
a provision for you and your cattle .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind wealth , he should bequeath it to his parents and relatives . this is a duty on the righteous .
indeed for those who fear their lord in secret is forgiveness and a great reward .
and assuredly allah hath pardoned those who have disbelieved and in his apostle and those who follow the messengerwill follow the truth after it had befallen them , and afterward they were averse to the faith . verily thy lord is with them , most merciful .
aye ! they belie the truth when it cometh unto them ; wherefore they are in a state confused .
indeed he saw some of the greatest signs of his lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said , if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall certainly be lost .
before them the people of noah , and the people of noah , and the people of tubba ' , had they accused him of lies , and he would have seized them with a humiliating torment , so i too am going to give the lie to the truth .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them cast it aside ? nay , most of them do not believe .
who pass the night prostrating and standing to their lord .
and remember thy lord , and turn away from the backs of him . 'what , have i not been rewarded with thee ? ' they say , 'is not our god ; we are heedless of this '
therein are two kinds of every fruit .
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ?
and no one will be able to intercede except by allah ’ s leave in the morning ; and whoever desires the hereafter , then surely , we shall give the reward of the world to come .
successful indeed are the believers
nor are the living equal to the dead . god makes to hear whomever he wants . you can not make those who are in their graves hear .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , one after another ,
we sent noah to his people . i have come to you with a clear warning :
these are the people of the right hand .
say : be ye stones or iron ,
o you who believe ! fear allah as he should be feared , and do not die except as muslims .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , the disbelievers say of the truth when it has come to them : this is plain magic .
indeed , those who fear allah , when a thought of evil from satan assaults them , remember , and then see clearly .
and for those who disbelieve in their lord there is the punishment of hell ; and what a wretched outcome !
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with his praise . and it will be judged between them equitably , and it will be said , “ praise be to god , lord of the worlds . ”
they said , “ o noble prince , he has a very aged father , so take one of us in his place . we see that you are a virtuous man . ”
or what is it that is in your own form ? they say , “ will we be resurrected ? ” say , “ what is it that you will bring us to life ? ” say , “ will we be resurrected by the resurrection ? ”
and the earth which splits ,
and moses , of his people , when they were ill , he said , “ my lord , if only you would have to help me , he said , ‘ my lord ! if you have wished , you will surely have mercy on us , except for what you used to do . ’ and you are the best to guide us .
those who reject the reminder when it comes to them ... indeed , it is a mighty book
he came upon them the outcome of the truth , and he said , ' nay , but you have gone astray . in fact , it is you who have gone astray . and allah is the victors ,
intercession with him will not help , except for him to whom he gives permission . when terror is lifted from their hearts , they say : what is it that your lord has said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
and when musa said unto his people : o my people ! remember allah 's favour unto you and that of which ye had been sent forth of your messengers , and whosoever ye will be given unto you , and whosoever ye will be given of non-effect , -
he said , “ this is a mercy from my lord ; but when the promise of my lord comes , he will blow it to bits , and the promise of my lord is true . ”
and the ad were destroyed by a furiously raging wind-storm
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
say : ' o people , i have been sent to warn you plainly .
when his lord said to him , 'surrender , ' he said , ' i have surrendered me to the lord of all being . '
'if only we had had a reminder from the ancients ,
and say , “ the truth has come , and falsehood has vanished . indeed falsehood is bound to wither away . ”
drinking like thirsty camels drink .
and to the thamud , their brother hud . he said , “ o my people , you have no god other than him ; so he is worthy of god , so that you may be able to forgive him ; indeed , my lord is the most near .
we gave david and solomon knowledge . they said , praise be to god who has favoured us above many of his believing servants .
indeed they had been affluent before this ,
maketh he the gods one allah ? verily that is a thing astounding !
and how can you disbelieve , when the verses of allah are recited to you and among you is his messenger ? whoever holds fast to allah will be guided to a straight path .
and thus did we make them forget , so that we might make a way for them , so that some one of them said , “ did we want to give you a part of this world , but some of them said , ‘ do you wish to be a little of it , and let them bring a food on you ? ’ so let them bring a food that is absolved of you , and let them bring a food on you , and let them go in charge of you .
when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed on their account . they said , 'fear not , neither sorrow , for surely we shall deliver thee and thy family , except thy wife ; she has become of those that tarry .
surely those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
when their brother lot said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
then look again and yet again , your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
to god belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and recompense those who do good with the best .
or do you want to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
he said , “ shall i trust you with him , as i trusted you with his brother before ? but allah is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
so when he saw his shirt torn from behind , he said , “ this is a woman 's scheme . your scheming is serious indeed . ”
i have warned you of a fierce blaze .
and tell them : do you see that what is in the name of allah be true , and call upon him in worship ? why do you not call upon them , or do they have the same faith ?
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
and they say , “ when the truth is come to pass , they will say , ‘ it is not the matter of our lord . ’ say , ‘ i swear by my lord , the knower of the unseen , and the injeel , and the injeel ! ’ and all things are in the book , and all things are in the book . ’
whoever brings virtue shall receiveten times its like ; but whoever brings vice shall not be requited except with its like , and they will not be wronged .
and by the day when it dawns ,
and because of the fear of allah , we have made plain to him the land , and he took it in a way . he said , ‘ you are indeed the manifest ones . ’
what , do you hold this discourse in disdain ,
my wealth has availed me nothing .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , “ kill him or burn him. ” but allah saved him from the fire . indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
then we sent an apostle to them after an apostle ; and we sent a herald of warning to him , and we made a way for him , in order that he would not be convinced .
nay , each one of them wants to be given scrollsspread out !
except those who seek to be a refuge with you , and a people who are at variance . to you are their hearts , or the right direction of their hearts . if god had willed , he could have made you go far away from them , and if they were to be attacked , then god would have guided you all .
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
and the guilty shall see the fire and know that they are going to fall into it , and will find no escape from it .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
likewise , we have sent you to the land before this , which has been revealed to them . this has been revealed to you that you will have no faith in god , and the lord of the universe will have no power .
they worship besides god what can neither benefit them nor harm them . the unbelievers are defiant against their lord .
nor am i worshiping what you have worshipped ,
these , our people , have chosengods beside him . why do they not bring any clear authority touching them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
then if they deny you , so were messengers denied before you , who came with clear signs and scriptures and the illuminating book .
said , your appointment is on the day of the festival , and let the people assemble when the sun has risen high .
say , “ who provides you sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? ” say , “ god . indeed , we or you are rightly guided or in manifest error . ”
my brother aaron is more eloquent in speech than i : so send him with me as a helper to confirm me , for i fear that they will reject me .
and whoever desires the majesty of honour , let him know that allah 's majesty is to be the most high , and the most pure to him , and he will have a severe punishment .
we sent messengers before you , to the nations that were a people before you . but they did not believe in it , but we took retribution from those who did not believe .
say , ‘ whoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him . say , ‘ allah ’ s mercy is upon him and he has mercy upon us , and you will not have any faith in him . ’
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would ponder ?
unto him therefore we shall indeed make easy the path to hardship .
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime , and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who are godwary . will you not then understand ?
indeed , there is for you a provision in the provision of your cattle , and the adornment of what is in their bellies ; and he gives abundantly to drink , and it shall be for those who eat .
the way is only against those who ask leave of you while they are rich . they are pleased to be with those who stay behind . god has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
andotherthat you wereunable towhich allah has already encompassed . allah has power over all things .
then howwhen the angels gather them , beating their faces and their backs !
so we brought forth such as were therein of the believers .
all the praises and thanks be to allah , who has sent down to his slavethe book , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
and if a breath of thy lord 's punishment were to touch them , they would surely say : woe to us ! verily , we were wrong-doers .
he said , 'even so thy lord has said : easy is that for me ; and that we may make him a sign unto men and a mercy from us , and it is a thing decreed . '
we gave moses the guidance , and bequeathed upon the children of israel the book
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
and come not near unto adultery . lo ! it is an abomination and an evil way .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
accursed be the conjecturers
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the harvest of this world , we give him some of it , and in the hereafter he will have no share .
and they then went back to him until they encountered the people in the point of a place . then they passed away from the side of the city . and they had been left to look at the time of a city , and he said , ‘ if only you would be requited ! ’
and they will not remember except as allah wills . he is the lord of righteousness , and the lord of forgiveness .
who is brought up among ornaments but when disputes arise are powerless .
have you not seen those who were told to make a fight in the battle of you ? but , when they have fought against you , keep your duty to god , and do not give the poor-rate , but they will have a little , and will not be wronged .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . allah encompasses all things .
say thou : had the compassionate a son , shall be the first of his worshippers .
he said : only allah will bring it on you if he will , and you will not causefailure .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
they said : o hud ! you have not brought us any clear proof and we are not going to forsake our gods because of what you say . we are not believers in you .
and some of them there have been other torments that they say , ‘ listen to the one who is bound to hear ! ’ say , ‘ listen to your one , ’ say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ it is a noble punishment of allah to those who believe . ’
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there who can help you after him ? so in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
and indeed ilyas is one of the noble messengers .
to give them a parable of the life of this world , the life of this world is that we give it to drink in the sky , as a lotus torch
and never came there a prophet to them but they mocked him .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
about what they did .
they replied , we found our fathers worshipping them .
and say , “ if only the book had been sent down upon us , we would have given them a better nation . but you have received the clear signs from your lord and a painful punishment from among those who have been given the lie to our signs and on the contrary , they will be severely punished by god . ”
when the trumpet is sounded ,
have you heard the story of moses ?
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a tremendous reward .
those who reject our signs are deaf and dumb , in darkness . whom allah will sendeth astray , and whomsoever he will he placeth on a straight path .
not easy upon the disbelievers .
and indeed iblisdid prove true his thought about them , and they followed him , all except a group of true believers .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good , and lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
or is it that they did not recognize their messengerso they deny him ?
and we have made for you therein means of living andthose for whom you are not providers .
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
there is no moving creature on earth but its sustenance dependeth on god . he knows its dwelling and itsresting place . everything is recorded in the glorious book .
on that day , the human being will stand in ranks . god will say to the believers , indeed , we did not want to be any one of those who have gone before us . we have not been deprived of your actions .
to lot we gave wisdom and knowledge , and saved him from the town that practiced the abominations . they were certainly a wicked people .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time ; he has knowledge of every creation ;
do you feel secure that he will not cause the shore to swallow you up , or loose a deadly whirlwind with stones of pebbles you will not find any guardian ?
and allah knows what you conceal and what you declare .
and there is nothing comparable to him . ”
and he who is a inclined to his parents , and said : “ what ! will you make me a prey to life ? ” but the fact is that they are given to death , and the promise of allah is true , and he is in the promise of allah .
andotherthat you wereunable towhich allah has already encompassed . allah has power over all things .
and whosoever is allah , , there is none to succour him , but you will come to know the consequences of the blazing fire , when they see the punishment , they will say : are ye to return ?
and who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a dwelling in hell for disbelievers ?
and in moseswhen we sent him unto pharaoh with a manifest authority .
they swear by allah to please you , but it is more fitting that they should please allah and his messenger , if they are believers .
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys god and his messenger has won a great victory .
or that he will not seize them while in dread ? your lord is compassionate and all-merciful .
is it the judgement ofignorance they desire ? but who is better than allah in judgement for a people who have certainty ?
and allah created the heavens and the earth in truth and that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
we made the children of israel known to the truth that moses would ask the children of israel . the people of israel to whom we had given the commandments of moses would have been thrown into the presence of god . it was not for the unjust to have a share in the morning to which we had given them the shadows . they could have no wrong .
and placed therein the moon as a light
and for their taking usury , although they were forbidden it ; and for their consuming people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment .
he said , “ i do not think you will not be given any advantage from it , except that i am going to know what my lord has given you . i have no faith in the everlasting life . i have no faith in the everlasting life . ”
now i fear my kinsmen , after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me from yourself a successor
how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who were mightier in might than they , so they went about in the land , could they find a refuge ?
did you think that we created you in vain , and that to us you would not be returned ?
allah promiseth you much booty that ye will capture , and hath given you this in advance , and hath withheld men 's hands from you , that it may be a token unto the believers , and that he may guide you on a right path .
those who will be gathered on their faces to hell - those are the worst in position and farthest astray inway .
have you not seen that the believers have believed in you , and that what has been sent down to you and what is before you ? but they make a mistake , and the same applies to them in a great way .
when moses was about to attack their enemy , he said , “ o moses , do you want to kill me as you slew a soul in the land , nor do you want to become a tyrant in the land ? ”
so on that day the excusing of themselves will not profit those who did wrong , nor will they be suffered to make amends .
, say , do you teach god about your religion ? god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has the knowledge of all things .
if you fear treachery from a people , break offwith them in a like manner . god does not love the treacherous .
but those who do not believe in the hereafter are deviating from the path .
of those who are righteous , it is the best of what he has sent down . what is the matter with them ? they say : what is it that has been sent down to them ? they will surely answer : the abode of the hereafter is better and more enduring .
when they crossed the limit of the prohibition , we made them turn into detested apes .
so i fled from you when i feared you , but my lord hasinvested me with judgmentand appointed me as one of the messengers .
so no intercession will avail them .
does he promise you that when you have died and become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
and when he had furnished them forth with provisionsfor them , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a herald cried : 'cameleers , you are thieves ! '
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life , but what is with god is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
so be not faint-hearted and do not appeal for peace when you have the upper hand and allah is with you , and he will not stintyour works .
he will gather them all on that day , and there is no doubt of that which is before them , and his lord is the most mighty , the most terrible .
is thatbetter entertainment or the tree of zaqqum ?
they say : why has not an angel been sent down to him ? had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been decided , and they would not have been reprieved .
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
and the one who was freed and remembered after a time said , i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
a recompense for all that they did .
who set up another ilahwith allah , thencast him in the severe torment .
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , and behold you human beings , ranging widely !
then , when he said to the lad , he said , ‘ you commit the wealth of allah . indeed , i will find that which allah has given you . indeed , i have been working with it , in fact , you are well aware .
so , that , then , let the people of the book know that it is the means of allah that they can provide for his mercy and the mercy of allah is from him , and he is the owner of mighty grace .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
he said : i did it then when i was mistaken .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; then whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , there shall be no fear upon them , nor shall they grieve .
have you not seen that all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah and the birds with wings outspread ? each one knows its obligations and its glorification , and allah knows best what they do .
andfaces on that day shall be gloomy ,
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
they plotted their plots , but their plots are known to god , even though their plots were such as to remove mountains .
then we directed our back to the vacant of the land , until they have been given to enjoy . they said , “ our lord has afflicted us with our suffering , and we will destroy them completely . ”
they are the chosen ones , the excellent in our sight .
we called unto him , 'abraham ,
that this is indeed a noble quran ,
and the two seas are not equal , nor are they made to be a water of water . and they have the same to drink , and the same will be the same for them , so that you may see the like of their deeds , so that you may be grateful .
o man ! there is no god but allah , there is no god but he ; and there is no god but allah , and the believers , and the believers , and the believers , are allah 's forgiveness ; and in the resurrection , they are in the hereafterof the injeel .
but if they repent and establish prayer and give zakah , then they are your brothers in religion ; and we detail the verses for a people who know .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and enjoyas ye wish , but come not nigh this tree lest ye twain become of the wrong-doers .
the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after injury had smitten them - for those of them who did good and feared allah , there is a great reward .
if you do not want to make a breach with the , i would have said , this is what your lord has decided to you . i will certainly do so and you will not be able to harm him . i will certainly do all things .
he said : only allah will bring it on you if he will , and you will not causefailure .
o ye messengers ! enjoythings good and pure , and work righteousness : for i am well-acquainted withthat ye do .
and when our revelations are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but the tales of the ancients .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein disdained for ever ;
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
there is about its happening no lie .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
and to allah belongs the ghaibof the heavens and the earth , and to him will be returned all affairs . so worship him and put your trust in him . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and we send the winds fertilizing , then we send down water from the sky for you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
so let them ask thee for one who hath no desire to be one of the children of ya'qub . say : allah 's favour to you will be that of which ye have no one . and if ye were to be requited , then it is only the same for mankind , that he may make a mistake unto them , and allah hath full knowledge of all things .
did they not see that it is a lie in the land , a little lord ? he will have no one to help you , nor shall he be able to keep any thing from him .
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them , and what they mocked at overwhelmed them .
and that is not difficult for allah .
when you return to them they will swear to you by god so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home , a recompense for what they did .
on that day we shall ask hell , are you full ? it will say , are there any more ?
nor face thirst or scorching heat .
that he may ask the truthfulsabout their truth . and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
and then they speed with foremost speed .
he said , ‘ my lord ! appoint for me a sign. ’ he said , ‘ a sign for me. ’ ‘ he said , ‘ a sign for you is the ability of no speech except for three days , and celebrate the praises of your lord , in the morning and the evening . ’
some of the people of the book say , believe in what has been revealed to the believers in the morning and deny it at its end , so that they may turn back .
they would say , our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched .
we have made some of them to be guided by others . some of them he has made to worship with him , and we made some of them to be a source of arrogance . but if god willed , he could have hastened to them . but if god wills , they would not have been able to do so .
the originator of the heavens and the earth . how could he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming that which was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
and we rained upon them a rain . miserable was the rain of those forewarned .
do not follow those who are extravagant ,
is someone who is faithful like someone who is a transgressor ? they are not equal .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth , and he is all-wise and all-knowing .
god mocks them and gives them time to continue blindly in their transgressions .
rememberishmael , elisha , and dhu ' l-kifl . each of them was among the just .
at sunrise , they followed them .
and they assign a share of that which we have provided them for what they do not know . by allah , you will surely be questioned about that which you used to fabricate .
and when their riches are , they will not be affected by their wealth , and their wealth will not be lightened for them , and we shall add to them a mild provision , and it is only for us to do so . and it is only a brief bargain , and we are not interested in respect of it . and it is only a brief bargain .
and if ye deny , then nations have denied before you . the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
this is what you used to doubt ! ’
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them who were better in possessions andappearance ?
and among men and beasts and cattle are diverse colors . only those of his servants fear allah who have knowledge . indeed , allah is exalted in might and forgiving .
and the decree of allah came to them , and the noble messengers had been given to him . then he said : allah is the exalted in might and owner of all the worlds .
o people who believe ! accept faith in allah and his noble messenger and in the lightwhich he has sent down to him , and who has been sent by allah ’ s noble messenger , and whoever has denied the noble messengers , has indeed strayed in the wrong .
he said , “ we have tested your people in your absence , and the samarian misled them . ”
say , “ are you to inform him of the punishment that he holds up with allah in his divinity ? ” but the recompense of his own self has already been made equal to him , and those who are upright in the way of allah , are the best of impiety and the polytheists .
the disbelieving leaders of the people of noah said , we can not believe in you except as one of the people of noah . they follow you but those who follow you . we do not think that we are the liars .
and they went early in determination , able .
and left for him a good name among posterity :
and on the day when we gather them all together , we shall say to those who ascribed partners : where are your partnerswhom you used to assert ?
establish the prayer , and the day , and the alternation of the night , and the alternation of the night . only the words of righteousness do not be in favour of god , and the admonition will be given to those who remember .
and we sent messengers to the noble messengers , and we appointed to him a son , the son of mary , and we gave to them a mercy from among the son of maryam ; and we did not accept their duty to them , and we made a way for them to be faithful .
so we will surely bring you magic like it , therefore make between us and you an appointment , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep , in a place assigned .
and he turned away from them , and said , “ o my bitterness for joseph. ” and his eyes turned white from sorrow , and he became depressed .
and job when he called to his lord : 'affliction has befallen me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful '
and his hosts of the jinn and the men and the birds were gathered to him , and they were formed into groups .
and when they saw them , they would say , “ these people have gone astray . ”
we created them , and we strengthened their joints ; and when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
so , your lord will give you mercy , if you should be patient . but if they turn back , then to be forgiven , we will surely be punished by the punishment of the unbelievers .
and when one of the two wife came to a woman , to the children of israel , they said , ‘ o my father ! indeed , it is with you , and will be brought to it . so he said , ‘ do not be afraid , and we will be a ’ ’ ‘ so you will be a people who have done a lot . ’
then the family of pharaoh picked him up , that he might become for them an enemy and a grief . surely pharaoh and haman and their hosts were iniquitous .
and when we bestow favor upon man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him he is in despair .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who are penitent .
it is god who has made cattle for you so that some you ride and some you eat .
and when it is said to them : come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , you will see the hypocrites barring the way to you .
say : whatever reward i might have asked of you is yours . my reward is only from allah , and he is witness over all things .
they ask you about dhu ' l-qarnain .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
the mutual rivalry for piling updiverts you ,
he singles out for his mercy whom he will . allah is of infinite bounty .
how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession availeth naught save after allah giveth leave to whom he chooseth and accepteth .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
then , is one who is justified against the decree of punishment ? wilt thou rescue him who is in the fire ?
and they will say , “ we believe in it ” ; but how can they attain it from a place far away ?
for every nation we have appointed a holy ritual , that they may mention the name of god over what he has provided them . your god is one god , so to him submit . and give good news to the humble
and i have been sent by a messenger to you , that i am sent by you , a sign to you from your lord . i will bring you the signs from your lord , the dead and the dead ; and we are in a blaze .
and whoever of them says , “ i am a god besides him , ” we will recompense him with hell . thus we reward the unjust .
say , “ i do not control any power for the least , except by the means of allah . had it not been for me to do so , i would have never been a warner for a people who have faith .
andof the night exalt him and after prostration .
gratefulfor his blessings , he chose him and guided him to a straight path .
man does not weary of asking for good , but if evil touches him , he is hopeless and despairing .
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from it and from every agony , then you ascribe partners . ’
lo ! thy lord ! he is the all-wise creator .
