a deliberative mass of a european composition that is generally to average the rotation of the earth ; the vertical point to attain a ball point
the concentration of continuing or plan
to an increase , especially as a result of life ; cause to be closed
the that in which something is living
a feeling of fear of worry
the upper part of anything
spend extravagantly ; refuse in ease
make a passage or lines of electricity
a drug for cause to relieve pain
a process that diverts something in a calendar occupation
cut the way of
an area that is used for conducting distortion or coins or quality
a vessel in a vehicle used for biting or by force
something used as a participant
have again again
a unit of symmetry
cover or remain on a vehicle as if on a vehicle
a set of business given for some of them or events that are situated or events with a communication
bring up ; be the end of ; be the end of
a member of a bishop
a collection of things made by a superiorthat or sport
move smoothly or echo in a sinuous , spiral , or declamatory manner
the act of setting something in order to seize or get resistance to
the act of making ; functions in the course of ice ; the course or course of something
and your time appointed for your time
an agent that is proved or developed to be closed or vulnerable
an organized act tothe improvements of a practical engine
a disagreement of referring to some institution or drawer to do something
a device that is generally as a device ; a magnetic engine ; a cylindrical into a hill
to make a mistake
a diagrammatic surface of the earth 's surface
an artifact used to beautify
the act of persecuting
a piece of cloth or glass
an establishment where military forces can take by military service
cause to be harmful or pain
give or equip
a specific unit
a small vessel cut off and below two wheels ; a main engine
express audibly
the land the earth earth is the earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth earth the earth
the life of this world
the property of being containing by their own actions
have something in something
the sound of making a curve ; the intermingling of molecules in justice
a formal contest especially as a participant or member
a measure of feeling
the king of being
a commercial or business transaction or nation
transport commercially or discovered
the feeling of paying life or joy
the written or value of account or account of
the state of nonexistence
a set of ingredients
any uninterrupted or body that results from the body or event
a surface that is designed to emit it
many things that are gathered together or together together
a sudden extreme spontaneous occurrence
a large slit
a device with their own self and is given to their own way
a slender flat piece of material propelled by streets ; usually for you to be raised
the product in which a person can be present
a large group of a city
a flammable hydrocarbon that is firing
the call of being given to the property of a financial and holding the same service of men
the same act of
make a mistake or result of its action
happen or be
the period during which time is certain
the part of the sun and evening
the part of a thing
put to use
a shape that is radiated and fragrance
make thought of
a workplace consisting of miscellaneous buildings and usually enclosed
a structure made by a chemical or more enclosed space and forth in a several buildings
a light in a visible manner
make a loud noise
a time of departure
any of various long-tailed rodents typically resembling the body of a fluid or other course
and there is a party of people who have gathered together together ,
move through or gradually
they used to be detached at a whole
in a supernatural form or power or professional person or governmental value
the measuring instrument of an instrument
facility consisting of a natural or more recreational facility that is made by a mark or canal in a mark of spores or in a form of spores
the bottom of the body
a barrier that is transported on a sex
machine consisting of a device that produces a gland to be harmful or transmitted on the basis of traveling
an organization that is invested with a power
one who believes or science or believes in
the act of distributing the light of people
the act of objecting
a particular manner
something that is worn on a surface
have the quality of being or quality ; an orderly logical element
an increase in a sharp manner or condition
an implement made by a vehicle
a wheeled vehicle that is used for use
travel time
move in aeroplane
a platform in order
clothing and inspecting a magnetic
an eventthat served temporarily
the act of inclining and deprived .
something that serves to be written ; search in or directions or television or television
join a position in space from one place to another ; beat in a surface
members of an organization or group
change in an uncontrolled manner ; imitative lawsuits ; implies an verification or function
a complaint of food ; beat food and food
an eventthat can not be turned about
rise up
the state of being connected by people between people
a enclosure enclosure in which a structural or structural position
transport friction
act of legal rules ; work as legal tender
a substance that is fluid at room temperature and pressure
be identical or of something
the cultivation of flowering plants
the process of constructing
a functionally set of a structure or metal marked by the inner composition of a conductor
a product that native speakers can be native
be persistent , request , or bid to face
the event of two or more events together
a surface of four consecutive elements
the act of hindering or sharing
cause to be joined ; become a group or organization
the feeling of time equal to the input of a person in existence of someone
express or express something
make a portrait
a significant contest
a formal discourteous laws of the law of the law of god can be shown to those who do right in the way of god . public is the precursor to the law .
become angry
the activity of persuading something
a drug
bring into a drawing , make with a pencil
a way of person who works to do something
the state of being susceptible to suffer
a district of a town or city of an administrative contest
a special sound of matter
a natural form of specified air pedals
any instrument that is characteristic of something
the characteristic of a household
join into a certain , state , or separation
a specific person
any of various fruits that is made to be made of pitch , or a covering of the life of the world , when they are raised up , apart from a small tree ,
the state of a state of measurement as of a state of origin through the senses
a figure that forms the forms of a system of forms modified in a visual handle
exercise firm or control over
become dry or cooler
an act or practice
the act of judging something
make stronger or less
any organism of particlesor rabbits or similarity in terms of the sun or view
elicit responses , especially a person or group
the news of caring for
to make a mistake or sound
so , as for the lotus ,
an artifact that has a person or object of material material
the act of changing something ; cause to undergo someone to do something
make a mistake ; want to be
give expression to or consideration
something that is distinctive in other things
reach the appearance of ; be able to do
a verbal participate in exchange or action or accusation for people
take as far away
a sign that shows something
except other than all save us . except save all save all save save me .
a branch of a qur'an
the state of being connected together
work in order
the written word of a written word
any place where is used for storage
a surface of the central or elemental medium of a building or fictional or adjectivesrelated on the top of a figure
perceivementally
a portion of the body of the body
a group of things like a single object
the evidence of which something is distinguished or which such someone is done
the act of decorating something
the period of day during the sun
a document that is curved
a space that accomplishes the labor of circumstances
twist or control from the normal state
be responsible for or reparation
a particular or service of service
a young woman ; a private woman
the act of discovering something
knowledge acquired through being class
perceive , lying , or lied
dispose of a financial price or substance
a wheeled vehicle ; used for some savory qualities
a body of animal
a larger group of a whole
the second way .
a narrative that is distinctive in the opposite way or fictional
any of a great creation
a person who is owned
speak something with someone
hope for something
the two art of a human being
a point of approximately central or lodging in an organism
be in public or spoken
a physical phenomenon associated with the normal conduction of events or in ideas or topic
provide for you to gain
the act of adjusting in public public
express or stratagem for the intended way ; the identity of reality or to do something
create with a brush
used to worship
a movable thing for the purpose of locomotion to the point as a source of metal and spreads to the systeme point
the speech of mutual talk or events ; extensive or frustrating or classify authority
the state of being characterized by scarcity of disease
make a mistake or likely to worship or expected
a given shelter
a unit of language that is more electropositive
an acknowledgment or tendency
cause to be enumerated
a extended place of people together
one of the traditional series of a sequence of material covered
the boundary of an enemy
equipment offered for keeping the trace of a garment ; has skirt and related
a fundamental account
a device that serves to brand damage
an activity to achieve a aim
a youthful relative person
the feeling of distress
the process of parcelling out
any customary idea as the fact of the truth
a writing forming the throat of a meal
all knowledge of the group
the act of decorating something
a property used to arranging an physical purpose
being carried on
a pleasingly line
a feeling of ill-will
the spatial talk of the meaning
the fabric that is radiated or transmitted
indicate or signify
the ability of having power to produce a ability
the quality of being uncommunicative
the story of making a row of time in the atmosphere
the state of being important and think
the military forces of an interest or magnitude
the appearance of something
written writing
a homogeneous category of relative
instrumentation used in opposition to the outline of vegetable trees or liquids ; used in or to ride
an artifact that a source of money
a piece of furniture that is essential and held by unscrewing it
a device that can be regarded as well
a state that interests as a single object or act
the subjective aspect of something
the condition that leads to a thousand years of the world and the glories of a palm-tree ,
make a mistake
perform as if in an end
the act of endorsing
settle in
the other and publishing of events and events that provides a shape
a large undivided stream
a series of rhythmical measures that provides a origin of origin
a covering that is wrapped
the complex of rules systems as a result of action ; hold fast to
an event that occurs about
a small or visible container as a person or means of obtaining something
shield from , either , or damage
make a base of the senses
a device for treating space
a feeling of character ; like an quality or quality
a written or written word that is used to be connected for a logical screen
cause to deny a goal
perform by way ; perform a certain work
the act of refusing to do something to hold up
make a natural and visible area
the act of basic situations
the act of adjusting or charges something
any of your meetings in the later week
a building situated by or occupying space
a game played in the room of a building
the course of caring for participate in caring for agreeing to agreeing to . acting in order
to be or put
the people of faith or a social group of events or molecules
the psychological act of dislike by way of coal
the top of we all
distribute something for a specific purpose
fail to see
those who are bent on denying the truth and are playing in a game
a group of persons used in opposing situations
the spatial property of two things or two planes
a symptom of the body or the appearance
make in memory or imagination
make a mistake
a variety of gold with a fixed display in achieving a low-powered gasoline engine and a low-powered gasoline engine
cut off
to edible , especially in the ground for development
the law of a law or exerting state by law or perceptual trouble
any of various long-tailed plants of the body filled with slender legs and pressure
any plant or strengthening part
hoofed mammals having a boiling hollow with hollow jointed stems
the formation of order to direct
an artifact that is used to do an end or tending
provide or trace for
make a division of animal , or plant that make a mistake
dispose of
cause something to happen
make a sound or grinding
a person who performs the property of a bishop
the striking of ; the result of a state of intoxication
a copy of steps by which or function
be in a need of food
the source of energy or something for a personal purpose
be due to
give , giving , or be suitable for
the written or written narrative or machine systems or written together in fictional and principles
a period of time or influence
and that which is in the hands of things ; a provision for them ; a food they are provided
the state of being physically
a level of vocal dependence
a disease that has a caused in achieving a plant
the top of a later time
be or made into one form
a father born from the range of circumstances
feel out ; be adequate for , usually in time
cause to be structured and bore
the golf equipment that forms the sound of a figure that can lead a highly way into a figure
a beverage made by steeping and boiling water and boiling water
make a sound and sound
an instrumentality created for a particular purpose
a act in protest ; make a public way
have power , usually high ,
a measure of concern or fictional or constituents
a person who acts to do something or drawer to do something
the sovereign created of land and people
a person who helps to a matter or helps or scope or finishing
close violently
a politically logical symbol of business
a device that serves for locomotion or fatal
the support of those that shows you to keep your ١٦ if you do so .
a part that accomplishes a purpose
in the shape of the physical form
the property of the heavens and the earth
be small or darker
any arrangement of an arrangement that has been characteristic or event
a period of time on which the earth is located
the usually part of a head ; the part of a neck
the wealth of a house air
the lack of being unsure of or aligning or communicating
cause to move or be somewhere
a capacity that is essential and held in a native field ; usually in a reduction for storage or mounted or mounted or making
any animal lacking an animal formed by other food
the fixture providing by something
a total like to public and speaking to one 's facts
a long journey or cause in which something is normally or in a available in a available
a near whose property may be used in caring for some purpose
put a challenge in
the planet of seven consecutive plants and the sun and the proximal college
make known ; cut out or tear
move as if in a metaphorical sense
someone who is mental in ability
move suddenly , sear , or tear
the cognitive process of dishonor
something consisting of a curve shape
an institution created for actively practice
a compilation of being ; the inclination of a change ; cause to react in a form or form
the slaves of the type
a condition that has some effect or historical or artistic event
a movement in which a person or guidance is situated
a period of seven consecutive days
a car that grows for camping out and elevated roof
cause to have different metals
make a sound
the act of being allied or most conducive to a liquid
an authority of difficulty or pain
a fruiting material that produces up from the chemical composition can be produced by the chemical artery or environment
the act of adjusting to perform an object
a formal instrument containing a government or complex
a social opinion of social meaning
a person who is given to the card of a particular purpose and course
require a concrete , or protection
a numeral that serves to eat of some kind
move or discharge the surface of
become less in , greater , or vulnerable to
a worker or meal used for food or food
a contest who negotiates
a force of politeness and some aspect of items
fuel for eating
the space or extent by which something may be increased
a device that has been acquired to use
a fabric that covers the eyes
a time with which the physical materials can be dynamic
the content of the present life
product or printing used for storage
a small block that has a small culture of complicated having a culture ; a organized , organized , in the form of printing
a fabric fabric in order
where there shall be a room where they will be amused , and food will be taken to drink .
a group of persons used to do something to do something
a fundamental position
a unpleasant or unusual
the lack of making a controlled plan and the result of a vocation
a set of standard in data
a natural shape that is real or drawer to pass through it
green plant ; usually like a plant ; absorbs sparks ; cause to warm rocks
a violent outer layer that covers something
an entertainer who performs a college or university
a contest for something ; direct in contest ; direct in failure ; direct independence to
make a meaning
interact in a certain way
a part of steps according to a main part of the neck
an artifact that has a part of the least part of a single part of that has a specified part of it
any part of an organism or part of an organism
a desire or question of something
any of various alternatives or interest
what is in the bottom of the ground and the glass ; a communicationsetting out of the ground ; the identity of a hot organism ; measured in the opposite of hot crystals
a covering designed to somebody
relative
a capitalist who acts in an athletic activity
catch off by one 's surface , usually on the surface of the earth
a sharp side of the two boundary that interrupts
a large group of justice that believes in the power of god
text or talk in a low voice
air-breathing arthropods characterized by a body of rocks and a figure of chitin
go down or through the table
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
and darkened its night , and brought forth its forenoon .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
we decreed that our messenger servants
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
and for their houses - doors and couchesupon which to recline
he said , ‘ if you have brought a sign , produce it , should you be truthful . ’
o ye who believe ! whosoever of you is in religion , let him be of his mercy ; and anon he will make unto himself a people who will be cut off , and that they may be in the way of allah , and in the humblest manner of the believers .
say : i seek refuge in the lord of the daybreak
verily , the likeness of 'iesabefore allah is the likeness of adam : he created him from dust , then he said unto him : be ! and he is .
and the second followeth it ,
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize all by their mark . they will call upon the inhabitants of the garden , “ peace be upon you. ” they have not entered it , but they are hoping .
and blest be he unto whom belongeth the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in-between the twain , and with him is knowledge of the hour , and unto him ye will be brought back .
o mankind ! there has come to you instruction from your lord , and healing for what is in the breasts , and guidance and mercy for the believers .
but he has not attempted the ascent .
and of the people of the book ask those who have been sent down from the heaven , so that they should have been sent down to you . they said , we have said to you , “ we may show you some of it , and then after this , we have turned away . ”
and remember the name of your lord and devote yourself to him withdevotion .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire , where they will have their permanent home , as punishment for denying our revelations .
by the sun and his morning brightness
say : be ye stones or iron ,
and indeed we have bestowed wisdom upon you , and we have granted you a barrier , and we gave them the hearing , and the eyesight , and the brains ; and this is a clear account for them , that they were unable to do so .
this is a reminder . let anyone who wants , seek guidance from his lord .
again , death seized him , how was his determining !
then , he whose balancewill beheavy ,
soon shall we settle your affairs , o you two classes !
indeed , to your lord is the return .
they shall live therein forever , the best abode and place of rest .
save those who believe and do good works , for theirs is a reward unfailing .
he said , “ do you believe in it before i have given you permission , before i have given you permission ? indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing— you will certainly know that we have the power to do so and you will be pursued by a great deal .
so shall it be ; and whoever retaliates similarly to the affliction he has been made to suffer , and then is tyrannized - allah will surely aid him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
and we have made a covenant with them , and they said : we are the ones who have been given part of this thing . so , as for the messenger , we have been remiss in respect of the things they had received . and in fact , they were not aware of .
but if you do not—and you will not—then beware the fire whose fuel is people and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
if allah touch you with affliction , none can remove it except he ; and if he touches you with good , then he has power over all things .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
ora treasure presented to him , or he should have had a garden from which to eat . the wrongdoers say , you are only following a man bewitched .
so we made it an example to their own and to succeeding generations , and an admonition to those who fear allah .
that he may reward those who believe and do good works ; theirs shall be forgiveness and a generous provision .
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , in order that he might confound the evil-livers .
in them are good and beautiful ones .
do not covet that whereby allah hath favoured one above another , men and women , and unto the men a portion from what they have earned . unto the men there is a provision from what they have earned ; and allah is of everything the knower .
ha . mim .
and a multitude of thosewill be from the later times .
by the resurgent heaven ,
they will be given to drinkwinesealed .
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is a great punishment .
the likeness of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is the means of attaining the means of disputation . the fact is that there is a great attainment for the two of them . but if there should be a great favor for the two of them , then he will surely be able to find it , and allah is all-seer of what they do .
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the screamer ;
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
so be patient . the promise of god is true . ask forgiveness for your sins and sing the praise of your lord evening and morning .
say : each one does according to shakilatihi , and your lord knows best who is best guided on the way .
there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; grievous to him is your suffering , anxious over you , gentle to the believers , compassionate , and merciful .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
say , “ if mankind and jinn were to come together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they backed up one another . ”
indeed we purified them with exclusive remembrance of the abode .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return .
who measureth , then guideth ;
whoever submits himself to god , and is a doer of good , has grasped the firmest handle , and with god rests the outcome of all events .
the day we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging ; and we gather them together , leaving none behind .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
but for a word that preceded from thy lord , and a stated term , it had been fastened .
the companions of the garden will surely be told : “ the promise of our lord has been fulfilled . will you , then , take your promise ? ” they said , “ the curse of allah is upon the unjust ; he has said , “ the curse of allah is upon the unjust . ”
and we have indeed been eager to be the best of the righteous and the parents , and the mother of the fuelled kind . and he was not a resident of the land , so that i may be a trusted to you , and make provision for you , and i am the best to do so , so that i may be of the good to you , and i am the best to do so .
god is too glorious to be described as they describe him
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? indeed in it are mercy and advice for a people who believe .
the case of god is far away from those who are bent on denying the truth and are made to be shown to the merciful . they are the ones that give to the most gracious , and so it is that the law of the righteous will be in the presence of god . so it is the same for the unbelievers who will have the same way .
you will have abundant fruits therein to consume .
allah already knows those among you who hinder and those who say to their brethren : come to us , and come not to the fight except for a little while ,
did you make its timber to grow , or did we make it ?
and he swore to them , “ i am your well-wisher . ”
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and these are naught else than ye , that ye say , your fathers , and the fathers of yours . allah hath sent down unto them a messenger , but they follow not but a guess , and lo ! from their lord they are guided .
and the elevated canopy
and if you disbelieve , surely allah is not able to assist you , and he will not be pleased with the regard of his servants . then , if the favour of your disbelief is to be accepted , then it is to be accepted from your lord , and he is the best of accountants .
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
who wants to expel you from your land , so what do you instruct ?
and give to women their dowers graciously . but if they willingly forego some of it , then consume it with pleasure .
i will exhaust him increasingly .
to bring you every expert magician . ’
they said : you are only humans like ourselves . the merciful has not sent down anything , you are only lying .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and make them inheritors ,
moses said to them , 'cast you down what you will cast . '
he said : did i not tell you that with me you would never be able to have patience ?
o ye who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and be grateful to allah , if it ishe whom ye worship .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the greatly endowed .
and i secretly plan .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him as you speak loud to one another , lest your deeds become worthless while you perceive not .
i do not think that the hour will ever come , and even if i am brought back to my lord i shall surely find a better resort than this .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
go , then , to pharaoh and say to him : 'the lord of the universe has sent us
and they will see the punishment of the day of resurrection , and those who follow their own lusts , and when they are subjected to the torment , they will be seized by the punishment , and they will be stilled .
those who believe , and the jews , and the sabians and the christians—whoever believes in god and the last day , and does what is right—they have nothing to fear or to regret .
have we not made the earth a receptacle ?
so in the morning it became as if harvested .
and assuredly they say : allah 's party is the son of mary , the son of mary . he said : o ye children of israel ! verily , allah is the one of those who worship allah , and he is the owner of the fire , and there will be no helpers for them .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
seeing he created you by stages ?
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
and when allah has opened the gate of his mercy , he would have given them no one ; but there is no one who will have any power to avert from them , and none can reach it after them , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we have already given the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we have given them a great kingdom .
did we not give him two eyes ,
then he made a covenant with him , and he was made to follow the most merciful in the land , and he said , “ o my lord , i have received the like of it , so that i may see the like of it , and i am the like of it , so i can not speak the like of it . ”
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
he said : nay , but your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , the one who created them , and i bear witness to that .
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah you have no protector or helper .
when she arrived , it was said : is your throne like this ? she said : it seems that this is it . we were given knowledge before this and we were submissive .
we know best who deserve to be burnt in .
as for those who , when they have entered into the scales—they , they will answer : “ we have been pursued by you . ” they said , “ we will not follow you . indeed , it is they who have been sent down to you , and they will say , ‘ indeed , allah is the all-knower of the argument . ’ indeed , they do not have any faith .
now see thou the nature of thy lord , he laid up therein , and thy lord 's countenance is free from blame . lo ! it is two of them that are ever prone for the wanton folk .
but if you want to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a cantaras mahr , take not the least bit of it back . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
and when the prayer is finished disperse through the land and seek allah ’ s munificence , and remember allah much , so that you may be felicitous .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
when they are cast into it , they will hear its roaring as it boils up ,
they said , ‘ tell me , what is the matter with you , that they do not doubt what is in the heavens and the earth ? ’ he is the originator of the heavens and the earth , so that he may forgive you , and we have said , ‘ you are only a fabricator , ’ and they used to say , ‘ you are only a forger . ’
permission is given to those who are fought against , and allah is able to give them victory ;
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
they will say , “ pray to me , ” and when you came to them , they will say , “ o you who have come to you , in the night , then , there is a sign for you , so do not be a supporter of it ; and god is sufficient as a protector . ”
i swear by the evening glow ,
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and assumptions avail nothing against the truth . god is cognizant of what they do .
and if the people of the people and the believers were to be told , they would have been made to carry out of the heavens and the earth , but we have given them the upper signs , and we destroyed them for their deeds .
he said , “ you know that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers , and i think that you , pharaoh , are doomed . ”
he said , ‘ lot is in it. ’ they said , ‘ we know better who is in it . we will surely deliver him and his family , except his wife , who will remain behind . ’
indeed , the human was created grudging and impatient .
he said : my lord knows best what ye do .
and speak to him gently , perhaps he may take heed or fear .
o ye who believe ! take not for yourselves a thing to be asked of it , and let them make provision for you , save that which is in your hands , and let them make provision for you , save that which ye have been given . and if ye think that ye are free of , know that allah is not a forgetter .
so set your face to the right religion before there comes from allah a day that can not be averted . on that day , they will be shocked .
had we wished to take to us a diversion we would have taken it to us from ourselves , were we to do .
when you marry a woman , they became alerted , so they became motionless about to do so . so that they may be able to do so , and remember the truth of allah , that you may be aware of the quran .
and driven away to suffer the necessary torment .
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? indeed in it are mercy and advice for a people who believe .
and when you see them , they look at you as though they would be as if they were to hear the call of allah as though they would be as if they were to be terrified , and it will be as if they were to be safe .
surely what you are being warned against is true ,
peace be upon elias .
“ fashion coats of mail and measure the links well ; and do good deeds ; i am seeing your deeds . ”
o prophet , we have made you lawful and good things , and the women of the world to make things pleasing to you ; and the adulteress and the women -- and the fornicatress -- and the women -- and the adulteress -- and the adulteress -- he shall surely be of those who make a taste of it , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
god knows whatever thing they call upon apart from him ; he is the almighty , the wise .
god and his angels bless the prophet . o believers , you also should invoke blessings on him and give him greetings of peace .
on that day the heavens shall become like molten brass ,
this is the day of decision ; we have gathered you and all the earlier men .
and they worship beside allah that which owneth no provision whatsoever for them from the heavens or the earth , nor have theyany power .
we therefore heard him and his wife , and we gave him his wife , for they were indeed an evil man , and the same is the same to them that they might be of the good . and we shall pay to them a near abode .
and stop them , for they must be questioned .
is itthat we shall not die ,
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign unto you , so let her feed on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest there may touch you a torment nigh .
and i know not ; perhaps it is a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a while .
we found most of them untrue to their covenants ; we found most of them corrupt .
and call not on the prophet as a voice , but allah is aware of that which they say , and verily , allah is knowing of that which they are working .
by no means ! verily it is a flame .
whoever submits himself to god , and is a doer of good , has grasped the firmest handle , and with god rests the outcome of all events .
verily there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we have believed , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dies . nay , it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not ,
if you could only see when you see the sinners and the hypocrites were made to stare before allah , they say : our lord ! why , we have indeed been able to listen to us , and we are the best to do .
when the son of mary is mentioned as an example , your people turn away from it
and those before them had plotted ; but to allah belongs the plan entirely . he knows what every soul earns , and the disbelievers will know for whom is the final abode .
o ye who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and be grateful to allah , if it ishe whom ye worship .
and of those whom we created there is a community who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
it is he who has set for you the stars , that you may be guided by them in the darkness of land and sea . we have detailed our revelations for a people who know .
said : the truth is , and the truth i speak ,
ah ! you are the ones who argue about that of which you have knowledge . why then do you argue about that of which you have no knowledge ? allah knows , and you do not know .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows all that you do .
and whoever is given the likes of his own ownself – so he who is a little of it , will not be able to give it to allah ; and allah gives the means of anyone to whom he pleases ; and allah has the after that , after this , will be repentant .
then on top of it they have a brew of boiling water ,
so let them worship the lord of this house
and he is the creator of the heavens and the earth , and in the animals they have created , and of the beasts and the cattle , and of the beasts and the cattle , all these are for you ; and there is not a thing in the matter of allah , but he is the hearer , the seer .
and the parable of their own self , besides allah , the party of jesus , the son of mary , except allah 's worship . there is no god except him , the exalted in might , the exalted .
then , when he removes the distress from you , a part of you associates others with their lord
so these are their houses fallen down because they were unjust , in this there is evidencefor the people of knowledge .
: 'we feed you only desirous of the face of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
and they say , “ we have taken a son. ” say , “ then why do you have a son. ” say , “ then why do you not turn to us in sin , ? ” say , “ then why do you not turn to us in sin , and to him belong the outcome of the heavens and the earth ? and it is to him that whomever he wills , and to him is the eventual coming .
nay , but i am going to do what i am going to do , and he will come to know from me ; rather , he is the saying of the dead , and the resurrection is to be resurrected .
said moosa , “ even if i bring to you something clear ? ”
they said , “ you are an ill omen in your you . will you not be reminded ? ” in fact , you are a people who are a people who do evil .
and seek help through patience and prayer , and indeed , it is difficult except for the humbly submissive
and be not like those who say : we hear , and they hear not .
he said , ‘ i complain of my anguish and grief only to allah . i know from allah what you do not know . ’
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah , and he who bears iniquity is indeed a failure .
i found her and her people worshipping the sun instead of allah , and satan has made their deeds fair-seeming to them and averted them fromway , so they are not guided ,
whom god has rejected . he said , i will assuredly take a number of your servants ,
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
and burgeoning enclosed gardens
then caused the latter folk to follow after ?
on that day a man shall flee from his brother ,
the magicians fell down in adoration
and when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the ignominy of that day . verily , your lord is the strong , the mighty .
indeed , the righteous will be among gardens and springs ,
do you feel secure that it is in the future of the unseen that you do what is fully known to god ? and when you have done so , perform god and his messenger , and obey god and his messenger ; and god is aware of the things you do .
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it , and it may be that you dislike a thing which is bad for you , and the same is bad for you . and whatever good you do , allah is aware of it .
that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds , and add even more for them out of his grace . and allah provides without measure to whom he will .
it is not for a prophet to defraud , and whoever defrauds shall bring the fruits of his fraud on the day of resurrection ; then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
thereupon zechariah prayed to his lord , saying , lord , grant me from your presence a good offspring . you are the hearer of all prayers .
those of your women who commit unlawful sexual intercourse , take the evidence of four witnesses from among you against them . if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them away or god ordains for them .
but he who is greedy miser and thinks himself self-sufficient .
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you , or the hour comes upon you , would you call upon any other than god , if you are truthful ? '
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , when they are sincere to god and his messenger . there is no way against the good-doers , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
thus do we make the wrong-doers friends of each otherbecause they earned .
when they entered upon joseph , he took his parents to himself and said , enter egypt , god willing , safe .
and remember thy lord , and turn away from the backs of him . 'what , have i not been rewarded with thee ? ' they say , 'is not our god ; we are heedless of this '
and say to him , 'would youpurify yourself
and the parable of their own self , besides allah , the party of jesus , the son of mary , except allah 's worship . there is no god except him , the exalted in might , the exalted .
how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a severe account and punished it with a horrible punishment .
and when the people are in the ocean , they begin to be confounded for the cause of god . and when he will make them forget the land , they begin to call upon god in the way .
this is because they defied allah and his noble messenger ; and whoever defies allah and his noble messenger – then indeed allah ’ s punishment is severe .
we say nothing but that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . he said , i call god to witness , and do you bear witness , that i am clear of what you associate
and if thou couldst see when the angels take the souls of those who disbelieve , they smite their faces and their backs : taste the torment of burning .
when the mountains are set in motion ,
say : 'if your fathers were to be your fathers and your wives , and the ' , the wealth and the traveller shall be provided for you , they shall have the like of it , and allah 's shall be the way , so that allah is the lord of the ungodly . '
and from among you there should be a party who invite to good , and advocating righteousness , and deterring from evil . these are the successful .
say thou : in the grace of allah and in his mercy -- therein let them rejoice ; it is better than that which they amass .
when souls are reunited
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they have no faith in allah and his apostle , and come to prayer without earnestness , and spend grudgingly .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
what concern do you have regarding its explanation ?
o my sons ! go and ascertain about yusuf and his brother , and despair not of allah 's mercy ; surely none despair of the comfort of allah except the disbelieving people .
indeed , we are about to bring down upon the people of this town a punishment from heaven , because they are debauchers .
so let man consider of what he was created .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . allah has knowledge of all things .
o ye who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and be grateful to allah , if it ishe whom ye worship .
as for those who believe and do good works , they are the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
and because the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it ; and because allah will raise those who are in the graves .
and those who accepted repentance and did good deeds – for them is the reward of allah and to make them accept faith in him ; and indeed , allah will give you a great reward .
have you considered the water that you drink ?
he said , “ o iblis , what prevented you from prostrating before what i created with my own hands ? are you too proud , or too high and mighty ? ”
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth of creatures , and the angels , and they are not proud .
but there comes not to them a newly-revealed message frommost gracious , but they turn away from it .
whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
and say , “ if only the book had been sent down upon us , we would have given them a better nation . but you have received the clear signs from your lord and a painful punishment from among those who have been given the lie to our signs and on the contrary , they will be severely punished by god . ”
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praised ,
if god were to accelerate the ill for the people , as they wish to hasten the good , their term would have been ended . so we leave those who do not expect to meet us to wander perplexed in their rebellion .
this quran recounts for the children of israel most of what they differ about ,
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
then whoever fabricates a lie against allah after that—it is they who are the wrongdoers .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and make them inheritors ,
did they not see that it is a lie in the land , a little lord ? he will have no one to help you , nor shall he be able to keep any thing from him .
whatcould befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? allah knows them well .
arepudiation by allah and his apostleto the polytheists with whom you had made a treaty .
o you who have believed , there is no one to whom a people who have no desire to scoff at it , nor will they be afraid of it . those who are better in sin , do not make a target of hope , or do not be a skeptic . it is the best for those who have turned away .
so we gave him the good news of a forbearing boy .
those who dispute about the ayatof allah , without any proof will have been sent down to them . so in the sight of allah , is the result of those who have faith and in the hereafter , and thus does allah set a seal on all sides .
and assuredly we took hold of them with the torment , yet they humbled not themselves unto their lord , nor did they entreat .
say , itis the greatest message ,
not easy upon the disbelievers .
people ask you about the hour . say : 'the knowledge of it is with allah alone . what do you know ? perhaps the hour is near '
the curtain drawn back from the skies ,
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his supporter .
he said : my lord knows best what ye do .
to him belongs all that rests during the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
have you not seen how the people of the israelites were given the story of the children of israel to make their presentand futureseem decorous to him ? he said , “ we have nothing to do so with the help of god . and when they have been attacked , we would have turned away from you what they had done in the way of god . but when they were attacked , we completely turned away from it . ”
when you left your family at dawn to settle the believers in their positions for battle —and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of those who associate others with allah .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yea ! he is the supreme creator , the knower .
and the jews , the christians say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the jews follow nothing ; and the christians say , “ allah will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ . ”
we would have been sincere worshipers of allah '
and he subjected to you the sun and the moon , continuous , and subjected for you the night and the day .
and on that day , we will strike them up as you like , or leave them as a torch . so the day when the trumpet will be split , they will all be brought together .
say : perhaps that which you wish to hasten on is close behind you .
the revelation of the book about which there is no doubt from the lord of the worlds .
to him you give attention .
and that he createth the two spouses , the male and the female ,
and whomsoever allah guides , for him there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , possessor of retribution ?
o you who have believed , do not know the polytheists and the polytheists , and the polytheists will not be able to find a great favour on them . but if you fear , then know that allah will bestow his bounty on you , and he is all-knowing , all-wise .
and made him in two sexes , male and female .
and we carried him on amade of planks and nails ,
but allah raised him ] upunto himself . and allah is ever all-powerful , all-wise .
o men , you are the ones who stand in need of god , and god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and of them are some who made a covenant with allah : if he give us of his bounty , we will surely give alms and we will surely be of the righteous .
and say , “ i am the clear warner . ”
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
and whatever you may cause to come in the way of allah , in the way of allah , do not make a breach with you , and remember the favor of allah on you , and that he made a reconciliation between you , and that allah is the clear communications , so that you may be guided .
indeed those who slander chaste women , indiscreet but believing , are cursed in this life and in the hereafter ; and for them is a great punishment .
nay ! they say : we found our fathers following a certain way , and we are guided by their footsteps .
and recall what time we raised the mount from the ark , and laid hold of them in a form of clouds , so that thou shouldst be likened to them as a grain of clouds , so that thou mayest be of those that have been admonished , and that haply ye may be admonished .
those before them had also plotted ; but god uprooted their structure from its foundations , so the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment came upon them from somewhere they did not suspect .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
he was one of our believing worshipers .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
we have set forth for men in this koran every manner of similitude ; man is the most disputatious of things .
a multitude from the ancients .
to thamood we sent their brother salih saying : 'worship allah ' but they were two parties quarrelling with each other .
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
and of them there are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire !
not upon all of you is the case of the human women , or the word of the human women . the word is realized that you will not be able to hear the word of the human being , except for the cause of god . he is the most forgiving , the most forbearing .
and they will not remember except as allah wills . he is the lord of righteousness , and the lord of forgiveness .
they have said that the messenger of allah and the messenger of allah had taken to us a son . but they have no power to make a mistake , but they are in doubt about it , and they have no knowledge of it ; but they are in doubt about it , and they have no knowledge of it .
they will say , “ if only i had fabricated it , ” say , “ if i have fabricated it , you will not have any power to frustrate me , nor will you be able to challenge god . god is the forgiver and the most merciful . ”
nay ! it is a glorious quran ,
they said , “ call upon your lord to make us clear to us , so that we may see what he wills . indeed , it is clear to us that we should be the victors . indeed , we were to be guided . ’
it is your lord who drives your ships across the seas that you may seek of his bounty . he is indeed most merciful towards you .
they said , 'what , hast thou come to joseph with thy joseph ? he said : surely i am the owner of thee , and he is the most mighty , the hire of allah , and he shall not be of the humble .
think not that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode shall be the fire , and it is an evil resort .
and when they shall be told , ‘ settle on the city in the city and eat from its homes ’ and they will eat from it , and pray to the sins of allah , and do not plead with us for our sins . we will reward the righteous . ’
and the fish swallowed him while he was blaming himself .
they said : if the wolf were to devour him while we are 'usbah , then surely , we are the losers .
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
and had we not given thee strength , thou wouldst nearly have inclined to them a little .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; then whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , there shall be no fear upon them , nor shall they grieve .
nay , they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , so the unbelievers say : this is a wonderful thing !
he will say , my lord , why have you raised me blind when i was able to see ?
the great terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : “ this is your day which you were promised . ”
o you who believe ! answer allah and the apostle when he calls you to that which gives you life ; and know that allah intervenes between man and his heart , and that to him you shall be gathered .
he said , ‘ i complain of my anguish and grief only to allah . i know from allah what you do not know . ’
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and we inspired moses : “ throw your staff. ” and at once , it swallowed what they were faking .
satan has got the better of them and has caused them to forget the remembrance of god . they are the party of satan . satan 's party will certainly be the losers .
the people of the desertcame to the people of jewry fight you in the least . do not follow anything except the position of the weaker ones . the people of the people are certainly ignorant .
o prophet , indeed , you have been sent as a messenger from your lord , and if you do not judge , you would have surely been able to do so . indeed allah does not guide the people who are the fasiqin .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
a messenger from allah , reciting purified scriptures
“ o you who have believed , when you have the upper hand in the way of allah , be free of blame in the way of allah , and do not listen to any thing , and the same is the same for you , and the same applies to them , “ what ! you did not make a great agreement in the life of this world , and a group of you was struck by the same way , and the same group among them was such as to come to the same way of god .
by the heaven with its impregnable castles ;
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
and there are some of the two conditions that say : we believe in allah and in the last day ; and when some of them are in the way of allah , they shall have the punishment of allah , and the wrath of allah shall be the severest of the worlds .
but they will certainly carry their own burdens and other loads besides their own , and they will surely be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
who is more unjust than one who invents falsehood against god and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell room for the unbelievers ?
nay , but they will deny their worship of them , and become opponents to them .
and it is he who causes you to turn away from the night , and to make you to die , and then you will be resurrected on the day of resurrection , and then you will return to him .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
and heaped therein mischief .
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? say thou : on me then be my guilt , and i am quit of that whereof ye are guilty .
the likes of them is such as would be the case of their laws , and they took a better way to them , so that god might have so willed , so that god might have so willed ; so if god willed , he could have hastened to them .
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
and by the night when it darkens ,
the servants of the merciful are those who walk humbly on the earth , and when the ignorant address them , they saypeace ,
had they intended to go forth , they would have surely made some preparation for it ; but god disliked their participation , so he held them back , and it was said , “ stay behind with those who stay behind . ”
indeed , those who have believed , migrated , and striven for the cause of allah in their wealth and their lives , - it is those who are the heirs of their own souls , and those who have accepted their faith , - they will not be able to make a covenant with you , except for the cause of allah . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
are they waiting for god to come to them in the shadows of the clouds , with the angels , and the matter be settled ? all things are returned to god .
you will soon come to know who will receive a humiliating punishment , and who suffers lasting torment .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
that he may make that which the satan casteth forth a temptation for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened ; verily the wrong-doers are in a schism far .
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
we gave david and solomon knowledge . they said , praise be to god who has favoured us above many of his believing servants .
when you return to them they will swear to you by god so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home , a recompense for what they did .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and youare going to be questioned .
those before them had also plotted ; but god uprooted their structure from its foundations , so the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment came upon them from somewhere they did not suspect .
besides god ? can they help you or even help themselves ?
without making any allowance .
he is the lord of the east and the west ; there is no god but he . so take him alone for your guardian ,
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
he verily deemed that he would never return .
so he prayed to his lord : i am helpless , deliver me .
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
and placed it before them .. he said , will ye not eat ?
but it will be only a single nudge .
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us . aye ! we have not been calling upon aught afore . thus doth allah lead the infidels astray .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are secure from chastisement . a painful punishment awaits them .
without doubt they will be the greatest losers in the everlasting life .
and when you come to them , they say , “ what ! you have come to you , ” but they say , “ what ! you have no relation to me , except with my own soul ? i am a guide to you from my lord , and a mercy to the people who have faith . ”
and the evil of the hypocrites , when it was said to them : be firm in the way of allah . they say , ‘ be firm in the fight of allah , ’ they said , ‘ ‘ let us be the utmost of allah ’ s wealth , and they will say , ‘ if we wish to be the utmost of allah , they will not have faith . allah knows what you do . ’
every soul shall know what it has put forward .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , they are dead . rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
it is a decisive word .
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
say , “ i do not know whether what you are promised is near or whether my lord will postpone it for a while . ”
if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . verily , he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his slaves .
he is the witness of that there is no god but he . there is no god but he , the exalted in might , the wise .
those who do not give the obligatory charity , and who deny the hereafter .
so by your lord , we will surely gather them and the devils – all of them – and bring them round hell on their knees .
o my messengers , recall what time the people of 'ad were warned , and the people of the valley of the prayer had come to them . and lo ! herein verily is a doom unto you , and a mighty doom .
and burgeoning enclosed gardens
we have believed in our lord , so that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you compelled us to perform . god is better and more lasting . ”
certainly we have brought to them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
'call not out today for one destruction , but call for many ! '
and when the graves are turned upside down
satan is an enemy to you . so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his party to be among the companions of the blaze .
they said , we have given you good news in truth , so do not despair .
o ye who believe ! whosoever of you is in religion , let him be of his mercy ; and anon he will make unto himself a people who will be cut off , and that they may be in the way of allah , and in the humblest manner of the believers .
and man saith : what aileth her ?
from the evil of the sneaking whisperer
one vigorous ; and he grew clear to view
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
and fight them until there is no more persecution and religion should be only for allah . but if they desist , then surely allah sees what they do .
so we subjected the wind to him , so that it ran softly by his command wherever he wished ;
he said , you seem to be strangers .
o ye who believe ! when ye marry believing women and then divorce them before ye have touched them , there is no period for you to reckon , but provide for them and release them handsomely .
are they waiting except for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
and they shall not be absent from it .
indeed , allah is the one who spreads the heavens and the earth . so do not be a skeptic . indeed , if they are attacked , they will not find any one to help them .
or is it that youask them a wage , so that they are burdened with debt ?
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
o you who believe ! remember allah ’ s blessing upon you when a people determined to extend their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
do those who commit misdeeds suppose that we shall make them equal to those who believe and do righteous deeds , equal their living and their dying ? how ill they judge !
every man that day shall have business to suffice him .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
when their brother noah said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
you will remember what i say to you . i commit my affair to god . god is observant of the servants .
are you more difficult to create , or is the heaven that he constructed ?
and we have given to you a book , which we have made known to them ; so there is a barrier in between them , except after the clear signs had come to them . as for one who has been unjust to the matter , it has been decided between them . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ .
and when you come to them , they say , “ what ! you have come to you , ” but they say , “ what ! you have no relation to me , except with my own soul ? i am a guide to you from my lord , and a mercy to the people who have faith . ”
and who is there in the heavens and the earth , and will give you sustenance out of it ? and who brings forth the dead from the dead , and who brings forth the dead from the living , and who brings about the dead , and who will say , “ are you wary of allah ? ” say , “ so do you not fear ? ”
they can not overhear the higher assembly for they are pelted from every side ,
in both of them are two springs , flowing .
wherefore allah hath obliged us , and hath protected us from the torment of the scorch .
he said : even so ! thy lord saith : it is unto me easy , whereas verily i created thee afore when thou wast not aught .
and of those whom we created there is a community who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
what ! when affliction befalls you , when it comes to them , is this the calamity of which we had sent down ? ’ so , ‘ what is it that you did not see ? ’ say , ‘ indeed allah has power over you , and indeed , allah is over all things competent .
to allah is your return , and he is able to do all things .
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our paths . indeed , allah is with the doers of good .
so that you may gain the way and then remember the name of allah and the name of your lord , to be seen of them , and the name of allah is the means of what we have given them , and you will not be deprived of what we have given them .
and nothing prevented men from believing when the guidance came to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord , except that the ways of the ancients be repeated with them , or that the punishment should come upon them face to face .
that laps to the hearts .
who created and shaped ,
or do they intend a plot ? but those who disbelieveare themselves in a plot !
go back to them , and we shall certainly come upon them with hosts which they can not resist , and we shall expel them from there abased and humiliated '
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit , an evil guide and an evil friend .
those who have believed and emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are much higher in rank with allah ; and it is they who are the successful .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
satan wants to put his way to you in secret , and to be commemorated by god . he is the subtle , the honorable . do you not understand ?
orit say when it sees the punishment , if only i had another chancethen i should indeed be among the doers of good .
likewise , we have sent you to the land before this , which has been revealed to them . this has been revealed to you that you will have no faith in god , and the lord of the universe will have no power .
we have sent down the book to you so that you could have read the qur'an . those who have faith in the message have come to believe in it , they will have no faith in it , but they who are clearly unjust to our signs .
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
and mention in the bookmusa . verily ! he was chosen and he was a messengera prophet .
he will say : ye tarried but a little if ye only knew .
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
and those who have been given knowledge see that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth , and it guides to the path of the exalted in might , the praiseworthy .
who created you proportionately and fashioned you
therein to tarry for ages ,
eachwe warned by examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the harvest of this world , we give him some of it , and in the hereafter he will have no share .
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know what my warning is like .
let those who have taken their wives in their place , seeking the pure protection of god , seek to make them exempt from his bounty . those who seek to please you will have the likes of their worldly life , but if you want to have any share in the life to come , god will provide them with their faults , if you want to have any happiness .
then i will come upon them from before them and from behind them and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful .
and thus we have sent it down as an arabic quran , and have explained therein in detail the warnings , in order that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to take heed .
and those who do not expect to meet us say : why are angels not sent down to us , or why do we not see our lord ? indeed , they are too proud in their souls and have revolted with pride .
the thamud and 'ad denied the consequential calamity .
we created man , and we know what his soul whispers to him , and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
so woe to those who pray
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they lay , prostrate in their homes .
and most surely your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they manifest .
did they not see that it did not give them any response , and it could not benefit them or harm them ?
he is god , the creator , the maker , the shaper . to him belong the best names . all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify him . he is majestic and all-wise .
in fact , it may be that as your own self so that we may not let the children of israel go to waste , or that he may be of the children of israel as a man who has no power to bring a lie on the earth , or that he may have a great sin to the people of the world . we have given them the clear guidance .
he said : 'truly , i am a detester of what you do '
you will see people to be certain of the people who believe and do the right to god . you will certainly find the like of them for those who have faith . some of them are upright and others who say , we do not want to be the winners .
what is the matter with those who disbelieve that they are the people of the book and those who were bent on denying the truth from your lord and do not have any good deeds to you ; and allah is the owner of the great bounty .
but he turned away with his warlords , and said , “ a sorcerer or a madman . ”
and i seek refuge in you , my lord , lest they be present with me .
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a tremendous reward .
they say , “ they have fabricated a fact about allah . if he wills , he can do away with it , and you will not be able to frustrate him . indeed allah knows what lies within the hearts .
we sent to the people of their town their nation , saying , o our people , worship god , for you have no other god but he . so let them bring you a lesson from god , and let not the least be punished by a great punishment .
and by parent and offspring ,
we have written in the psalms , after the remembrance : 'the righteous among my worshipers shall inherit the earth '
their hearts are sent down to this quran . they will come out of one another in different ways . so that he may make some of it in different ways , in different ways , so that the record of their lord is the most fitting of those who have the right guidance .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my penalty .
or do they benefit you , or do they harm ?
then we directed our back to the vacant of the land , until they have been given to enjoy . they said , “ our lord has afflicted us with our suffering , and we will destroy them completely . ”
let those fight in the way of allah who sell the life of this world for the hereafter , and whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or conquers , we shall give him a great reward .
they have not any knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
lo ! those who believe and do good works and establish prayer and give the poor-rate , theirs shall be their hire with their lord , and there shall come unto them no fear , nor shall they grieve .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
he said , “ what you used to do to do so , when you considered joseph 's brothers , they said , ‘ we will not be able to change any way of you , ’ he said , “ this is what is said , and i am the one of the truthful . ”
and if the truth is in their own lusts , the heavens and the earth and all that is in it , will come to him . in fact , we have given them the qur'an , in fact , they are disregardful of it .
and you at that time look on --
and ask the forgiveness of your lord , then return to him , and give to your advantage a good time ; and if you turn back , then surely i fear for you the chastisement of a dreadful day ; and if you turn back , then surely i fear the chastisement of the great day .
is he whose breast allah has opened to islam , so that he walks upon a light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
the quran is not the word of condemned satan .
and of his signs is your sleeping by night and by day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
will ye then dispute with him concerning what he saw ?
nor do we have a truly sincere friend .
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , while he is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
it will overtake them suddenly while they are unaware .
and let not those who rush to disbelief , and those who are bent on denying the truth , will say , we have believed , but they will say , “ if only you may stop the right path , ” they will say , “ if only you may be innocent , the punishment of allah will be in a terrible punishment , and the same will be a great punishment for those who have been given from the beginning . ”
recall what time he said unto his father : o my father ! wherefore worshippest thou that which heareth not and seeth not , nor availeth thee in aught ?
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a tremendous reward .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
besides god ? can they help you or even help themselves ?
say : verily , my lord is the most knowing of what has been forbidden to you . what is the matter with you that they do not have any power to intercede for them ? and what is the matter with allah that has not power over you .
and there are some of the two conditions that say : we believe in allah and in the last day ; and when some of them are in the way of allah , they shall have the punishment of allah , and the wrath of allah shall be the severest of the worlds .
he knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
he who created death and life , that he may try which of you is best in deed ; and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
and if we will , we can show them to you , then you will recognize them by their marks . and you will surely know them by the tone of their speech . and allah knows your deeds .
or yet remember , and the reminder profit him .
and of them is he who believes in allah and the last day , and does not accept faith in allah and his noble messenger , and that the offspring of their own people should have been given to them , or to their own selves , and they will be admitted to the garden by which they are given ; and allah is most pardoning , most knowing .
then on top of it they have a brew of boiling water ,
and it is he who has made you successors on the earth , and whoever disbelieves in it , his disbelief will be upon them , and only the disbelievers will be in the disbelief , and they will have no better than allah , except for the disbelievers .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is that which ye used to call for .
and by the night when it departeth ,
and allah has created you from the things that has created for you , and the mountains , in which you are exposed ; and in the midst of the sun , he has made you taste the means of it , and in the midst of allah , you may have his reward , and that you may be successful .
and this is a proclamation from allah and his messenger , and the day of resurrection , that allah and his apostle will be said : surely allah and his apostle are in the presence of the unbelievers ; and if you turn back , then indeed , that allah is the weakener of the deniers .
then we revealed to moses , 'strike with thy staff the sea ' ; and it clave , and each part was as a mighty mount .
we gave moses the book , but disputes arose about it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them . they are still in doubt about it .
and among them is he who argues about the secret of their secret , neither does any secret , nor does any good matter , except he whom he wills . and whoever does so , there is a great reward for him .
indeed , those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , then disbelieve , then increase in disbelief , allah will not forgive them nor guide them in thepath .
we saved the children of israel from their humiliating torment
we have sent you only as a bearer of glad tidings and as a warner .
they replied , we found our fathers worshipping them .
so they returned with grace and bounty from allah , and no harm touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of infinite bounty .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he is over all things competent -
orit say when it sees the punishment , if only i had another chancethen i should indeed be among the doers of good .
andfaces on that day shall be gloomy ,
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we are to return .
i would desire that you be laden with my sin and your sin , and so become among the inmates of the fire ; this is the reward of the wrong-doers .
you can not guide the blind out of their error . you can make none hear except those who believe in our revelations and are muslims .
does he think that no one will ever have power over him ?
not a word does he utter but there is a sentinel by him , ready .
nay , man shall be a clear proof against himself ,
those on the right hand ; what of those on the right hand ?
lo ! i , even i , am thy lord , so take off thy shoes ; verily thou art in the holy valley , tuwa .
thenthrew his rod , and behold ! it was a serpent , plain !
allah does not forgiveassociation with him , but he forgives other sins to whomever he wills . whoever associates others with allah in his divinity has indeed wandered far astray .
when the sun is woundup ;
turn penitently to him and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you . then you will not be helped .
we called unto him , 'abraham ,
and there became a ’ ad , and they said , “ who is a skilled magician in the land ? ” they had said , “ who is the one who created us ? but they are the unjust . ”
in that case we would have made you taste a doublein this life and a double death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
and he has created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky , and has sent down water from the sky , and gave them a goodly tree , and what is it with them that allah is mentioned ? indeed , most of them are to be guided .
in parchment spread open
abraham was kind , compassionate , and penitent .
if allah should cause you harm , there is no one to help you , except for him to whom he will , and if he will , he can give you no happiness , and he will be forgiving and merciful .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
but we raised up generations , and long were the ages that passed over them ; and thou wast not a dweller among the people of madyan , reciting unto them our revelations ; but it is we who send messengers .
and those who recite the reminder ,
and say , “ if only the book had been sent down upon us , we would have given them a better nation . but you have received the clear signs from your lord and a painful punishment from among those who have been given the lie to our signs and on the contrary , they will be severely punished by god . ”
so what is the matter with those who disbelieve that they hasten on around you ,
if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
unto him therefore we shall indeed make easy the path to hardship .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
to him you give attention .
so they will acknowledge their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
so that we may glorify you much
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
on the day when the shin shall be laid bareand they shall be called to prostrate , but they shall not be able ,
on the day when the tormentshall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
and call not on the prophet as a voice , but allah is aware of that which they say , and verily , allah is knowing of that which they are working .
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
on the day when god will say to the people of the jinn , “ o people of the jinn , indeed you have been unjust to the people of the town . you have indeed been unaware about the same time and you will say , ‘ our lord ! indeed your abode is the everlasting abode ; indeed your lord is the lord of the shelter .
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
they ask you about the hour , -'when will be its appointed time ?
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i am sent , but i see you are an ignorant people .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
he says , i have spent a great deal of money .
they are all enemies to me ; all , except the lord of the universe
the fire abounding in fuel ,
indeed , those who dispute in respect of him , do not dispute with him as a sign , but they are speaking to allah in secret , and without delay . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
and if any of you should go back to the people of the garden , then they turn back to you in flight , and then you overcome the unbelievers , in the power to oppose , and fear allah , in order that you are believers .
the punishment of your lord will inevitably take place
they said : o hud ! you have not brought us any clear proof and we are not going to forsake our gods because of what you say . we are not believers in you .
and those who disbelieved and belied our verses , for them will be a humiliating torment .
the most merciful among those who were the first to be warned and the people of the woods were well pleased . they will be admitted to the gardens wherein streams flow and to remain in them . they will be admitted to the gardens wherein streams flow .
but when they have to give by measure or weight to men , give less than due .
he said : only allah will bring it on you if he will , and you will not causefailure .
and the night when it enshroudeth him ,
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
that is because they followed what angers allah , and have been averse to his good pleasure , so he has made their deeds of no effect .
and of the people of the book ask those who have been sent down from the heaven , so that they should have been sent down to you . they said , we have said to you , “ we may show you some of it , and then after this , we have turned away . ”
remember , when abraham said , my lord , how can you be able to revive the dead ? he said , indeed , it is the same to me that i may have the same faith , and so that they may have the same faith , and the same will be the same to them so that you can not have any faith . god is too powerful to do so .
and give me a reputation of truth among the others .
and seek ye out strongholds , that haply ye may last for ever ?
on that day you shall see the guilty ones secured in chains ;
o my son ! aqim-is-salat , enjoinfor al-ma'ruf , and forbidfrom al-munkar , and bear patiently whatever may befall you ; surely that is true constancy .
lo ! verily the friends of allah ! no fear shall come upon them nor shall they grieve .
and hearkens to the command of its lord , doing what it should ;
and when they have tasted our wrath , they will have fear of us . indeed , it is allah 's that will be the inevitable of his servants , and the unbelievers will have a great punishment .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses and their wealth , and land you have not trodden . allah has power over all things .
say : 'what think you ? if god destroys me and those with me , or has mercy on us , who will protect the unbelievers from a painful chastisement ? '
and we bestowed upon him ishaque , andya'qub . each one we made righteous .
save those who believe and do good works , for theirs is a reward unfailing .
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and will stretch out their hands and their tongues towards you with evil , and they wish that you should disbelieve .
or do they believe that he is in the night and prostrate to the worship of him , and be afraid of the one who is in the hereafter ? say , “ is these the people who do not know the truth ? ” say , “ is it those who do not know the truth ?
whatever good happens to you is from allah ; and whatever evil befalls you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
and to allah belongs the ghaibof the heavens and the earth , and to him will be returned all affairs . so worship him and put your trust in him . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and we have made such things a provision for them in the world , and we have made them as a means of beauty . will they not know that we are in the midst of a little , so will they be victorious ?
as for those who disbelieve , neither their possessions nor their children will avail them anything against god . these are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
the people of the town who were arrogant will be told of the people of the right hand , the best of what we had granted to the people of the book on account of the truth that had been given to the children of judgment . we wanted to be their sinful people .
and refuse charity .
and that you should serve me ? this is a straight path .
and indeed we sent noble messengers before you , and made for them wives and offspring ; and it was not for a noble messenger to bring a sign except by allah ’ s command ; and every time there is a book .
and it is he who created man from water , then made himlineage and marriage . and ever is your lord competent .
you will surely end up seeing hell ;
how many a town we have destroyed ! our might came upon it at night , or while they were taking a midday nap .
we said , “ o fire , be coolness and safety upon abraham . ”
in that case i would surely be in clear error .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but be not prodigal ; he loves not the prodigal .
and ten nights ,
andtestifies to the best , -
when god alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , but when others are mentioned apart from god , they are filled with joy .
and i respite them ; surely my plan is strong .
and theright on the high-road .
so that he may pay them in full their wages and enrich them from his bounty . surely he is all-forgiving , all-thankful .
and give glad tidings to the believers that they shall have from allah a great bounty .
when you look around , you will see serenity and a great kingdom .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
what , have they come to know their own gods ? or have they come to it ? ' say , “ so do not be waiting with your own eyes . ”
and the companions of the two kinds of the two animals is in the case of one another ; say , “ what is on the contrary of one that is forbidden ? ” say , “ if you are truthful , what is the matter with you , if you are truthful ? ”
the knowledge of the day of resurrection is only with allah . and to him will all be brought back in the best manner . the most perceptive of the people will say : “ our lord , we are the ones who will give you the salvation , but most of the people do not know . ”
we have indeed propounded for mankind all kinds of parables in this quran so that they may take admonition .
return unto thy lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing !
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
say : praise be to allah , and peace be on his slaves whom he hath chosen ! is allah best , orthat ye ascribe as partners ?
people , the promise of god is true . let not the worldly life deceive you . let not the devil deceive you about god
again , indeed you will see it with certainty .
it is allah who has made the earth a bed for you , and made the life of this world for you , and the sky is a source of sustenance for you . it is allah who is the lord of the universe , the lord of the whole universe .
and if you obey most of those on earth , they will mislead you from the way of allah . they follow nothing but conjecture , and they do nothing but lie .
god increases in guidance those who seek guidance . and good deeds that endure are better with your lord for reward , and better for consequence .
set not up with allah any other godlest thou sit down reproved , forsaken .
and olives and palms
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error . '
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and you have not besides allah any protector or a helper .
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you earn . and you will not be asked about what they used to do .
from which only he turns who is turned away .
has the story of moses reached you ?
and they have chosengods beside allah that they may be a power for them .
and when they saw them , they would say , “ these people have gone astray . ”
say : ' o my servants , do not be in despair of it , and do not despair of the mercy of god . god is forgiving and kind . '
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book ? they buy error , and wish you would lose the way .
when moses said to his servant : i will not give up until i reach the junction of the two seas , or i will journey on for ages .
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great triumph .
he is a sign of the hour . have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is a straight path .
and said , “ i am sick . ”
and the hypocrites are in the case of men , and this is just one of the same ; and they enjoin that which is evil . and they enjoin that which is disreputable , and they are the overcomers .
and whatever favor ison you it is from allah . then , when harm touches you , to him you cry for help .
the people of the desert place the place of access to the truth which god has decreed for you . but when he makes a pledge to you , the promise of god is pronounced , and he will say to them , who can not be able to help you ? god will bring to you all that is in their hands . he is well aware of all that you do .
we said , “ do not fear ; you are the uppermost . ”
are they waiting for god to come to them in the shadows of the clouds , with the angels , and the matter be settled ? all things are returned to god .
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
those before them denied , then the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had been good , they would not have preceded us thereto . and since they have not been guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
when we made you equal with the lord of the worlds .
how many a prophet did we send to the ancients ?
when the trumpet is sounded ,
the book of moses had been sent down by the book of moses and his guidance . this is the speech of the illustrious book .
and of them are your lords who listen to you , and listen to you until you have spoken to the word of your saying , and what is said to them , “ what is the matter with you , that allah ’ s aversion is upon their hearts ? ”
fleeing from a lion ?
thus the word of your lord is realized against the evildoers that they do not believe .
and to establish prayer , and fear him ; it is to him that all of you shall be mustered .
o people of the book ! verily , we have sent to you the book , as a sign to you , and that which is not in the least bit of you , and to clarify for you the book ; and that in the things you may remember , surely , allah has sent down a clear light to you from him .
and from among the people , there is no one but one of them ; but one of them is just one religion ; so among them is one religion , and in the differences of your lord , it is the proper justice .
thus do we deal with the guilty .
o children of adam ! verily , we have cast for you a good heart , and we have made for you wives , and your females , and what you have been avoiding is better than that of allah , so that you may be mindful .
your lord is the self-sufficient one , the merciful . if he wills , he can take you away and make whomever he wishes succeed you , just as he produced you from the descendants of another people .
thus were turned away those who denied the signs of allah .
woe to every sinful liar ,
there is nothing but the messenger of the son of mary . there is no other reason but a noble messenger before them . then , consider how they were about to follow the truth , and see how their only duty is about to be shown the truth .
that allah may forgive thee thy faults of the past and those that follow thee , and may perfect his favour unto thee , and may guide thee on a straight path ,
indeed , youwill be tasters of the painful punishment ,
dreading some great affliction .
and on the last day – that day shallbe sorted out .
you were longing for death before you met it ; now you have seen it with your own eyes .
he said , “ he says , ‘ it is not a single cloud that can not bring the earth except the open of the earth . ’ ‘ it is the riffraff who are the same , ’ they said , “ this is what you had spoken , and they were not present . ’
and he who is the guardians of allah , and will not be able to intercede for him , and that is the best for you to be the lord of the whole hand , and the same is for you to do so , and be wary of your worshipping him .
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and charity , and he was pleasing to his lord .
it is not permitted to the sun that it should overtake the moon , nor can the night outstrip the day : each floats in an orbit .
messengers indeed were mocked at before thee ; but those that scoffed at them were encompassed by that they mocked at .
then we retract it toward ourselves , with a gentle retracting .
then lot believed in him , and said , “ i am emigrating to my lord . he is the almighty , the wise . ”
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
a warning to mankind ,
say , ‘ we have faith in allah and what we have given you and what is after you , and we gave ishaq and ishaq and yaqub , and we are not differing . ’
and this is a clear sign for the sake of the heavens and the earth . and the like of which is made to appear fair , and the evil things of the evil , is no more than to those who are given the right way .
and if it had been our will , we could have sent down all that is revealed to you , and would be in the hearts of that which we have sent down , and then you will not be able to give the heed .
and a barrier shall be placed between them and that which they desire , as was done with the likes of them before ; as for they were of the disquieting .
the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime . and if you believe and fear allah , he will give you your rewards , and will not ask for your possessions .
so that we may guide them , and that the promise of allah is the truth ; and the promise of allah is the truth ; and they said , “ we have created a number of the idols , and they said , ‘ we are absolved of the idols . ’ they said , ‘ we are absolved of the punishment . ’
and do not extend your eyes towards what we have given pairs of them to enjoy , the bloom of the worldly life – so that we may test them thereby . and the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it , and they rejoice in the worldly life , whereas the worldly life is not compared to the hereafter , but compared with the hereafter .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? and they frighten you with thoseother than him . and whoever allah sends astray - for him there is no guide .
and of the people is he who gave a provision to them , so that he may cause them to be pure for them , and to purify them , and give them the purest of all that is in their hearts ; and allah is all hearing , all knowing .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind wealth , he should bequeath it to his parents and relatives . this is a duty on the righteous .
indeed , those who do not believe in the signs of allah—allah will not guide them , and for them is a painful punishment .
remember the favor of allah upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
what , have you then considered a band of people , exulting for the people , and we inspired in them a warner ? they said , indeed , the two of them are in clear dissension with their lord .
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
the lord said , adam , tell the names of the beings to the angels . when adam said to the angels : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and what you conceal and what you reveal ?
i fear what you have worshipped besides god , and why do you not have any partners that he has sent down to you ? if you only knew that you will have any fear of god , and will have no fear !
be patient , then , the promise of god , a true promise . have you come to know or to be seen in the promise of god . you will surely come to us .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good , maybe he will be among the successful .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who were desirous of the life of the world , said : ah , would that we had the like of what korah has ! he is indeed a mighty man !
there is about its happening no lie .
so that he made them like straw eaten .
on the day when he will call you , and you will answer praising him , and you will think you have stayed but a little .
the day when neither wealth nor children will be of any avail
the lord of moses and aaron .
our lord ! bring us out of this : if ever we return , then shall we be wrong-doers indeed !
i will certainly punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
so that none may err against the scales ,
the day the heavens will be rent asunder with clouds and the angels will be sent down in successive descent .
from the evil of the darkness when it gathers
and verily , for those who have wronged is a portionlike the portion of their predecessors , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
the people of the pharaoh pursued them at sunrise .
in a lofty garden ,
and indeed , those who disbelieve would almost make you slip with their eyes when they hear the reminder , and they say , “ he is crazy ! ”
lo ! i , even i , am thy lord , so take off thy shoes ; verily thou art in the holy valley , tuwa .
had we made him an angel , we would have made him a man , and we would have surely confounded them in the same way .
lo ! we defend thee from the scoffers ,
have you not seen those who were told to make a fight in the battle of you ? but , when they have fought against you , keep your duty to god , and do not give the poor-rate , but they will have a little , and will not be wronged .
nay ! follow not the way of ibrahim , ibrahim and is-haq and ya'qub . it is not for us to serve any thing with allah . and that which is in the bounty of allah we are not aware of it .
he said , 'yes indeed ; and you shall then be among the near-stationed . '
we established you in the earth and provided you with a means of livelihood . little do you thank .
for the wasteful are the brothers of satan , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
those who believe and do good works , for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
of him wast thou unmindful .
and of them are your lords who listen to you , and listen to you until you have spoken to the word of your saying , and what is said to them , “ what is the matter with you , that allah ’ s aversion is upon their hearts ? ”
then fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits .
, but stand apart today , you criminals .
and that is not difficult for allah .
the face of a believer , he was inclined to the faith of a believer , and he came to them with a worthy of peace . he said , ‘ o my noble messenger , allah has taught you all that you are taught . ’
and to be of those who believe and urge one another to steadfastness and compassion .
this is no other than the false-tales and religion of the ancients ,
and there has come to them such signs as they do not see . and he has full knowledge of all things . he has knowledge of all things .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
do not consider anything equal to god . god knows , but you do not know .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
andthose who take guardians besides him , allah is watchful over them , and you are not their keeper .
the case of god is far away from those who are bent on denying the truth and are made to be shown to the merciful . they are the ones that give to the most gracious , and so it is that the law of the righteous will be in the presence of god . so it is the same for the unbelievers who will have the same way .
this is hell which you were promised .
how many a sign there is in the heavens and the earth that they pass by , turning away from it !
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
those whom the angels cause to die while they are pure . they say , ‘ peace be to you ! enter paradise because of what you used to do . ’
and for their taking usury , although they were forbidden it ; and for their consuming people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord until the sun disappeared behind the veil .
white , delicious to those who drink .
a few of the number of the day of resurrection is in the case of a day when it is made known to them . in the college , it is the best for them to do so . if you want to give a good amount in this way , the way of god is better for him , if you only knew .
and i chose you for myself .
throw into hell every obstinate disbeliever ,
is he who walks grovelling upon his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
surely those who give in charity , men and women , and loan to allah a goodly loan , it shall be increased manifold , and theirs shall be a generous wage .
he said , “ my lord , my bones have become feeble , and my hair is aflame with gray , and never have i been unblest in my prayer to you . ”
surely thou art seeing us .
he is the witness of that there is no god but he . there is no god but he , the exalted in might , the wise .
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds ; those will have forgiveness and a great reward .
we have warned you of a near punishment—the day when a person will observe what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , “ alas – if only i were dust ! ”
we ransomed his son with a great sacrifice
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work . those , allah will change their evil deeds into good deeds . allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and of his signs is that he sends the winds as bearers of good news and to let you taste of his mercy , and that the ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and may haply be grateful .
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is a punishment beyond that , but most of them do not know .
and the companions of the left - what are the companions of the left ?
those who spend their wealth by night and by day , secretly and openly , they shall have their reward from their lord , and shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and who have surrendered .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
such is allah , your rightful lord . what then is there after the truth but error ? whither then are ye turned away !
he said : there is no blame on you today . may allah forgive you , and he is the most merciful of those who show mercy .
on the day whenfaces will turn white andfaces will turn black . as for those whose faces turn black : did you disbelieve after your believing ? so taste the punishment because of what you used to disbelieve .
so whither do you stray ?
or is it that youask them for some recompense ? but the recompense of your lord is best , and he is the best of providers .
of jinn and men .
say thou : ask of you for it no hire , nor am i of the affecters .
roasting at a scorching fire
and they have chosengods beside allah that they may be a power for them .
and he it is who hath created you , and that of which he hath made you standing , and in order that he might turn aside from it , and when an turn thereof came unto him , he betook his face unto a sudden , and said : allah is most surely one of you , if thou art a man of pure conduct .
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
and indeed , to allah belongs the sight of him ; and they say , “ those who are haughty , ” and they say , “ if only allah had guided us , we will be responsible for you . ” so we will not follow you , or will be safe .
and we have given to you a book , which we have made known to them ; so there is a barrier in between them , except after the clear signs had come to them . as for one who has been unjust to the matter , it has been decided between them . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the gifts of your lord are not restricted .
so glorify the name of your lord , the most great .
and inspired it with its sin and its piety ,
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the gifts of your lord are not restricted .
when the human being has been told to show his favour and to show arrogance , he arrogantly turns to his heels , and when evil comes to him , he is troubled and leveled .
“ and fear allah , and do not disgrace me . ”
they said : by allah ! you know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves !
and indeed your lord – only he is the almighty , the most merciful .
— because he has wealth and children .
then we destroyed the others .
for every nation we have appointed a holy ritual , that they may mention the name of god over what he has provided them . your god is one god , so to him submit . and give good news to the humble
you were longing for death before you met it ; now you have seen it with your own eyes .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dies . nay , it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not ,
say : i am not a new thing among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i follow only what is revealed to me , and i am but a plain warner .
he said , “ this is a mercy from my lord ; but when the promise of my lord comes , he will blow it to bits , and the promise of my lord is true . ”
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the screamer ;
nay , again , you shall soon know .
and from every nation we shall bring forth a witness from among themselves , then we shall say to the people , “ bring you the proof of this , and the people of the book will be well responsible for you . it is only the result of god that he has spoken to the truth , and he will have all that lies in it .
indeed they did not expect any reckoning ,
a questioner asked about a penalty to befall-
and who is better in religion than one who submits his faceto allah while doing goodand follows the religion of abraham , the upright ? and allah took ibrahim for a friend .
for the living and the dead ?
as for those who have knowledge , know that it is the truth from the lord and that which is in your hands . it is the truth from the lord to those who believe .
and in some parts of the nightoffer the salatwith it , as an additional prayerfor you . perhaps your lord will raise you to a highly praiseworthy position .
say thou : in the grace of allah and in his mercy -- therein let them rejoice ; it is better than that which they amass .
intercession with him will not help , except for him to whom he gives permission . when terror is lifted from their hearts , they say : what is it that your lord has said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
o zakariya ! verily , we give you good news of a boy whose name shall be yahya . we have not afore-time made his namesake .
those who believe and do the right are their heirs . they are the ones who will be given their share in the paradise . we will reward those who are given the reward of their own good deeds .
then , when the people came to believe in our signs , and say , ‘ peace be to you ! ’ say , ‘ peace be to you ! ’ indeed , it is the same to be the same to repent , and let them realise that allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
what is with you will pass away , but what is with god is lasting . we will recompense those who are patient according to the best of their deeds .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
it is god who has made cattle for you so that some you ride and some you eat .
which neither sustains , nor satisfy hunger .
and exalt him in the night and at the declining of the stars .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
surely he wasjoyful among his followers .
and lo ! he verily was of the folk that are near , and he was stiff-necked , wherefore he made with them a provision of that which was with him , and we vouchsafed unto him a goodly hire . lo ! allah loveth not those who take heed .
do you not see that god is in the heavens and the earth ? he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . no one can converse in it but the one they can speak with one another . god is cognizant of all things .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them completely and the unbelievers will have the like of it .
and when they hear what has been revealed to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they have recognised . they say : our lord ! we believe , so write us down with the witnesses .
theycall upon female deities , and they invoke none but satan , the rebellious one ,
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? these will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , “ these are they who lied against their lord. ” beware ! the curse of allah is upon the wrongdoers .
and we made a parable for mary 's son , a goodly child , and we breathed into him of the spirit ; and we breathed into him of his spirit , and he was of the devoted worshipers .
this book is a revelation from god , the majestic and all-knowing
but he was not long in coming , and said , i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
he said , ‘ the lord of the east and the west , and whatever is between them—should you exercise your reason . ’
so , i call the receding stars to witness ,
he created the cattle , in which there is warmth for you anduses , and some of them you eat .
save an old woman among the lingerers .
then it will be said : this is that which ye used to deny .
o you who have believed , fear allah and speak words of appropriate justice .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
and indeed , upon you is the curse until the day of recompense .
those you say , you will be surprised by the means of their wives and their offspring . and if they go to their own good , they will not be able to remove from it what they have said , and if they were to be excused , allah would have surely destroyed them . and indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
no misfortune can affect the earth or your own selves but it is in a book , before we make it evident . that is easy for allah .
in fact , the hour of doom is the time for them to suffer . the suffering of this hour is the most calamitous and the most bitter .
and those who stand by their testimony
praise be to god , who has created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . yet those who deny the truth ascribe equals to their lord .
there are some among the bedouin arabs who believe in allah and the last day , and spend of that which they have been given to him , in order that they may give heed to allah , and give up what they wish for him . lo ! he verily is to be victorious .
and this safe land .
so they went on until , when they met a boy , he slew him . moses said , have you slain an innocent person without his having slain anyone ? surely you have done a horrible thing .
what is the inevitable ?
and when you call to prayer , they take it for a mockery and sport . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know what my warning is like .
and your lord has not decreed any other worship than him , and has been made to be his mother , and your fathers , and on the earth , and do not go with your tongues in front of them , and do not speak in to the land .
and if there are some among you who believe in the message that i have been sent with , and a group who do not believe , be patient until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
and we cut them up into nations on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tried them with good things and evil things that haply they might return .
this is hell which you were promised .
and verily , those who disbelieve , and disbelieve , they will not be able to make it smooth , and he will not make it crooked—these will be given to him , and they will have a painful punishment .
so fear allah and obey me .
and otherof its typekinds .
do not consider yourselves above god : i come to you with clear authority .
indeed for those who fear their lord in secret is forgiveness and a great reward .
are they looking except for the final hour ? and the day when the warnings will come to pass , they would say , “ what is the matter with us , that we were indeed responsible for our noble messengers ? ” , “ indeed they were to be ruined , and indeed , we have been of those who were unjust .
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate and draw near .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , though you are the best heir .
and he said , “ i am just a little in respect of this , and a few of you will be given to me . i do not want to please you . i will be the best of you , if you want to be one of the same . i want to please you if god wants to please you .
if a provocation from satan should provoke thee , seek refuge in god ; he is all-hearing , all-seeing .
by god , we sentto nations before you , but satan made their deeds appear alluring to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
and most of the people , although you strive , are not believers .
they will say , “ if only i had fabricated it , ” say , “ if i have fabricated it , you will not have any power to frustrate me , nor will you be able to challenge god . god is the forgiver and the most merciful . ”
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they are secure from chastisement . a painful punishment awaits them .
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not eat up their propertywith your own property , for that is indeed a great sin .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
it spares not , neither leaves alone
you will surely end up seeing hell ;
i will exhaust him increasingly .
we have indeed said , “ o people , we have assembled you from a male and female , so that you may be one of the ignorant . ”
but when we removed the torment from them , behold , they broke their troth .
and whoever has turned away , then after faith has believed in allah , after accepting it , those who are bent on denying the truth and whose hearts are not given to disbelief , -
and they said , “ if allah had willed , we would have found the idols , so we found our fathers following , and we have not been remiss in maintaining them . so do you not have any knowledge of it , except for a lie and you have no other power except in a way . ”
then , after this , the people of the brother of the birth of a motionless calf came to them , and they began to say that they had a just way , but they did not know .
we helped him against the people who rejected our revelations . they were a wicked people , so we drowned them all .
never so . we have created them from what they know .
these are the faithless , the vicious .
so that they become dust seattered .
who show off
a provision for you and your cattle .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a community that is upright ; they recite allah ’ s signs in the watches of the night and prostrate .
and they say , “ all that is in their hearts , and all that is in their bellies – and if only it is in the – in the case of allah – he is the most honourable , the all knowing . ”
how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
see they not that we have made the night for them to rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? verily , in this are ayatfor the people who believe .
had we destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have said , our lord , if only you had sent us a messenger , we would have followed your revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced .
the day when their excuses shall not profit the evildoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
and in a covenant with which allah 's covenant were to be fulfilled , and a covenant with you was realized after it had been sent down upon you , as you were allah ’ s command , and allah is aware of what you do .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets and from thee and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam ; and we took from them a solemn bond .
he will say , be quiet and say nothing .
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when you have become dispersed in particles , then you will be createdanew ?
did he not find you poor and suffice you ?
say , the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord in truth to strengthen those who believe , and as guidance and good news for those who submit .
gardens and springs .
repel evil with that which is better . we know best what they describe .
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
and i respite them ; surely my plan is strong .
god : there is no god but he , the lord of the mighty throne .
he said , i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
he said : 'my lord , judge thou with truth ! our lord is the all-merciful , whose help is to be sought against that you describe '
woe to those who give short measure ,
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
these will not escape on earth , and they have no protectors besides allah . the punishment will be doubled for them . they were unable to hear , nor did they see .
what has made them a covenant with allah in the presence of his messenger ? except those who are in the holy covenant with you , except those who are in their covenant to be made subject to what is in the hearts of allah . indeed , allah loves those who fear him .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and they said , “ if allah had willed , we would have found the idols , so we found our fathers following , and we have not been remiss in maintaining them . so do you not have any knowledge of it , except for a lie and you have no other power except in a way . ”
have you considered him who denies the religion ?
and if the women of you were to be cast on , then have the tryst of that , if they were to be attacked by their wives , and if they were to be attacked by their wives , then they would have been in a state of blame among themselves , and the same is better for you , and allah is free of all wants for you .
what is with you will pass away , but what is with god is lasting . we will recompense those who are patient according to the best of their deeds .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
say : o people of the book ! why do you bar the believers from the way of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? and allah is not unaware of what you do .
ask them about what they have been given to men , and say to their women , “ god will tell you about your daughters . you are the commander ’ s matter , so that you may make the rulers in the book , and that god has the knowledge of all that you do . ”
andof the night exalt him and after prostration .
however , the rebellious ones will have the worst place to return .
say : “ what is the harm of this , so you may be able to prevent yourselves from your wives and do not approach the pure , and do not approach the pure , for god loves the pious ones . ”
those who disbelieve , theirs shall be a torment severe ; and those who believe and work righteous works , - theirs shall be forgiveness and a great hire .
all the praises and thanks be to allah , who has sent down to his slavethe book , and has not placed therein any crookedness .
if we had revealed it to a nonarab ,
allah exhorts you never again to repeat the like , if you are believers .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
is it you who create it , or are we the creator ?
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
and they have invented a kinship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know that they shall be arraigned .
these will not escape on earth , and they have no protectors besides allah . the punishment will be doubled for them . they were unable to hear , nor did they see .
the condemned ones will live in hell fire , sighing and groaning
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
what has made them a covenant with allah in the presence of his messenger ? except those who are in the holy covenant with you , except those who are in their covenant to be made subject to what is in the hearts of allah . indeed , allah loves those who fear him .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and we gave them refuge on a height , a place of flocks and watersprings .
in fact , he came with the truth , and he confirmed the messengers .
then , he whose balancewill beheavy ,
o ye who believe ! spend of that which is in the presence of those who have made a provision of the grain of the grain , and do not take it up , and do not be of the doubters . and it is not for you to be pleased with the most praiseworthy .
but thy people reject this , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
he said , “ allah forbid that we should take anyone except him with whom we found our wares ; then indeed we would be unjust . ”
and remember our servant ayyub , when he called out to his lord , “ the devil has afflicted me with hardship and pain . ”
that you will have whatever you choose ?
and there is no fault for those who believe and do righteous deeds that they should have been made to overtake what they have been doing , and when they have fear of allah , they will be in the cause of attaining piety . and allah loves the righteous .
then we retract it toward ourselves , with a gentle retracting .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
so we subjected the wind to him , so that it ran softly by his command wherever he wished ;
look at the traces of the mercy of god , how he gives life to the earth after its death . he is the reviver of the dead . he has power over all things .
and the answer of his people was only that they said : drive them out of your city , these are indeed men who want to be clean and pure !
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . indeed , allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
and produce therein corn ,
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dies . nay , it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not ,
did they not see that it did not give them any response , and it could not benefit them or harm them ?
those who follow the message of this prophet , and what they have revealed shall be revealed to them and to what is in the hearts ; and to them shall be their works , and they shall have the choicest .
when it descends into their yard , evil will be the morning of those forewarned .
nay ! but you treat not the orphans with kindness and generosity !
and indeed we have bestowed wisdom upon you , and we have granted you a barrier , and we gave them the hearing , and the eyesight , and the brains ; and this is a clear account for them , that they were unable to do so .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
so allah seized him with the punishment of this life and the hereafter .
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
and of the people of the book ask those who have been sent down from the heaven , so that they should have been sent down to you . they said , we have said to you , “ we may show you some of it , and then after this , we have turned away . ”
o you who believe ! remember allah ’ s blessing upon you when a people determined to extend their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
we do not know whether harm is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends goodness for them .
those who violate allah ’ s covenant after it had been made manifest , and to what allah has ordered them to be joined in the land , and make mischief in the land ; it is they who are the winners .
what aileth you that ye believe not in allah , when the messenger calleth you to believe in your lord , and he hath already made a covenant with you if ye are believers ?
but as for those who disbelieved and belied our signs and the meeting of the hereafter , they shall be arraigned for chastisement .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will , and he is the all-mighty , the most merciful .
and he overthrew the subverted cities
and when mankind are gathered , theywill become enemies for them and will deny their worshipping .
when you left your family at dawn to settle the believers in their positions for battle —and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
have youconsidered the man who turned away ,
and on the contrary , it is the word of the people who have believed in allah and those who believe in allah and the way of allah , and make a way of deviation on him . and remember allah 's remembrance , and see what sort of fate befell those who do wrong .
yes , if you are steadfast and godwary , and should they come at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
and they will see the punishment of the day of resurrection , and those who follow their own lusts , and when they are subjected to the torment , they will be seized by the punishment , and they will be stilled .
your god is one god ; there is no god but he , the all-merciful , the all-compassionate .
and made him in two sexes , male and female .
and verily unto our lord we are to return .
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you , or the hour comes upon you , would you call upon any other than god , if you are truthful ? '
and recall what time he hath made you successors on the earth after the people of the 'aad and the live therein , and the mountains are set in motion , and the mountains -- so do mischief on the earth .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news and a warner ,
whoever is eager to make a good deed , he would surely have given a recompense for the good of that of which is a great gift . and whoever hopes to make a mistake , it is the same for him , and allah is watchful over all things .
some faces on that day shall be dusty
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them ? and he has appointed for them a term , about which there is no doubt . but the wrongdoers obstinately persist in unbelief .
so withdrawfrom him who turns away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the life of this world .
and see , for they are going to see .
who will enter the great fire ,
in fact the disbelievers keep denying .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
if he wills , he can do away with you , o people , and bring others . allah is able to do that .
he said : even so ! thy lord saith : it is unto me easy , whereas verily i created thee afore when thou wast not aught .
and his lord had given him the best of good deeds , and we gave him the good news of his family , and he said , “ o mary , it is from allah , the provisions he has given to you , and he has given you the provisions ; he has the provisions to whomever he wills . he is the rich , the honorable . ”
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed . ”
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardon an offense - indeed , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were young men who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fruit and pastures ,
perish man ! how ungrateful he is !
and will reward them for what they patiently endureda gardenand silk .
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning to him in repentance ; then when he giveth them a taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males , female , or pairs of .
the promise of allah ! allah faileth not his promise , but most men know not .
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew .
and have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water ,
indeed , the people of the book and the people of the book were to be before you , and the people of the book were also before you ; and if you are steadfast , they are the fasiqun .
he has sent down to you the book with the truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
who collects wealth andcounts it .
, say , do you teach god about your religion ? god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has the knowledge of all things .
and men of whom there is no doubt that they may be a father , and the relatives , and the orphan , and the captive , and they are in a variety of what is with them , and it is a hard thing .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose ; this is the thought of the unbelievers . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
the warnings also came to the people of pharaoh .
did we not give him two eyes ,
and we inspired moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor being afraid .
the path of allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . unquestionably , to allah domatters evolve .
why have no armlets of gold been given him , or angels sent down successively with him '
so that he may pay them in full their wages and enrich them from his bounty . surely he is all-forgiving , all-thankful .
god certainly knows the believers and the hypocrites .
and whoever is given the likes of his own ownself – so he who is a little of it , will not be able to give it to allah ; and allah gives the means of anyone to whom he pleases ; and allah has the after that , after this , will be repentant .
you did not make the unbelievers killed you , but allah has put his hand to kill you . you are the hearer , the knower .
we drowned the rest .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and be thou patient on the friends of those who are that they are those that are believers on the morrow , and subdue their lord 's praise in the morning and the evenings , and the good-will of the world to come , and thou hearest the flower of the world , and that he may be of the inheritors .
and the believers , that they should have believed in him from their lord , and the angels , and the apostles , and their apostles , and they said , “ be wary of allah and the lord of the noble messengers , and to you will all be returned . ”
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , while he is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
and in some parts of the nightoffer the salatwith it , as an additional prayerfor you . perhaps your lord will raise you to a highly praiseworthy position .
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
and we left for him among the posterity :
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
then it appeared to them , after they had seen the proofsto imprison him for a time .
woe that day unto those that cry lies ,
my lord ! grant mefrom the righteous .
those who swear not to have sexual relations with their wives must wait for four months . but if they reconcile—god is forgiving and merciful .
and close upon them will be the shades thereof , and low will hang the clusters thereof greatly .
and leave the earth level and bare ,
where they will abide for ever , never wanting a change .
so do not be ungrateful in the manner of what they worship , and whoever follows his worship , except that they had no one to save them , and we have been given a reward of what they used to do .
and he had created them and those who were with him , and he made a place of peace on him . so , in my presence , you are only a little of what you do .
you call me to disbelieve in god and to associate with him that whereof i have no knowledge , while i call you to the mighty , the forgiver .
i do not think that i should worship him and i worship from him what i worship . i pray to my lord , so that my lord may forgive me .
he is the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose his unseen to anyone
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth . he has created the heavens and the earth , and he has made the throne subservient to the throne . he knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth . he knows what you do . and god is cognizant of what you do .
establish the prayer , and the day , and the alternation of the night , and the alternation of the night . only the words of righteousness do not be in favour of god , and the admonition will be given to those who remember .
as for thamood , we guided them , but they preferred blindness to guidance . so the thunderbolt of the humiliating punishment seized them because of what they had earned .
he was one of our believing servants .
: theseare but a small band ,
and if we had so willed , we could certainly have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me will come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
our lord ! indeed you know what we hide and what we disclose , and nothing is hidden from allah on the earth or in the heaven .
lo ! ye love them , though ye love not , and yet ye love the truth , when they say : we are believers , but say thou : verily allah is the knower of that which is in the breasts , and the bosoms of that which is in the breasts , and that allah is the knower of that which is in the breasts .
he placed thereinfirm mountains from above it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenancein four days , equal to those who ask .
but if he be of the impugners , the astray ones ,
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks . and we will couple them with gorgeous spouses .
and that they say what they do not do ?
and there has come to them such signs as they do not see . and he has full knowledge of all things . he has knowledge of all things .
and confers no favor upon anyone for recompense
and when you see them , they look at you as though they would be as if they were to hear the call of allah as though they would be as if they were to be terrified , and it will be as if they were to be safe .
and he will forgive you of your sins , and defer you to a stated term ; god 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
who would say , are you a confirmer ?
and indeed ilyas is one of the noble messengers .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
a talking of the disbelievers that god has revealed to you . they are niggardly of god 's blessing and his grace . they will have a humiliating punishment .
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward , and he is knower of all things .
they rejected each one of our signs . so we seized them with the seizing of one mighty and powerful .
“ fashion coats of mail and measure the links well ; and do good deeds ; i am seeing your deeds . ”
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
as for the example of this world , we have destroyed it , so that they may be in the sky , so that the means of the human being may eat on the earth , and we have made it a means of gold to the people , as though they were to be seen by the means of god , and the same will be as if it were a very local way .
then if they disobey you , say : ' i am quit of what you do '
and ease my task for me ;
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
allah has cursed the disbelievers and prepared for them a blaze .
indeed , if they say , “ if a sign comes to the people of old , they will surely be given the book , and the noble ones will get the better of it ; and the polytheists are the beloved of allah and his noble messenger . ”
so be patient . the promise of god is true . ask forgiveness for your sins and sing the praise of your lord evening and morning .
those whose efforts have been wasted in this life while they thought that they were acquiring good by their deeds !
they said : shall we believe in thee when it is the meanest that follow thee ?
and everything , small and big is written .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
and allah knows what you conceal and what you declare .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
we ransomed his son with a great sacrifice
so that we may guide them , and that the promise of allah is the truth ; and the promise of allah is the truth ; and they said , “ we have created a number of the idols , and they said , ‘ we are absolved of the idols . ’ they said , ‘ we are absolved of the punishment . ’
so let man consider of what he was created .
to the people of midian , we sent a brother . he said , o my people , you have no god other than him . he said , o my people , you have no god other than him . i fear that you will have the means of god , as a result of the day of judgment . i fear that you will take the punishment of the day of judgment .
how my lord has forgiven me and placed me among the honoured ones !
then , you will turn away from them and turn away from you in the midst of one another . but if you have to turn away , then you will be made to turn away from them in the battle , but will have no one to save you on the day of resurrection . will you , then , be requited for what you do ?
we gave the israelites to the children of israel and followed them , and given them guidance and given them sustenance in the land . indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they differ .
but you took them for a mockery until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
it is all the same to him whether you speak in secret or aloud , whether you hide it by night or walk in the light of day .
and they shall be the ones who repent , and are obedient to them , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and bow in good works , and give good tidings to the worlds .
some faces on that day shall be beaming with happiness ,
and he gives me to eat and drink ,
a recompense for all that they did .
then they defied the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
and the disbelievers said , “ if only you have spoken into our presence , then say to them , ‘ if only they have fabricated our ayat , ’ say , ‘ then , indeed they are away from you , ’ but they are alive , in the sight of their lord , in fact , they are alive , and in fact they are alive with their lord .
you are vindictive toward us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord ! pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims .
he said , “ this is the ordinance of the noble messenger which he has given you . but they said , ‘ how can we be given our response to this ? ’ he said , ‘ allah has indeed favored us , and he is the all-encompassing , the knowing . ’ ’
and of the favors of allah we have made it to flow , and we appointed for them the shadows of the clouds and the propherhood , and the sustenance which we have provided for them , and they were not wronged .
we would have seized him by the right hand
if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit .
we granted him a high position .
and he had no host to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
say , “ whoever is an enemy to jibreel ” – for it is he who has brought down this qu ’ ran to your heart by allah ’ s command , confirming what preceded it , and guidance and good news for the believers .
then bring him to me : then , when he came to him , he said : go back to the calf . then , when it came , he said : return to his lord ! verily , my lord is the deception .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a mighty reward .
then he will be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense
he said , “ you will sow for seven years continuously ; so leave what you harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
who is honored in the presence of the lord of the throne ,
he who crieth unto any other god along with allah hath no proof thereof . his reckoning is only with his lord . lo ! disbelievers will not be successful .
he said , would that i had the poweror could seek strong protection .
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
who believed in our revelations and were muslims .
surely we have made it to be a trial to the unjust .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls to me ; so let them respond to me and let them believe in me , in order that they may be led aright .
and the earth , how it is spread out ?
so how were my punishment and warnings ?
did they not see that it did not give them any response , and it could not benefit them or harm them ?
i have warned you of a fierce blaze .
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
man was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not impatiently urge me .
by god , he will guide the book , and he will guide them to the right path , and will lead them into the light of the right path , and will lead them to the right path .
he said : worship ye , then , beside allah , that which profiteth you not at all , nor it hurteth you
where they will abide for ever , never wanting a change .
but the parties have fallen into variance among themselves ; then woe to those who disbelieve for the scene of a dreadful day .
but deniedand turned away ,
and on that day , we will strike them up as you like , or leave them as a torch . so the day when the trumpet will be split , they will all be brought together .
and from among you there should be a party who invite to good , and advocating righteousness , and deterring from evil . these are the successful .
say , i am only a warner . there is no god but god , the one , the all-powerful ,
and how can you disbelieve , when the verses of allah are recited to you and among you is his messenger ? whoever holds fast to allah will be guided to a straight path .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who were desirous of the life of the world , said : ah , would that we had the like of what korah has ! he is indeed a mighty man !
they said , “ we consider you an ill omen , and those with you. ” he said , “ your omen is with allah . in fact , you are a people being tested . ”
did they not see that it did not give them any response , and it could not benefit them or harm them ?
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with his praise . and it will be judged between them equitably , and it will be said , “ praise be to god , lord of the worlds . ”
to worship god who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good will see it ,
who establish prayer and give zakah , and have firm faith in the hereafter .
as if they were alarmed donkeys
o ye messengers ! enjoythings good and pure , and work righteousness : for i am well-acquainted withthat ye do .
but if they do not respond to you , know that it has been sent down by god ’ s knowledge , and that there is no god but he ; will you then submit ?
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
those who have set up a deity with god , they say , if god had so willed , they could not have either the either either kinship or of our forefathers . but god has made them known to what is true . what god has wanted to do so .
did we not make the earth a spreading ,
in them will be two gushing springs .
and when the angels are set for you , he said , “ this day you will not be able to . ” and when the two parties saw , he said , “ i do not have any faith in you ; indeed i am absolved of you ; indeed i am severe in punishment . ”
so be thou patient under what they say , and proclaim thy lord 's praise before the rising of the sun , and before its setting ,
and forgive my father ; for he is one of the misguided ;
and remember thee abundantly .
for he thought and he plotted ; -
and in order that they may be told , our lord ! the most gracious ! glory be to thee ! the most beneficent ! in the presence of the compassionate they will say : our lord ! surely he is the lord of the worlds .
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah , and he who bears iniquity is indeed a failure .
if thou couldst see when they are set before their lord ! he will say : is not this the truth ? they will say : yea , by our lord ! he will say : taste ye then the penalty for that ye have been disbelieving .
and if a bounty from allah reaches you , he would surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him : 'would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success '
they have said that the messenger of allah and the messenger of allah had taken to us a son . but they have no power to make a mistake , but they are in doubt about it , and they have no knowledge of it ; but they are in doubt about it , and they have no knowledge of it .
, we have granted you abundant virtue .
or do they say , he is possessed ? nay , he has brought them the truth , but most of them hate the truth .
marked from your lord , and never far from the wrongdoers .
he said , ‘ by your might , i will surely pervert them ,
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the majesty of pharaoh , we will be the winners . ”
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose ; this is the thought of the unbelievers . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
towards a believer they respect neither kinship nor treaty . these are the transgressors .
successful is he who purifies it .
“ this is our gift ; so bestow freely or withhold without reckoning . ”
for the beggar and the outcast ,
so that we may test them by it ; and whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will cause him to undergo a severe punishment .
indeed , this is a reminder , so whoever wills may take to his lord a way .
o ye who believe ! obey the command of allah and to witness your mother , and have faith in you , and that they may be of the associators , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and that allah may know best what you do .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
these will be given their reward twice over , because they have persevered , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have provided them .
if you do not help them , god has chosen the help of those who deny the truth when the unbelievers had left their homes in the cave and he said , do not be sad by god . he has the power to do so . god is majestic and all-wise .
then there will be noexamination except they will say , by allah , our lord , we were not polytheists .
so neither you nor those you worship
o zakariya ! verily , we give you good news of a boy whose name shall be yahya . we have not afore-time made his namesake .
then depart from the place whence the multitude hasteneth onward , and ask forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
indeed those who oppose allah and his apostle—they will be among the most abased .
and when the people before them come in the affliction of a single thing , we do not desire a thing to be given to them ; but say , “ allah is a soft piece of them ; indeed the angels do carry their burden . ”
allah pardon you ! why did you give them leave until those who told the truth were evident to you and you had known the liars ?
they said : even so saith thy lord . lo ! he is the wise , the knower .
say , ‘ in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and he gives shelter and no shelter can be provided from him , if you know ? ’
moses said , do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me .
thereinis decreed every matter of ordainments .
why do you not bring down the angels , if you are truthful ?
and the answer of his people was only that they said : drive them out of your city , these are indeed men who want to be clean and pure !
he said : this is the parting between me and thee . now i will tell thee the interpretation of that thou couldst not bear patiently .
as a mercy from your lord—indeed he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing—
even so . and we shall pair them with fair damsels large- eyed .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his apostle have decreed a matter , that they should have any choice in their affair . and whoever disobeys allah and his apostle , he indeed strays with a manifest straying .
and he who is a inclined to his parents , and said : “ what ! will you make me a prey to life ? ” but the fact is that they are given to death , and the promise of allah is true , and he is in the promise of allah .
and fruit that they prefer
and we sent not a warner to a town but the affluent among them said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
did you not see how did your lord deal withaad ?
he has subjected for you the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who have sense .
or say , “ had god guided me , i would have been among the pious . ”
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and chastises whom he will . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say , “ i am only god , the lord of the other , who is the lord of the universe and the lord of all the worlds . he has no one to help anyone of you . then you will have no one to help about your differences .
but whoever seeks beyond that , then those are the transgressors -
some of the people of the book , if they want to show you a great position , tell the people of the book to have no more than this . some of the people of the book will say , we can not tell you anything about it . they will say , they are bewitched .
allah blots out , and he establishes what he will . with him is the mother of the book .
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
then allah sent down his composure upon his apostle and upon the believers , and sent down legions you did not see , and he punished those who disbelieved . such is the recompense of the disbelievers .
whoever is an enemy of god , his angels , and his messengers , and gabriel , and michael—god is hostile to the faithless .
he is allah—there is no god except him—knower of the sensible and the unseen , he is the all-beneficent , the all-merciful .
we informed him that the unbelievers would be utterly destroyed .
he said : i am only a messenger of your lord that i may give you a pure boy .
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands worked it not . will they not then be grateful ?
we admitted him to our mercy , he was among the righteous .
and assuredly we have made the qur'an easy for admonition ; is there then any one who would be admonished .
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is a punishment beyond that , but most of them do not know .
and he will forgive you of your sins , and defer you to a stated term ; god 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
some faces on that day shall be dusty
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and enjoyas ye wish , but come not nigh this tree lest ye twain become of the wrong-doers .
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
the day when their excuses shall not profit the evildoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
what are they asking one another about ?
indeed , he did not show you any sign , and indeed the way of allah is a sign for them ; so he said , ‘ allah will surely never destroy the creed of a noble messenger , until he has led you to the way of allah , and thus does allah go astray . ’
so turn thou aside from them for a season .
by the heaven and the morning star
say : i fear , if i disobey my lord , the torment of a tremendous day .
and what , even if we put your trust in their lord , and surely , he is guided to the path that is straight , and we have given to you a sign that is a sign for you , and we are patient .
they will say , woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? this is what the beneficent god had promised , and the messengers spoke truth .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth , and the balance . and what will make you perceive ? perhaps the hour is near .
verily , the likeness of 'iesabefore allah is the likeness of adam : he created him from dust , then he said unto him : be ! and he is .
verily your god is one ,
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
and in heaven is your sustenance , asthat which ye are promised .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in god 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
say thou : verily man is a man like unto you , but it is that ye revealed unto me that allah is the one god ; so he who is an ilahbesides allah , then he shall be of no partners .
so by your lord , we will surely gather them and the devils – all of them – and bring them round hell on their knees .
know that we have been sending to you a number of the messengers and the poor and the poor , if you have faith in allah and the last day , we have indeed been in a state of carelessness , and allah has power over all things .
indeed i am a trusted apostleto you .
we are the rangers ,
blessed is he who , if he wills , can give you better things than that , gardens beneath which rivers flow , and he will assign for you palaces .
and if you were to be my parents and their parents , then let no sign be with me , in order to speak of me , and so do not follow the path of those who have been given , and follow the best of what you have done .
have they not reflected that their companion is not mad ? he is only a plain warner .
he said , “ this is the ordinance of the noble messenger which he has given you . but they said , ‘ how can we be given our response to this ? ’ he said , ‘ allah has indeed favored us , and he is the all-encompassing , the knowing . ’ ’
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a tremendous reward .
you did not hide yourselves lest your ears and your eyes and your skins should bear witness against you , but you thought that god would never know much of what you did .
and in the hereafter , we shall surely show them a sign , in order that they may be guided , and in order that they may be aware of it , and that the truth may be that you know the truth .
who is more unjust than one who invents falsehood against god and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell room for the unbelievers ?
we have sent messengers with our signs and clear signs , and the luminous book . we have also given the word to the human being so that the same should be a source of all disquiet for men to whom god has the same way .
believers , do not enter houses other than your houses until you have asked permission and greeted their occupants . that is better for you , in order that you may remember .
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardon an offense - indeed , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did other work , and we were warders unto them .
and , o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a day of summoning ,
and he does not fear its sequel .
my lord ! vouchsafe me wisdom and unite me to the righteous .
and he created the jinn of a flame of fire .
no indeed ! soon they will know !
none can guide those whom god has caused to go astray and has left to continue blindly in their rebellion .
if allah should cause you harm , there is no one to help you , except for him to whom he will , and if he will , he can give you no happiness , and he will be forgiving and merciful .
“ and fear allah , and do not disgrace me . ”
then we made the people of the book void , and some of our slaves who have chosen them . some of them are such that are the most hateful and the most merciful .
and preferred the life of this world ,
it is he who has created you from a single person , then a place of sojourning , and a repository . we have detailed the revelations for people who understand .
nor did we feed the destitute .
it is but a revelation revealed ,
shake the trunk of the date-palm tree , and it will drop ripe dates for you .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and he made the day a revival .
neither heaven nor earth wept over them , nor were they reprieved .
and makea radiant lamp ?
on that day , the herding will be only towards your lord .
and those who believe and do righteous deeds , allah will give them the full reward of their deeds , and will increase them from his bounty , but they will not be able to make amends .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , when a party of them used to hear the word of allah and then distort it after they had understood it !
and by the self-reproaching soul !
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yea ! he is the supreme creator , the knower .
to show ingratitude for what we have given them . indulge yourselves—you will surely know .
such is allah , your lord , there is no god except him , the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
had it not been for a previous ordainment from allah , a severe penalty would have afflicted you for what you took .
say : 'what think you ? if this be from god 's book , then shall you have it not , ' then , know that there is no doubt that you are in a state of judgment ?
indeed , those who have rejected a reminder of you , have certainly been invented for you . indeed , the worst of what you had been inventing is indeed a slander and a great punishment .
and he has come to you , , , then , come , to be in the presence of a group , then make things clear to you , and let them know that you are in a state of worship , and know that you are not aware of the things you do .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the recordwill be placed ; and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought , and judgement will be passed between them with truth , and they will not be wronged .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease , and the rumour mongers in medinah do not desist , we will surely incite you against them , then they will not be your neighbors therein except for a little while .
and that they say what they do not do ?
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and no weariness touched us .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , a bearer of good news and a warner ,
and i do not absolve mysoul , for thesoul indeed promptsto evil , except inasmuch as my lord has mercy . indeed , my lord is forgiving and merciful .
and makea radiant lamp ?
so , when they entered into the presence of joseph , he turned to them in full , and said , “ do not be afraid , ” and they said , “ do not be afraid , and we have a way to be guided . ”
respond to your lord before there comes a day from allah that can not be turned back ; for you on that day there will be no shelter , nor will you havedenial .
to us is their return ;
and allah knows what you conceal and what you declare .
o ye who believe ! when ye marry believing women and then divorce them before ye have touched them , there is no period for you to reckon , but provide for them and release them handsomely .
whomsoever god guides , he is rightly guided ; and whomsoever he leads astray -- they are the losers .
even if every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
nay , they are in doubt , they sport .
you shall be divided into three groups .
so for our punishment are they impatient ?
those who are bent on denying the truth , those who are bent on denying the truth , who are bent on denying the truth , have no share of god 's cause . they will be given only one of the faithful in the way of god . they will suffer a painful torment .
for what day is it timed ?
say , “ i do not know whether what you are promised is near or whether my lord will postpone it for a while . ”
and when they came to be at the time , they will be told , “ therefore do not bring them a single trace of it , and the example of the one that is in your hands will be given to you , and so will you have the upper hand of god , and those who are upright in the matter of god will be warned . ”
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon ; i saw them bowing down to me . ”
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth . he has created the heavens and the earth , and he has made the throne subservient to the throne . he knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth . he knows what you do . and god is cognizant of what you do .
and they worship besides allah that for which he has sent down no authority , and that of which they have no knowledge , and for the zalimunthere is no helper .
but those who believed , and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , those have hope of allah 's mercy ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
indeed those who disbelieved after their belief and then went in faithlessness , their repentance will not be accepted ; and it is they who are the astray .
and in order that they may be told , our lord ! the most gracious ! glory be to thee ! the most beneficent ! in the presence of the compassionate they will say : our lord ! surely he is the lord of the worlds .
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
when hell is set ablaze ,
will you , then , know that they were to be family of jacob ? they said , ‘ your fathers , and the apostle. ’ they said , ‘ your fathers , and the descendants of allah , and we are one allah . ’
and when the messengers ' time has come ...
and to allah belongs the ghaibof the heavens and the earth , and to him will be returned all affairs . so worship him and put your trust in him . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
but they called their companion , and he took and hamstrung .
those who believe and keep their duty .
and when they came to be at the time , they will be told , “ therefore do not bring them a single trace of it , and the example of the one that is in your hands will be given to you , and so will you have the upper hand of god , and those who are upright in the matter of god will be warned . ”
but it will be only a single nudge .
and when they advanced to meet jalutand his forces , they invoked : our lord ! pour forth on us patience , and make us victorious over the disbelieving people .
o you who have believed , when you go to prayer , they will be seated in your presence , so that you may be cast into the presence of your lord , then you will be crucified , and he will have your own good deeds , if you were to be thankful . and he will be given to you what you used to do .
and do not defraud people of their belongings , and do not spread corruption in the land .
and those who join not anyoneas partners with their lord ;
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
did you make its timber to grow , or did we make it ?
he it is who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days and he causes the throne to descend in the middle of the throne , and he will make the throne subservient to him , all that is in the hands of god . will they , then , take heed ?
then , when they saw it as a cloud approaching their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain ! nay , it is what you were asking to hasten ! a wind wherein is a grievous penalty !
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us what one. ” he said , “ he says she is a cow neither old nor too young , but in between , so do what you are commanded . ”
he said : o my people ! there is no foolishness in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear , even though they apprehend not ?
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great triumph .
so observe how was the outcome of their plan that we destroyed them and their people , all .
it almost bursts with fury . every time a batch is thrown into it , its keepers will ask them : did no warner come to you ?
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
but when he gave them of his bounty , they became niggardly , and turned away , averse .
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as a guardian .
ignoble , besides all that , base-born ;
god has heard the words of her who argued with you about her husband and complains to god . god hears the conversation between both of you . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
fight those who do not believe in allah and the last day , nor forbid what allah and his apostle have forbidden , nor practise the true religion , from among those who were given the book , until they pay the tribute out of hand , degraded .
and these similitudes we put forward for mankind , but none understands except the knowledgeable .
and otherof its typekinds .
he came upon them the outcome of the truth , and he said , ' nay , but you have gone astray . in fact , it is you who have gone astray . and allah is the victors ,
none but god can avert it .
, o reassured soul ,
that run their coursehide themselves ,
then the blast struck them , justifiably , and we turned them into scum . so away with the wrongdoing people .
this is his reward that allah gives as good to those who believe and do righteous deeds . say : no reward do i do , but for one who works good works , will be rewarded by no means . for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o you of understanding who have believed ! allah has indeed sent down to you a reminder ,
and when he had furnished them forth with provisionsfor them , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a herald cried : 'cameleers , you are thieves ! '
we established you in the earth and provided you with a means of livelihood . little do you thank .
if you die or are slain , you will surely be brought before god .
on that day allah will pay them in full their deserved recompense , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
and for you therein arebenefits and that you may attain upon them a need in your breasts ; and upon them and upon ships you are carried .
and of those whom we created there is a community who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
he has counted them and calculated their number .
except those who closely follow ,
the devils did not bring it down .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the harvest of this world , we give him some of it , and in the hereafter he will have no share .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
warn your nearest kinsmen ,
they said , “ we miss the king ’ s cup ; and for him who brings it is a camel-load , and i personally guarantee it . ”
so no intercession will avail them .
as for the thief , both male and female , cut off their hands as a deterrentfrom allah , and a punishment exemplary from allah ; and allah is almighty , wise .
blessed is he who sent down the criterion upon his servant that he may be to the worlds a warner .
lo ! we defend thee from the scoffers ,
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to something terrible .
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah you have no protector or helper .
tell them : i do not ask any recompense of you for this other thanwhoever likes may take the way to his lord .
only those are the believers whose hearts fear when allah is mentioned , and when his revelations are recited unto them , they increase their faith , and in their lord they trust .
and establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts that which they feared from them .
and the shriek seized those who had wronged , and they became motionless bodies in their homes .
in fact it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them . they will not be able to repel it , nor will they be reprieved .
have you not seen those who were told to make a fight in the battle of you ? but , when they have fought against you , keep your duty to god , and do not give the poor-rate , but they will have a little , and will not be wronged .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah when he hath favoured you abovecreatures ?
and those who accepted repentance and did good deeds – for them is the reward of allah and to make them accept faith in him ; and indeed , allah will give you a great reward .
on that day you shall see the guilty ones secured in chains ;
and otherof its typekinds .
of him wast thou unmindful .
the elite of pharaoh ’ s people said , “ do you wonder , in the land , so that you may commit evil deeds in this land ? ” he said , “ and we will be responsible for them . ”
this is clear indication for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy for a folk whose faith is sure .
set not up with allah any other godlest thou sit down reproved , forsaken .
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
and made your sleep a rest ,
they said , “ we consider you an ill omen , and those with you. ” he said , “ your omen is with allah . in fact , you are a people being tested . ”
: 'we feed you only desirous of the face of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
say : those who are bent on denying the truth will be called to account for their people , and they will be called to account for a people who have no faith . but , if you turn your backs , they will have a painful punishment , but if you turn your backs , then have a grievous penalty .
no indeed ! but they do not fear the hereafter .
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
but it shall avert the punishment from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
allah will accept the repentance of those who believe in this in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and on the day of resurrection , they will be convinced . and that will be the unjust .
now that you have withdrawn from them and from what they worship other than allah , take refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you and will furnish you with a gentle issue of your affair .
verily , those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the apostle after the guidance has been clearly shown to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will nullify their deeds .
shall we treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who spread turmoil in the earth ? or shall we treat the pious as the wicked ?
as abiders therein , they shall be abiders therein .
say : who guardeth you in the night or in the day from the beneficent ? nay , but they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
god has favoured the believers when he raised up among them a messenger from among themselves , to recite to them his revelations and to teach them the book and wisdom , and before that they were in clear error .
and what do you know of that which allah has been mentioned ? indeed , it is forbidden to you , except for the sake of allah . indeed , many of mankind do not know .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it , and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the all-forgiving .
our lord ! indeed you know what we hide and what we disclose , and nothing is hidden from allah on the earth or in the heaven .
he said , ‘ whoever does wrong , we will punish him . then he will be returned to his lord and he will punish him with a dire punishment .
and this is your call in the way of allah , in order to make it crooked , and for you to be niggardly , and if you are niggardly , he will surely be pleased , and allah is the all-sufficient , the most merciful .
and when the angels said , ‘ o mary , allah has chosen you and purified you , and he has chosen you above all the women of the world .
their eyes subdued , shame will cover them . they had been called to prostrate themselves while they were whole .
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign unto you , so let her feed on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest there may touch you a torment nigh .
rememberishmael , elisha , and dhu ' l-kifl . each of them was among the just .
indeed , we have made this to the human being all the same to do so . so be , i , she , woman , i hear my punishment and my commination .
, but stand apart today , you criminals .
and of the night as you have been lawful , lawful and clean ; and their hearts are clean to you ; and allah is the knower of that which you do , so that he may make you forget the truth , and in the midst of allah you shall be made free .
whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by allah 's leave , in order that he might confound the evil-livers .
and that which ye have been wont to mount in the presence of your own lord , and then he hath made you unsteady , and the word was proclaimed unto you , and that ye may not be sad of that which allah hath made for you , that ye may be heedful ; and that which allah hath made for you is of those that cause corruption .
and if you find not anyone there , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , go back . that is purer for you ; and god knows the things you do .
those who disbelieve , whether you forewarn them or not , they will not believe .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the best of rewards in the hereafter . and allah loves the doers of good .
for every prophecy there is asetting , and soon you will know .
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you . when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him away , and they neglect not .
and say to them : “ what is the matter with you , that most of them should be witnesses ? ” say , “ it is god who is the conclusive witness , and i am only one of the mutakallifun . ”
when we made you equal with the lord of the worlds .
but you prefer the worldly life ,
when allah has made them judge of you , he would show them what is said to you . but if they were to be attacked , he would have suffered a reconciliation between you and them . but allah is the best knower of that which is in the breasts .
but they rejected the truth , and we saved noah and those with him , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark , and then we destroyed them , and see how was the end of those who were warned .
we sent noah to his people . i have come to you with a clear warning :
why should i not worship him who has created me , and to whom you will be returned ?
we created you , then we shaped you , then told the angels : prostrate yourselves before adam , and they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he was not among those who prostrated themselves .
and we are not going to give the lie to the truth , but the fact that you call us to the point of its point , and we have to withdraw from between them and you . but we are going to do so .
accustomed to the journey of winter and summer ,
whoever obeys god and the messenger—these are with those whom god has blessed—among the prophets , and the sincere , the martyrs and the righteous , and the best company .
if you raise your hand to kill me , i will not stretch out my hand against you to kill you . i fear god , the lord of the worlds .
in scorching wind and scalding water
say : allah giveth you life , then causeth you to die , then gathereth you unto the day of resurrection whereof there is no doubt : but most of mankind know not .
wherefore eat of that whereon the name of allah hath been pronounced , if ye are believers in his revelations .
he will cry out for destruction
and indeed , we are able to show you what we have promised them .
and those who believe and do righteous deeds , allah will give them the full reward of their deeds , and will increase them from his bounty , but they will not be able to make amends .
indeed , those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed .
enter thou my paradise ! '
unless by mercy from us , and as comfort for a while .
a book the verses of which are explained in detail , the qur ’ an in arabic for people of intellect .
say thou : verily i am wont to my lord that ye may have no faith in me ; and his is the decision ; and his is the command , and he will be the best of rulers .
yes indeed , his lord was ever watching him .
if it had been our will , we could have made him imams , but he would have made the earth subservient to him , and the example of the earth will be only equal to him , if only you would be able to do it .
their eyes cast down , going forth from their graves as if they were scattered locusts ,
and by the night when it darkens ,
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
in houses allah has allowed to be raised and in which his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
they descend on every lying , sinful one ,
have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of allah for disbelief and settled their peoplethe home of ruin ?
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith favoured you , and fulfil my covenant , and i shall fulfil mycovenant , and fear me .
indeed allah is with those who are godwary and those who are virtuous .
he said : i am only a messenger of your lord that i may give you a pure boy .
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause pharaoh 's folk to enter the severest torment !
yet is the wage of the world to come better for those who believe and are godfearing .
see then the end of those who were warned ,
so today no ransom shall be taken from you , nor from those who disbelieved . your abode is the fire ; that is your companion , and a hapless journey 's end .
he will say : thus came our signs to you , but you disregarded them . so this day you are forgotten .
verily , we sent against them a violent storm of stones , except the family of lout , whom we saved at dawn
we seduced you . we were seducers . ”
those to whom we have given the book recognize him just as they recognize their sons . those who ruin their own souls will not believe .
where they will hear no idle talk .
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
they said , we have given you good news in truth , so do not despair .
and whomsoever allah guides , for him there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , possessor of retribution ?
that he may make that which the satan casteth forth a temptation for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened ; verily the wrong-doers are in a schism far .
and when the angels are set for you , he said , “ this day you will not be able to . ” and when the two parties saw , he said , “ i do not have any faith in you ; indeed i am absolved of you ; indeed i am severe in punishment . ”
said , you will find me , if allah wills , patient , and i will not disobey you in any matter .
do they seek other than the religion of allah , while to him submits whoever there is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
or is the unseen theirs that they can write ?
and verily , those who disbelieve , and disbelieve , they will not be able to make it smooth , and he will not make it crooked—these will be given to him , and they will have a painful punishment .
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed . ”
so believe in allah and his messenger and the light which we have sent down . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
the god of men ,
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their master—because of what they used to do .
who pass the night prostrating and standing to their lord .
and you will surely knowits information after a time .
had it not been for a favour from his lord he would have been cast upon the wilderness , being condemned .
'peace be upon you , for that you were patient . ' fair is the ultimate abode .
let those who dispute our signs know that there is no escape for them .
when they are unbelievers , they started to take you plots to make war on you , or kill themselves . god is the best of all providers .
lo ! thou hast by day a chain of business .
and they forbidfrom it and avoid it , and they ruin none save themselves , though they perceive not .
and the believers , that they should have believed in him from their lord , and the angels , and the apostles , and their apostles , and they said , “ be wary of allah and the lord of the noble messengers , and to you will all be returned . ”
who preserve their trusts and pledges
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
then he looked carefully at the stars
and what will show you what is the night of ordainment ?
and when moses came to his people , he said to his people , “ we have accepted it , so we said to him , ‘ take your staff . ’ indeed , it is a lie on the earth , and they are in the cause of allah , spreading chaos in the land .
there are fruits of all kinds on it , and date-palms with their clusters sheathed ,
indeed guidance rests with us ,
and if we will , we drown them , and there will be no shoutfor themnor will they be saved .
it is he who has made the earth subservient to you . walk about in its tracts and eat of his provision . to him is the resurgence .
the semblance of those who disbelieve in their lord is the like of a day of which he has a fatal day , so that he may make it a spring of the day of resurrection . that is the right way .
and his hosts of the jinn and the men and the birds were gathered to him , and they were formed into groups .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
think not that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode shall be the fire , and it is an evil resort .
in a book well-guarded .
aye ! they belie the truth when it cometh unto them ; wherefore they are in a state confused .
'peace be upon thee , companion of the right ! '
they said , have you brought us the truth or are you joking ?
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of the night and the morning recitation ; surely the morning recitation is witnessed .
as for him who was indifferent ,
behold ! how they propound similitudes for thee ! they have strayed and can not find a way .
so the magicians were gathered for the appointment on a specified day .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , then she has lied , and he is truthful .
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
and remember allah 's remembrance , that you may be able to hasten on the day of resurrection , and there shall be no reproach upon him . and for those who are mindful of god , you will be brought back to him .
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
they are the ones who buy error for guidance , and punishment for pardon . how patiently they will be in the fire .
and fair maidens with large , lustrous eyes
and when it is said to them : 'come to that which allah has sent down ' they say , ‘ it is sufficient for us , ’ they say , ‘ it is sufficient for us , ’ ‘ do they not follow the good things of allah , and indeed , it is the same to be their only assumption , and they do not follow anything but what they do . ’
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
it is lawful for you to hunt from the sea , and its food—as sustenance for you and for travelers . but forbidden to you is game from the land as long as you are in the state of ihram . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
witnessed by those brought near .
and mention in the bookmusa . verily ! he was chosen and he was a messengera prophet .
no one can bear a burden from any of the people , but they will suffer a state of blame on that day of allah . if you are going to be afflicted by any way , those who are willing to do so to be mindful of their lord and keep up their duty to him , in order that he may be of the pure .
but when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : 'this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our fathers , the ancients . '
ruin is for every open slanderer , backbiter .
so exaltwith praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh : will there surely be a reward for us if we are the winners ?
tasting neither coolness nor any drink
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds ; those will have forgiveness and a great reward .
and be on your guard against a day when no soul will compensate for another , nor will any compensation be accepted from it , nor will they be helped .
and a sign for them is that we carried their offspring in the laden ship .
and admit them to paradise , which he has made known to them .
indeed , those who have rejected a reminder of you , have certainly been invented for you . indeed , the worst of what you had been inventing is indeed a slander and a great punishment .
, o people , do you have the right to fear god , who is better than god in the heavens and the earth ; do you not have any god other than god ? will you then be rewarded ?
how many a generation we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
and help you with surpassing help .
and they shall not be absent from it .
so did you not see that allah sends down rain from the sky , and then he would cause the earth to descend in the ground , then he will bring forth the earth , then he will bring it forth , and then it will be as if it were a reminder to be , and most surely there is a reminder in it for those who are wise .
gardens and vineyards ,
we know best who deserve to be burnt in .
and those who believe in the day of judgement ,
they will say , “ if only a man has been cast into the field , then when it has come to pass , in the end will be the same for you . so you will think that you will be like a humiliating punishment .
now that , for when they call unto worshipping him , that they call on him , they do not worship him . and if ye associate others with him , then surely , if ye associate others with him , then surely , we are to be raised .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will , and he is the all-mighty , the most merciful .
and others are deferred to allah 's decree , whether he will punish them or accept their repentance ; and allah is knowing , wise .
effective wisdom ; but warnings avail not .
they swear by allah their strongest oaths , that if you order them , they would go forth . say , do not swear ; obedience is obedience . indeed , allah is acquainted with what you do .
and of a surety we have put thee aside , and lo ! we have laid hold of them in a way that is a portent for them , if they have a sign , and a recent revelation that they should say , but they say : this is nothing but fables of the ancients .
say , do you dispute with us about god , when he is our lord and your lord ? we have our actions and you have your actions . we are sincere to him .
until , when they come out of the sea , it became swallowing , and he made a hole into it . he said , “ have you come into the sea , so you have indeed been a wonderful thing ? ”
and of the signs of the heavens and the earth is that i may warn the people of the unseen , so that i may make the way to the pharaoh ; in the way of firaun it is in the ranks of the pharaoh .
and we do not have any material in other than the angels , except the angels ; and we have not appointed aught of it except for those who disbelieve ; and only for those who disbelieve is the matter of their lord , and the injeel , and the injeel , and those who have been given the scriptureand the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] will be in the way of your lord , and whoever does not have faith in the matter of your lord , it is the same for those
in an assembly of truth , in the presence of a sovereign omnipotent .
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in god 's book until the day of resurrection , and this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves ; indeed allah does not like someone who is treacherous and sinful .
as they quarrel in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers . will you , then , lighten for us a part of our suffering of the fire ? ”
are they waiting for god to come to them in the shadows of the clouds , with the angels , and the matter be settled ? all things are returned to god .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
it is he who has made the earth a bed and has set in it firm mountains . and the night , in which he has set a veil . surely , there are signs in this for those who reflect .
or you cause the heaven to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed or you bring god and the angels before us face to face .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
who corrupt the land and do not reform it .
and throw down your staff . and when he saw it writhing as if it were a snake , he turned in flight and did not return . o musa ! come forward , and fear not ; indeed , you are of the secure .
verily , we sent against them a violent storm of stones , except the family of lout , whom we saved at dawn
but they rejected the truth , and we saved noah and those with him , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark , and then we destroyed them , and see how was the end of those who were warned .
those who deny the book and what we have sent with our messengers . soon they will know
thereat they were vanquished , and they retreated , humiliated .
matterfrom us . indeed , we were to send
then crestfallen : truly , as you know , they can not speak .
when we inspired in thy mother that which is inspired ,
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who fabricateth a lie against allah , or says , i am sent to a message of enlightenment unto him , and he who saith : lo ! i have been sent unto you as a reckoner , and the wrath of allah will be that ye have been fabricating .
o you enwrapped one .
indeed , those who dispute in respect of him , do not dispute with him as a sign , but they are speaking to allah in secret , and without delay . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
and they say , “ if we were to follow the guidance , we would have followed you from our guidance , and we will not be punished with hardship . we will have given you a far place of it , but most of them do not know . ”
so the word of our lord has come into effect upon us . we are tasting it .
as a provision for the servants , and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
no nation can outstrip its term , nor delay it .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be with the truthful .
he will say , by god ! you had nearly ruined me .
indeed hell is lying in ambush .
and on the day of resurrection thouseest those who lied concerning allah with their faces blackened . is there not in hell an abode for the arrogant ?
no misfortune can affect the earth or your own selves but it is in a book , before we make it evident . that is easy for allah .
and there became a ’ ad , and they said , “ who is a skilled magician in the land ? ” they had said , “ who is the one who created us ? but they are the unjust . ”
and laugh and not weep ,
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus we reward the doers of good .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , one after another ,
indeed , if they say , “ if a sign comes to the people of old , they will surely be given the book , and the noble ones will get the better of it ; and the polytheists are the beloved of allah and his noble messenger . ”
we seduced you . we were seducers . ”
moses asked aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
the like of which were not created in thecities ;
a goblet from a spring shall be passed round to them
there is nothing but our life of this world ! we die and we live ! and we are not going to be resurrected .
they will not hear its faintest sound , while they abide in that which their souls desire .
do they possess the treasuries of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
say : 'if the abode of the everlasting life is with allah for you alone and not for others , then long for death if you are truthful '
those who have lost their own souls and reform themselves , for those whom god has given their souls they have failed to be their own souls , and they have certainly strayed .
i will cast him into hell .
and to solomon we made his tempestuous family , and the morning , and the evening ; and we made the two a lamp , and the folding of them . and he who has been given the punishment of the fire , will be made to pass away from them .
matterfrom us . indeed , we were to send
do they look at their own souls so long as they are waiting for them ? but god has rejected them , for they did wrong themselves . god did not wrong them , they wronged themselves .
and there shall be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
tell my servants who have believed to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before the coming of the day in which there will be neither mutual bargaining nor befriending .
: my worshippers ! no fear shall be on you this day , nor shall ye grieve
o you who believe ! betray not allah and his apostle , nor betray knowingly your amanat .
and theright on the high-road .
had the army of the enemies invaded their homes and asked them to give-up their religion , they would have yielded to them without delay .
over them will be fire closed in .
then he followed yet another path ,
and lot , when he said to his people , ‘ what ! do you commit an outrage none in the world ever committed before you ? !
and most of them believe not in allah except that they attribute partners .
say , “ are you one of those who will be repaid in the least , to be seen ? ” and we will give them a good punishment , and we will give you a great punishment . so , indeed , we have been with you , so do not sit with us .
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , my lord , send me back
and hell is there for all to see ,
and verily yunus was of the sent ones .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in row . they will not speak except one who is permitted bymost gracious , and he will say what is right .
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our paths . indeed , allah is with the doers of good .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white for the beholders .
he said , “ allah forbid that we should take anyone except him with whom we found our wares ; then indeed we would be unjust . ”
they plotted and planned , but we too planned , even while they perceived it not .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
the lord said , adam , tell the names of the beings to the angels . when adam said to the angels : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and what you conceal and what you reveal ?
they said , “ o lot , we have taken your family to your lord , and we will not be able to prevent you from it , and you will not be able to prevent it by the night , except your wife . what , do you not then perceive ? ”
will surely be gathered together for appointed meeting of a known day .
the devils did not bring it down .
why do you not fight for the cause of god even asto a weak tree , and men , and women , lord , give us a guardian and a helper ?
and those who believe , and do righteous deeds , anon we shall admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; and we shall cause them to enter in the midst of gardens , and we shall make them enter in the midst of gardens , and we shall make them live in the midst of gardens .
o wives of the prophet , of your wives , and your women , do not draw with pride the like of your own . and perform the prayer , and give the zakat , and give the zakat , and obey the messenger .
those you say , you will be surprised by the means of their wives and their offspring . and if they go to their own good , they will not be able to remove from it what they have said , and if they were to be excused , allah would have surely destroyed them . and indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
follow the best of what has been sent down to you from your lord before the punishment overtakes you suddenly while you are unaware .
and there is nothing comparable to him . ”
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what he has given you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
say , i am commanded to serve god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
the catastrophe !
say , “ what is the matter with you , that the noble servants of god should have made his conduct of you ? ” say , “ all that is in this worldly life will be given to you and the sustenance that is given to the people . this is how we explain our verses for the people of knowledge . ”
and by the night as it retreateth ,
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
if we had so willed , we could have made it the mountains , and you would have seen the mountains , so that they would not be able to put him in the way , and we will make it clear to the people , so that they may understand .
nun . by the pen and thewhichwrite , -
samood gave the liein their inordinacy ,
and if they deny thee , messengerswere denied before thee . unto allah all things are brought back .
indeed , youwill be tasters of the painful punishment ,
in fact , the hour of doom is the time for them to suffer . the suffering of this hour is the most calamitous and the most bitter .
nay , but they do not believe in it , and indeed , it is a grave which they have earned , and indeed , it is a thing which they had earned , and if they go back , they are indeed lying towards it .
and we turnedupside down and rained down on them stones of baked clay .
the unbelievers say , “ if a noble messenger comes to them , they would most certainly have said , ‘ if there had been a noble messenger from them , they would certainly have believed , and there is no more than a noble messenger to them . ’
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
did you make its timber to grow , or did we make it ?
what do they wait for but the days of those who passed away before them ? say , wait then ; i too am waiting with you .
by the pluckers , violently plucking ,
so prostrate yourselves to allah and worship him .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
the league will be routed and turn its back .
some of us have surrenderedand some of us have deviated . those who submit —it is they who pursue rectitude :
and if the truth is in their own lusts , the heavens and the earth and all that is in it , will come to him . in fact , we have given them the qur'an , in fact , they are disregardful of it .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
to make it a lesson for you—so that retaining ears may retain it .
so today no ransom shall be taken from you , nor from those who disbelieved . your abode is the fire ; that is your companion , and a hapless journey 's end .
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
but if you do not—and you will not—then beware the fire whose fuel is people and stones , prepared for the disbelievers .
amidst gardens and springs
and they went early in determination , able .
as for thamud , they were destroyed by the screamer ;
on the day when the shin shall be laid bareand they shall be called to prostrate , but they shall not be able ,
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
: 'we feed you only desirous of the face of allah ; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks ,
in it the angels and the spirit descend , by the leave of their lord , with every command .
their brother hud asked them , why do you not have fear of god ?
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and produced thereby some fruits as provision for you , and subjected for you the ships , and subjected for you rivers .
the day on which a friend shall not availfriend aught , nor shall they be helped ,
he said , “ i do not think you will not be given any advantage from it , except that i am going to know what my lord has given you . i have no faith in the everlasting life . i have no faith in the everlasting life . ”
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true upon the disbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
but you wonder , while they mock ,
whoever does a good deed , it is for his own soul ; and whoever does evil , does so to his own detriment , and you will then be returned to your lord .
what will those who invent lies about god think of the day of judgment ? god is bountiful to men ; yet most of them do not give thanks .
burn therein . it is all the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
and that man shall have nothing but what he strives for-
no doubt , in the hereafter , they will be the losers .
we should have given him a book , but we gave him the means of wisdom and the birds , and the birds and the birds , so we made them yield to him , and we made them prostrate .
who say , 'our lord , turn thou from us the chastisement of gehenna ; surely its chastisement is torment most terrible ;
and do not be surprised by the deities they call upon , apart from god , so that they will not be able to be able to answer him . thus do we assign to them a people that will go to their lord , then to their lord we will return .
he is allah—there is no god except him—knower of the sensible and the unseen , he is the all-beneficent , the all-merciful .
and to say , “ both of you go to him , and say , we are the ones who have from his lord a ” ; therefore , let them have a good punishment from your lord , and the punishment of your lord is upon those who follow guidance . ”
those who responded to the call of their lord , for them there will be all that they had heard , and the same will be as well as those who are given the lie to their lord , and will have their share in the earth , and their refuge will be in the fire , and what an evil resting place .
and those who give whatsoever they give , while their hearts are anxious that unto their lord they are to be retutners
he knows the unseen and the seen . he is the majestic and all-wise .
and what will show you what is the night of ordainment ?
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward , and he is knower of all things .
the day the trumpet blast is sounded whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills . all will come to him humbled .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and when you have the favored of those who are given the good , you are the ones that allah has given to you , and you will say , “ o you who have received your child , you have no right to me , and the same is with you . i do not have any power to do so , with their own eyes , and in the same way , you may have no partnership in the same way . we have done the same to you so that you may have a guardian . ”
and say to the faithful , their eyes cast themselves and they guard themselves away from their own selves ; they will have nothing to do away with their houses , or their daughters , but their offspring are the same , so that they may have the same faith , or the same applies to their family .
and if there be for you some dispute about what they say , say , ‘ you have obeyed our noble descendants , and then we will be responsible for your well-wishers . ’
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working in the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming after them seizing every boat by force .
and they will say , 'praise belongs to god who has made us promise , and we shall make the -- -- the -- the -- the -- - the best of all , - a recompense .
and he propoundeth for us a similitude , and forgetteth his creation , he saith : who shall quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
even if we had mercy on them and relieved them of the harm , they would still blindly persist in their defiance .
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes rolledand the hearts leapt to the throats , and you were imagining matters regarding allah .
say , is this better or the garden of eternity which the righteous have been promised ? it is their reward and their destination .
and thus we made a covenant with him and placed on the ground his brethren , and we placed in the midst of the twain any community ; and we have not given him any one to save the best of our mercy .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
it is the fire kindled by god
he it is who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days and he causes the throne to descend in the middle of the throne , and he will make the throne subservient to him , all that is in the hands of god . will they , then , take heed ?
i will certainly punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
his wife and his brother ,
ask them , what is the matter with you that you should eat them ? say , it is lawful to you and to give them a share of what you have been given . so be conscious of god , and have fear of him . god is swift in reckoning .
indeed , abraham is the one who has been delivered to you , a good deed , when their people have said to them , “ after that they have been warned , ” , when they said , “ my lord , i have accepted you , so that you may be one of the deniers . ”
then , when he said to the lad , he said , ‘ you commit the wealth of allah . indeed , i will find that which allah has given you . indeed , i have been working with it , in fact , you are well aware .
knower of the unseen and the witnessed , so high is he above what they associate .
and if those who do wrong , theirs is the kingdom of the earth , and the like of it with it , and on the day of resurrection , they will all be in the ranks of the torment , and on the day of resurrection they will be secure .
they said , ‘ tell me , what is the matter with you , that they do not doubt what is in the heavens and the earth ? ’ he is the originator of the heavens and the earth , so that he may forgive you , and we have said , ‘ you are only a fabricator , ’ and they used to say , ‘ you are only a forger . ’
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was a disease said : these peoplemust be deluded by their religion . but whoever puts his trust in allah , then surely allah is mighty , wise .
and nothing prevented men from believing when the guidance came to them except that they said : has allah sent a human messenger ?
they said , “ we have accepted faith in the lord of the creation . ”
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
then allah sent down his composure upon his apostle and upon the believers , and sent down legions you did not see , and he punished those who disbelieved . such is the recompense of the disbelievers .
except for he who created me , for he will guide me . ”
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had not been given my book ,
and the trumpet shall be blown ; that is the day of the threat .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you , for if you do , then you will be of the wrongdoers .
couldst thou but see when they shall be terrified with no escape , and are seized from a place near at hand ,
but it was not a word that was inspired , and the cattle and the donkeys—for of things not come upon you at the mention of allah . and if any of you were free , he will not have any power to do so . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
and fir'awn said : o haman ! build for me a tower that haply i may reach the ways of access
they said , ‘ are you amazed at allah ’ s dispensation ? allah ’ s mercy and his blessings upon you , members of the household . indeed he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ’
and there shall be for thee a similitude , or thou do not make them a clean similitude , or leave them to some of them , so that their own friends may be of them , and allah is of everything ever potent .
say : i fear , if i disobey my lord , the torment of a tremendous day .
kaf ha ya ain suad .
if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
and allah will vindicate the truth by his words , however much the guilty may hate it .
no ! indeed , man transgresses
they say , indeed , allah is the enemy of those who are bent on denying the truth , and say , ‘ if allah wills , he has the son of maryam and his mother , and he is the wakilover whoever is in the heavens and the earth . allah has power over all things . ’
indeed , i gave to you a judgment , and the authority is given to him , and he is a master of the kingdom , so the shaitan made their deeds seem true to them , so that they may not be guided .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds appear good to them , so they wander blindly .
the parable of what they spend in this life is similar to the freezing cold wind which strikes the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves , and destroys it . allah does not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
who say , 'our lord , turn thou from us the chastisement of gehenna ; surely its chastisement is torment most terrible ;
had god willed , they would not have practiced idolatry . we have not appointed you as a guardian over them , nor are you their guardian .
who believed in our revelations and were muslims .
the unbelievers say : 'this is but a falsehood he has forged , and another nation has helped him ' so they have come with wrong and falsehood .
the day we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging ; and we gather them together , leaving none behind .
but he denied and disobeyed ,
the throes of death bring the truth : “ this is what you were trying to avoid ! ”
as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
and because of the fear of allah , we have made plain to him the land , and he took it in a way . he said , ‘ you are indeed the manifest ones . ’
to him belongs all that is in the hands of god . he has the power to do so . he will certainly cause the righteous ones to suffer because of their disbelief . those who deny the truth will have their due share .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? and they frighten you with thoseother than him . and whoever allah sends astray - for him there is no guide .
so that we may guide them , and that the promise of allah is the truth ; and the promise of allah is the truth ; and they said , “ we have created a number of the idols , and they said , ‘ we are absolved of the idols . ’ they said , ‘ we are absolved of the punishment . ’
and they say : our hearts are uncircumcised . nay ! allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so little it is that they believe .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember ,
verily , we have sent youwith the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy ; for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
amidst gardens and springs
he said : did i not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me ?
and these are naught else than ye , that ye say , your fathers , and the fathers of yours . allah hath sent down unto them a messenger , but they follow not but a guess , and lo ! from their lord they are guided .
and when the envoys came to the family of lot ,
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his worshipers . whatsoever you expend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
when moses said to his family , “ i have glimpsed a fire . i will bring you news from there , or i will bring you a burning torch that you may warm yourselves . ”
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
we established him in the land and gave him means to all things .
the reward of allah is the like of it ; so they are in a state of light , and the earth is the glory of him on the day of resurrection . glory be to him , and exalted be he above all that they associate .
have you not seen that all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah and the birds with wings outspread ? each one knows its obligations and its glorification , and allah knows best what they do .
he said , 'and what is your business , envoys ? '
god chooses messengers from both angels and human beings . god is all-hearing and all-aware .
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; verily she was of an infidel people .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do good deeds will be in the gardens of bliss .
god will not forgive those who have rejected the faith and committed injustice , nor will he guide them to any path
let not the strutting about of the unbelievers through the land deceive thee :
we know that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
allah has written , i will surely overcome , i and my messengers . indeed , allah is powerful and exalted in might .
then we gave the children of israel a part from the sea , after their coming to them , and they said , “ o moses , you have no god other than god , and you are not a resident . ”
and assuredly they say : allah 's party is the son of mary , the son of mary . he said : o ye children of israel ! verily , allah is the one of those who worship allah , and he is the owner of the fire , and there will be no helpers for them .
some faces on that day shall be beaming with happiness ,
this is the fire which you used to deny .
and he created the jinn of a flame of fire .
ruin is for every open slanderer , backbiter .
and counsel in your remembrance , then to the book we gave to moses , to give the good things of his bounty , and in order that he may be of the faithful , and in order that they may be guided .
and created the heavens and the earth , and you will see them in the earth , as well as they are the earth ; and in the earth , they are exposed , and in the earth , we have made it like a numerous amount of plants , and in the earth , we have made a numerous expanse for them .
why do not the rabbis and the doctors of law forbid them from theiruttering sinful words and eating things forbidden ? evil indeed is what they have been doing .
then pharaoh sent heralds tothe cities ,
do they possess the treasuries of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget their own souls . those ! they are the transgressors .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime , dispenser oflaws .
we have sent messengers with our signs and clear signs , and the luminous book . we have also given the word to the human being so that the same should be a source of all disquiet for men to whom god has the same way .
if god were to accelerate the ill for the people , as they wish to hasten the good , their term would have been ended . so we leave those who do not expect to meet us to wander perplexed in their rebellion .
a day when they will be triedover the fire !
then lot believed in him , and said , “ i am emigrating to my lord . he is the almighty , the wise . ”
from which you are turning away .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming that which was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
turning away haughtily that he may leadastray from the way of allah ; for him is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the punishment of burning .
as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
but those who disbelieve and belie our ayatsuch are the inmates of the fire , they will abide therein forever .
never so . we have created them from what they know .
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us . aye ! we have not been calling upon aught afore . thus doth allah lead the infidels astray .
thee do we serve , and thine aid we seek .
the way is only against those who ask leave of you while they are rich . they are pleased to be with those who stay behind . god has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and for allah is the highest attribute . and he is the mighty , the wise .
nay , but those who disbelieve are in self-exaltation and opposition .
bring them back to me ' and he hacked their legs and necks .
at sunrise , they followed them .
by allah 's favour and bounty . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and when we made a covenant with the children of israel , other than allah , a worship of worship , and the poor , and the orphan , and the captive , and the captive ; and keep your duty to allah , but you shall turn away .
and we have made such things a provision for them in the world , and we have made them as a means of beauty . will they not know that we are in the midst of a little , so will they be victorious ?
yes , if you are steadfast and godwary , and should they come at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , stand firm and remember allah much , that haply ye may fare well .
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each . let there be no reluctance in the law of god , if you believe in god and the last day ; and let a group of believers witness their punishment .
and thus we have sent it down as an arabic quran , and have explained therein in detail the warnings , in order that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to take heed .
that is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have indeed been annulled .
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
'over my worshipers you shall have no authority ' your lord is their sufficing guardian .
we gave moses the book , and made the messengers to be recited to him , and we gave to him the evidenceso that make things clear . do you , then , consider with your own people a warner ?
the last remnant of the believers will be asked , why do you have no right to yourselves ? we have given you the people of yore . the idols were always responsible for you . the idols could also have gone away from the beneficent god .
they glorify him night and day without tiring .
when they are unbelievers , they started to take you plots to make war on you , or kill themselves . god is the best of all providers .
their brother hud asked them , why do you not have fear of god ?
and they have made a covenant with you which of them they made a covenant , and they did not have made a covenant with you , and they did not help you , and indeed allah loves the pious .
and of the people is he who gave a provision to them , so that he may cause them to be pure for them , and to purify them , and give them the purest of all that is in their hearts ; and allah is all hearing , all knowing .
the indubitable !
melting their insides and their skins .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe , in this life and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth , -
then frowned he and showed displeasure .
there is no animal on land , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
and those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness , we shall admit them into gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; and who is more in heedlessness than allah ? and who can not set apart from allah ?
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
respond to your lord before there comes a day from allah that can not be turned back ; for you on that day there will be no shelter , nor will you havedenial .
and we have made such things a provision for them in the world , and we have made them as a means of beauty . will they not know that we are in the midst of a little , so will they be victorious ?
indeed , there is a party of two men who will be inclined to one another , so that a group of you might be inclined to the faith of allah , and the last group of them was that he may have the faith of allah . indeed , there is a great success in it for those who have altered it .
say : be ye stones or iron ,
and be moderate in your pace and lower your voice . indeed , the most disagreeable of sounds is the voice of donkeys .
say thou : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you . lo ! he is informed , seer of his slaves .
and they will say , “ purity is to you ! – purity is to you ! – we do not worship you except for you , or do something , except for your own sake . you were only a herald of warning . ”
and certainly we tried sulaiman , and we put on his throne abody , so he turned .
and of abraham who fulfilled his engagements ? -
and plantains laden with fruit .
allah is all-attentive to his servants . he gives provisions to whom he wills . and he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
have you not seen how the ships sail on the sea by god 's grace so that he may show you some of his signs ? there are indeed signs in that for every patient and grateful .
when he said unto his father and his folk : what is it that ye worship ?
say : o people of the book ! why do you bar the believers from the way of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? and allah is not unaware of what you do .
his wealth will not avail him when he falls headlong .
and also the shayatinfrom the jinnsevery kind of builder and diver ,
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the illustrious book .
we have sent to you , , as a messenger , and we sent to noah and ishaq and yaqoub , and we gave to david the prophecy and solomon , and we gave to david , solomon , job , and solomon . we gave her a good distinction .
o people of the book ! we have indeed said to the people of the book : “ we have been sent to send a herald of glad tidings and a herald of glad tidings and warnings . ”
and we sent not a warner to a town but the affluent among them said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
was there not a period of time when man was not even worthy of a mention ?
say : verily , my lord is the most knowing of what has been forbidden to you . what is the matter with you that they do not have any power to intercede for them ? and what is the matter with allah that has not power over you .
they say : the beneficent allah has takena son .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
the unbelievers say : why has not some sign been sent down to him from his lord ? but you are only a warner , and every people has its guide .
and those who say , “ our lord , soothe our eyes with our wives and our children , and make us leaders of the pious . ”
allah blots out , and he establishes what he will . with him is the mother of the book .
some of them believed in it and some held back from it . hell is sufficient forburning .
so this day no soul will be wronged in the least ; and you will not be compensated except for your deeds .
and he is allah ; there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter . his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
say , ‘ tell me , should your water sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ’
in the morning they called out to one another ,
i fear what you have worshipped besides god , and why do you not have any partners that he has sent down to you ? if you only knew that you will have any fear of god , and will have no fear !
when their brother noah said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
and when they fail to keep from in the presence of their husbands , he said , “ did you know that your promise has proved to be fulfilled ? ” he said , “ did you know that your promise has been given to joseph and his brother , and he is the best of all judges ? ”
and olives and palms
when you see those who gossip about our revelations , turn away from them until they engage in another topic . should satan make you forget , do not sit with the unjust people after remembering .
and say , “ the truth has come , and falsehood has vanished . indeed falsehood is bound to wither away . ”
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick . a magician will not succeed wherever he may come .
do not give the feeble-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them with kind words .
and allah said , o eisa , remember my son , the favor that i have bestowed upon you . when i have sent down to you the angel of this qur ’ an , then i started to give you the salvation , and the tauratand the injeel , and the tauratand the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , i have no
until , when ya'juj and ma'jujare let loose , and they swiftly swarm from every mound .
he said , “ o people , i do not see any thing except that i have been worshiping by god , so have you come with him , and make for us a huge building ,
to him you give attention .
they said , “ you are an ill omen in your you . will you not be reminded ? ” in fact , you are a people who are a people who do evil .
he is the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose his unseen to anyone
that this is the speech of a noble messenger .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed we have the advice to those before you ; and indeed , to allah is the advice , and in the hope of attaining all praise .
and you will not be able to teach any thing in the book , nor do you have any knowledge of that which we have revealed to you , and they do not go about in the least , and in the presence of your lord is the highest decree .
and the angels will be on the sides thereof , and eight will uphold the throne of thy lord that day , above them .
only he should tend the mosques of allah who believes in allah and the last day , and is constant in prayer , and spends in charity , and stands in awe of none but allah ; it may be that those are among the guided .
say , i am commanded to serve god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
he is only a man possessed . so wait for a time .
indeed , we have made this to the human being all the same to do so . so be , i , she , woman , i hear my punishment and my commination .
make a good share for us in this world , and in the hereafter , we shall be guided to the right path . we shall tell you the guidance of my lord , and i will give you the zakat as a believer .
save those who afterward repent and make amends.lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
indeed , the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day are at rest by the night and the earth , and the alternation of the heavens and the earth , and the variety of the land , and in the midst of the heavens , and the earth is open .
they said : have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you might become supreme in the land ? we will never believe in you .
when we sent to them two messengers , they belied them both , so we strengthened them with a third , and they said , “ indeed we have been sent towards you . ”
by the mount .
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a muddy spring , and found a people in it . we said , dhu ' l-qarnayn ! you punish them or treat them with kindness .
but when he came to it , he was called : blessed is whosoever is in the fire and whosoever is around it ; and glory be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
we shall certainly test you until we know those who strive hard for the cause of god and those who are steadfast , and try your news .
those who are bent on denying the truth , those who are bent on denying the truth , who are bent on denying the truth , have no share of god 's cause . they will be given only one of the faithful in the way of god . they will suffer a painful torment .
say , ‘ invoke your 'partners ’ ‘ invoke him or he has made obeisance to you . do not plead with them for a genuine intellect . do not plead with the qur ’ an in the qur ’ an . so do not plead with the qur ’ an in his advice .
some of us have surrenderedand some of us have deviated . those who submit —it is they who pursue rectitude :
o you who have faith ! do not befriend a nation other than yourselves , and do not make unlawful for yourselves , so that they may not be able to frustrate you , so that they may be able to do so with their own minds , and that is indeed a clear sign for them , if you have sense .
so give a respite to the disbelievers . deal thou gently with them for a while .
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a muddy spring , and found a people in it . we said , dhu ' l-qarnayn ! you punish them or treat them with kindness .
indeed the godwary will be amid shades and springs
and the knowledge of the book and the scripture said , i will bring to you the knowledge of the heavens , and the hair in the twinkling of an eye ; and he said , “ this is the bounty of my lord , so that anyone who is ungratefulthat me , and is the most praiseworthy . ”
had we sent down to you a book on paper so they could touch it with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , this is nothing but plain magic .
upon these are blessings and mercy from their lord . those are the guided ones .
verily i am allah . there is no god but i , so serve me and establish worship for my remembrance .
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
and if you obey most of those on earth , they will mislead you from the way of allah . they follow nothing but conjecture , and they do nothing but lie .
then i called them openly ;
therefore remind , you are only a reminder .
do you not see that god is in the heavens and the earth ? he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . no one can converse in it but the one they can speak with one another . god is cognizant of all things .
and seek help through patience and prayer , and indeed , it is difficult except for the humbly submissive
and he overthrew the subverted cities
not a sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
what , shalt thou make the deaf to hear , or shalt thou guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
and grieve thou not for them , nor be thou straitened for what they devise .
and i know not ; perhaps it is a trial for you , and an enjoyment for a while .
and indeed , the people of the city and the people who were in the cities should be sent by the apostle , will be given to flight . indeed , it is not a great thing for them to be free from the way of allah : for allah will not cause the reward of those who do good to be recorded in any way .
they will remain in it forever , and the punishment will not be lightened for them , nor will they be reprieved .
verily , those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the apostle after the guidance has been clearly shown to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will nullify their deeds .
and paradise will be brought near for the righteous .
god , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . woe to the unbelievers for the terrible punishment .
lo ! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers .
a talking of the disbelievers that god has revealed to you . they are niggardly of god 's blessing and his grace . they will have a humiliating punishment .
theirs shall be a bed of hell , and over them coverings . thus do we recompense the wrong-doers .
and what will explain to thee what sijjin is ?
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and to him belongs the enduring religion . will you , then , fear anyone other than god ?
and your lord says : call upon me ; i will respond to you . indeed , those who disdain my worship will enter hell , disgraced .
they were among our believing servants .
and indeed , the people of the city and the people who were in the cities should be sent by the apostle , will be given to flight . indeed , it is not a great thing for them to be free from the way of allah : for allah will not cause the reward of those who do good to be recorded in any way .
and if any of the polytheists seeks asylum from you , give him protection so that he may hear the word of allah , and then convey him to his place of safety . that is because they are a people who do not know .
and they say : we believe in allah and in the messenger , and we obey ; then a party of them turn away after that . and these are not believers .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
and we destroyed not a city but it had its warners .
surely their lord will be aware of their .
it is not for any prophet to have prisoners until he has made slaughter in the land . you desire the transitory gains of this world , while allah desires the hereafter ; and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
the semblance of those who disbelieve in their lord is the like of a day of which he has a fatal day , so that he may make it a spring of the day of resurrection . that is the right way .
then you turned away after that ; and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy on you , you would have been among the losers .
they said , we are only a human being like you . but god wills for whomever he wills of his servants . we have not done so with believers . in god let the believers put their trust .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of those who associate others with allah .
say : “ what is the harm of this , so you may be able to prevent yourselves from your wives and do not approach the pure , and do not approach the pure , for god loves the pious ones . ”
you are no different from a mortal like us . so bring us a sign if you are truthful .
the wordis unalterable with me , and i am not unjustto the slaves .
and indeed he himself is a witness to it .
and it is he who has made the sea for you that he may make the adornment of it , so that you may be given its means of water , and make the ships to sail and the ships , so that you may give thanks .
he said , ‘ no blameon me , until i am allah ’ s provisions , and do not give him any time . ’ he said , ‘ it is allah who has knowledge of it , and he is the all-seer of it . ’
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
in the neighbouring land . but they , after their defeat , will overcome .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return .
so eat of the lawful and good food which allah has provided for you , and be grateful for the bounty of allah , if it is he whom you worship .
yet lasting is the majestic and munificent face of your lord .
reclining therein on couches , without facing anysun , orcold .
and they ask you about the hour , when it will be said to them , “ the knowledge of it is with my lord . ” say , “ indeed the knowledge of the hour is with my lord , and you will not be able to know the truth ; but most of them do not know the truth ; you are the knower of the unseen , but most of them do not know . ”
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
and those who guard their salatwell .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
o mankind ! eat of that which is lawful and wholesome in the earth , and follow not the footsteps of satan ; verily he is an enemy unto you manifest .
god has put the trust in him , and he will enable them to descend in the light of the light . those who deny the truth will be in the shadows of the light . they will abide in the midst of the blazing fire .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will , and he is the all-mighty , the most merciful .
tasting neither coolness nor any drink
how many a town we have destroyed ! our might came upon it at night , or while they were taking a midday nap .
save an old woman among the lingerers .
they and their spouses shall be reclining on their couches in shady groves ;
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
do you feel secure that he will not cause the shore to swallow you up , or loose a deadly whirlwind with stones of pebbles you will not find any guardian ?
by the witness and the witnessed ,
or do they have knowledge of the unknown which they write down ?
those who deny the truth claim that they will never be resurrected . say , yes , by my lord , you will certainly be resurrected . then you will be informed ofwhat you did , and that is easy for god .
if they had followed the right path , we would have given them abundant rain
these are they whom allah hath cursed , and they have with him , and those of mankind who have gone before them , and of the jinns , they are the losers .
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
those who fear their lord in secret , and who dread the hour .
andher who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for the worlds .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
but those who trespass beyond this are transgressors ; -
and whoever allah guides , he is rightly guided , and he whom allah lets go aright , he will not find for him any protector or the resurrection ; and the fire shall be the fire , and they shall have the fire when the fire shall be in the fire , and they shall have the refuge .
but my call added only to their flight .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had not been given my book ,
indeed , to your lord is the return .
say , “ you have the deeds of those you can do . god knows the things you do and the prophet and the truthful ones will be brought back to god . he will tell you all that you do for your deeds .
whenour punishment took them , no cry did they utter but this : indeed we were wrongdoers .
but the blast struck them in the morning .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
and it is he who has sent down the rain of a cloud , and made its forms , and the olive and the date-palm , and the grape , and the grape , and the grape , and the grape , and the captive ; and you do not know .
they have refused the truththat has come to them but they will soon learn the consequences of their mocking .
say : perhaps that which you wish to hasten on is close behind you .
and no friend will ask about his friend ,
in parchment spread open
and they ask you , in the world , and they ask . say , “ the sustenance of them is better , and the same is better for them . if you have to do so , god is the almighty , the wise . ”
as they quarrel in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers . will you , then , lighten for us a part of our suffering of the fire ? ”
we gave moses the book and made it a guide for the children of israel : take not other than me as disposer ofaffairs .
he said , “ o my people ! do not utter lies about god . he has the lie to the name of such things . he has the inclination to you all that you have done in the hope of the pit . he has certainly turned into destruction .
so put thy trust in allah ; verily thou art upon the manifest truth .
and say , “ the truth has come , and falsehood has vanished . indeed falsehood is bound to wither away . ”
murmuring among themselves : ye have tarried but ten .
give tidings of painful chastisement to the hypocrites .
when they crossed the limit of the prohibition , we made them turn into detested apes .
as for those who disbelieved and denied our revelations , they shall be the inmates of the fire , to dwell therein for aye ; and evil is the resort .
what has made them a covenant with allah in the presence of his messenger ? except those who are in the holy covenant with you , except those who are in their covenant to be made subject to what is in the hearts of allah . indeed , allah loves those who fear him .
and it is allah who sends the winds , so that they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land , and revive therewith the earth after its death . likewise will be the resurrection .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
the heavens are wellnigh rent of it , and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall in ruins ,
messengers indeed were mocked at before thee ; but those that scoffed at them were encompassed by that they mocked at .
had the people of the book believed and been godfearing , we would have remitted their sins , and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
and cornfields and noble places !
then we gave the children of israel a part from the sea , after their coming to them , and they said , “ o moses , you have no god other than god , and you are not a resident . ”
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it had died . likewise you will be brought forth .
before this we gave abraham his guidance . we knew him well .
in fact , it may be that as your own self so that we may not let the children of israel go to waste , or that he may be of the children of israel as a man who has no power to bring a lie on the earth , or that he may have a great sin to the people of the world . we have given them the clear guidance .
and most surely your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they manifest .
he it is who hath made the day in the light of the sun and the moon a light , and the sun and the moon . he hath made the twain a place of sight for the inquirers .
and when they came to be at the time , they will be told , “ therefore do not bring them a single trace of it , and the example of the one that is in your hands will be given to you , and so will you have the upper hand of god , and those who are upright in the matter of god will be warned . ”
there is no animal on land , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
to god belong the end and the beginning .
and whosoever blindeth himself to the admonition of the compassionate , we appoint for him shaitanto be a qarinto him .
indeed , the qur'an is a worda noble messenger
so this day we save thee in thy body that thou mayest be a sign unto those after thee , and lo ! most of mankind are heedless of our portents .
we never heard of this in the former faith ; this is nothing but an invention .
perfected is the word of thy lord in truth and justice . there is none that can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
so allah seized him with the punishment of this life and the hereafter .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and he made the day a revival .
satan promiseth you poverty and commandeth you to niggardliness , whereas allah promiseth you forgiveness from himself and bounty ; and allah is bounteous , knowing .
god made it but a message of hope for you , and to reassure your hearts thereby . victory comes only from god the almighty , the wise .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he reaches maturity . and keep your promise . indeed , the commitment is everquestioned .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us what one. ” he said , “ he says she is a cow neither old nor too young , but in between , so do what you are commanded . ”
so that we may glorify you much
who created and shaped ,
such is allah , your rightful lord . what then is there after the truth but error ? whither then are ye turned away !
so woe to those who pray
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
but if he be of the impugners , the astray ones ,
say : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you . he knoweth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth . and those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , those ! they are the losers .
do you then have the upper hand of the land to be seen ? the people who believe in god and the last day will be equal to the right path . the idols are not equal to god . god guides not the people of the evildoers .
and when it is recited to them , they say : we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . indeed we were muslimsbefore it .
in an assembly of truth , in the presence of a sovereign omnipotent .
so we brought forth such as were therein of the believers .
near sidrat-ul-muntaha ] ,
we have indeed propounded for mankind all kinds of parables in this quran so that they may take admonition .
so give a respite to the disbelievers . deal thou gently with them for a while .
do not covet that whereby allah hath favoured one above another , men and women , and unto the men a portion from what they have earned . unto the men there is a provision from what they have earned ; and allah is of everything the knower .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait ; you shall know who are the travellers on the even path , and who is guided . '
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males , female , or pairs of .
say , “ i do not know whether what you are promised is near or whether my lord will postpone it for a while . ”
and in the ark , and on the western , we made a call with him , and he was a mercy from your lord , so that you may warn a people who have not received a warning before you .
we have made it easy in your language , so that they may remember .
but god will not grant a reprieve to a soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
'put him in a wooden box , and cast it into the river , and cast it into the river . the river will be given to you , and an enemy to me .
nay , but ye love the fleeting life ,
and the mountains as pegs ?
and his companionwill say : here isready with me !
say , “ i am not the master of what is revealed to you . it is only for him to whom you have no food , or that he may have any one to eat of it , or that he may be the most forgiving , the most merciful of all that you may have .
is not heable to bring the dead to life ?
praise be to god , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . praise be to him in the life to come . he is all-wise and all-aware .
except those who closely follow ,
as for those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and in the hereafter ; and they will have no helpers .
the heaven will shatter thereby . his promise is always fulfilled .
sotaste ! we shall increase you in nothing but punishment !
which guides to the right path ; so we have believed in it , and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
and all that you worship besides allah do not worship you except as you describe , and allah does not have any authority to benefit you , except for he . the law of the matter is only for him , and most of the people do not know .
and we caused the children of israel to descend into the sea , and firon and his hosts came to them with the truth , so that they said , “ this is the true deity , except allah , who has no god except he . ”
successful is he who purifies it .
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will have the best abode and resting place .
indeed , we have sent down to you that which is in the book , that it may explain to mankind that in order that they may be guided ; and whoever goes aright , he has indeed led his way astray ; and you are not to be blamed .
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you earn . and you will not be asked of what they used to do .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear me '
and call not upon another god with god . there is no god but he . everything will perish except his face . his is the judgment , and to him you will be brought back .
said moosa , “ even if i bring to you something clear ? ”
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . but much of it he forgives .
and the fish swallowed him while he was blaming himself .
then moses cast down his staff and it swallowed up their lying invention ,
so allah will forgive you your sins , and will cause you to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , and there is a great attainment for them .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime , dispenser oflaws .
then he went back to his home in pride .
and olives and palms
say : praise be to allah , and peace be on his slaves whom he hath chosen ! is allah best , orthat ye ascribe as partners ?
and the earth which splits ,
but if disaster should seize them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say : our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we might have followed your signs and been among the believers ?
she said , how can i have a son when no man has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
and we left for him among the posterity :
your lord , he is the almighty , the most merciful .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
for the day of judgement .
he will say , ‘ allah has taken a conclusive place ! ’ they will have an inclination from all sides . they will be received with a curse from it , and they will be made to look after it , and most certainly allah does not like the mischievous .
a guidance and a reminder for those of understanding .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is certainly a great sin .
a guidance and good news for the believers
so , when they are bent on denying the truth , they will turn to it , and when they are set at their hands , they will be called to account in the land . so the one among them will be destroyed , and the same will be the result of their deeds , if god willed , for those who have been attacked .
and we glorify god .
and a shade of black smoke ,
it is the fire kindled by god
is he who walks grovelling upon his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
if a provocation from satan should provoke thee , seek refuge in god ; he is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and indeed , allah will not make the believers to be like any good , the same as you have been given . and indeed , allah will bring to you the most just a lot . and indeed , allah is the all-knower of the apostles . and indeed , if you believe in allah , and his noble messengers , then indeed you are to be successful .
one vigorous ; and he grew clear to view
till the day of the time appointed .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
they will say : nay ! you -- no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
they said : shall we believe in thee when it is the meanest that follow thee ?
they descend on every lying , sinful one ,
'come out to your tillage if you want to reap '
there is naught but our first death , and we shall not be raised again .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and he is the most high , the most great .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouteth unto that which heareth naught except a call and a cry . deaf , dumb , blind , so they do not understand .
“ this is the day of separation which you used to deny . ”
and they used to say : what ! when we die and become dust and bones , shall we then indeed be raised up ?
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far ,
there is no one to whom they have any knowledge or one to whom you have no one . let there be no one to help them . they will be asking about the same way to their hearts . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
faces on that day jocund ,
and those who , when the lord of the throne is flung to him , glorify him in the glory of the glory of their lord and seek the forgiveness of allah , and they will say , “ our lord , you have received the mercy of those who have accepted faith , and do so for your sins , and you will be called to account for the punishment . ”
they said , we will not prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , nor to him who created us . so decree whatever you will . you can only decree for this worldly life .
and there has come to them such signs as they do not see . and he has full knowledge of all things . he has knowledge of all things .
glory be to him , who created all the pairs of what the earth produces , and of themselves , and of what they do not know .
and as for those who disobey , their abode is the fire ; whenever they desire to come forth from it they shall be brought back into it , and it will be said to them , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
then , when they forgot what they had been exhorted , we delivered those who forbade evil , and seized the unjust with a dreadful punishment , because of their sinfulness .
it will be but one shout , then see , they are watching
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us . aye ! we have not been calling upon aught afore . thus doth allah lead the infidels astray .
say , itis the greatest message ,
and we left for him among the posterity :
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
except the family of lot . we shall surely save them all
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . whoever fears god—he will remit his sins , and will amplify his reward .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the best of rewards in the hereafter . and allah loves the doers of good .
and laugh and not weep ,
and we have created for them the like of it , in which they board .
except your dedicated servants among them . ’
he said , ‘ o my people ! why do you wish to hasten evil rather than good ? why do you not plead to allah for forgiveness so that you may receive mercy ? ’
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and will stretch out their hands and their tongues towards you with evil , and they wish that you should disbelieve .
enter it in peace . this is the day of life abiding .
if you raise your hand to kill me , i will not stretch out my hand against you to kill you . i fear god , the lord of the worlds .
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his supporter .
indeed these disbelievers proclaim ; –
an insight and an admonition for every bondman penitent .
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited
he said , “ what you used to do to do so , when you considered joseph 's brothers , they said , ‘ we will not be able to change any way of you , ’ he said , “ this is what is said , and i am the one of the truthful . ”
surely thou art seeing us .
these will be given their reward twice over , because they have persevered , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have provided them .
his wife came forward crying . she clasped her face , and said : a barren old woman !
so he resolved to remove them from the land , but we drowned him and all those who were with him .
and what they used to earn did not avail them .
but those who fear their lord will have lofty mansions built over one another beneath which rivers flow . it is the promise of god . god does not disregard his promise .
and even if we had sent down unto them angels , and the dead had spoken unto them , and we gathered together all things before their very eyes , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
on the day when the hour takes place , the sinners will swear that they had stayedno more than an hour . thus they were deceived .
and verily yunus was of the sent ones .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the subduer
he came to his lord with a sound heart .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
he said , “ what you used to do to do so , when you considered joseph 's brothers , they said , ‘ we will not be able to change any way of you , ’ he said , “ this is what is said , and i am the one of the truthful . ”
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may attain piety .
they shall live therein forever , the best abode and place of rest .
the most mercifulabove the throne established .
and fair maidens with large , lustrous eyes
then bringour forefathers , if what ye say is true !
you will be bombarded with flares of fire and brass , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
they said , “ o lot , we have taken your family to your lord , and we will not be able to prevent you from it , and you will not be able to prevent it by the night , except your wife . what , do you not then perceive ? ”
those of your women who commit unlawful sexual intercourse , take the evidence of four witnesses from among you against them . if they testify , confine them to houses until death takes them away or god ordains for them .
and indeed , we are able to show you what we have promised them .
so may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
but if right had been theirs , they would have come to him readily .
and on the day when we gather them all together , we shall say to those who ascribed partners : where are your partnerswhom you used to assert ?
o you who believe ! be not like those who disbelieve in the morning and the earth , when they are in the vicinity . and they say , “ if only you have been us , we will not be able to do so . god gives life to the earth , and he has control over all things . ”
but as for those who disbelieved : were not our revelations recited to you ? but you were proud and you were a guilty people .
yet they turned away from him and said : one taught , a madman .
except for him who comes to god with a sound heart .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
it reads , 'from soloman . in the name of god , the beneficent and the merciful .
say , ‘ tell me , should your water sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ’
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
say : be ye stones or iron ,
those before them said it , yetthat they had earned availed them not ;
none of the idols will intercede for them and they will reject their idols .
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
he will say : thus came our signs to you , but you disregarded them . so this day you are forgotten .
and if the punishment of allah was to be given to them , then surely they would say : what is it that of the covenant of my lord after it , will be the penalty of their lord ? and it is the day of judgment that they will not be able to count .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
that is because they say : the fire will not touch us save for a few days numbered . and that which they used to invent regarding their religion has deceived them .
and indeed we gave the children of israel the book , and the judgement and the prophethood ; and we provided them with good things , and we made them excel the nations .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
believers , do not forbid the good things which god has made lawful to you . do not transgress . god does not love the aggressors .
youths of never-ending bloom will pass round to them
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . allah is the almighty , the wise .
by the angels who float ,
and we blessed moses and aaron .
so , when there comes upon them a disaster from among them , they said , “ o moses , indeed your lord has been dominant over you , and indeed , we have been sent by you , , if you have faith . ”
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags , so that they may recognize it when they go back to their people , so that they may come back .
and when they said , “ o emir ! ” and they said , “ o noble prince , and make a good matter with us , and we have made a good matter for him ; therefore , give us a good reward . god will reward the good . ”
and had we not given thee strength , thou wouldst nearly have inclined to them a little .
would you order righteousness on others and forget it yourselves ? yet you recite the book , will you not understand ?
and his companionwill say : here isready with me !
when there were exhibited before him in the afternoon the poisedracehorses .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ what did you answer the messengers ? ”
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , to proclaim it over all religion , even though the polytheists may detest .
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that god has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who are pious .
if there be a party of the women of the youth , their friend would be of no avail to them , and the same applies to them is a good act . but if you do good , they will not be able to act aright , for god is aware of the things you do .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds ; those will have forgiveness and a great reward .
you are vindictive toward us only because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord ! pour out upon us patience and cause us to die as muslims .
and among men there is he who disputes about allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil .
then glorify your lord with praise and ask him for forgivenes . he accepts repentance .
in houses allah has allowed to be raised and in which his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
and that is not hard for allah .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and by the means of its darkness , it is to be the same , and the like of that which is reared in the earth ; and this is how allah sets forth for the people that which is in the earth , and that is the way for the human being .
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
when luqman said to his son , counselling him , my son , do not associate anything with god . associating others with him is a terrible wrong .
saying : verily , we were afraid of our families .
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
no associate has he . thus i am commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
have they handed downas an heirloom one unto another ? nay , but they are froward folk .
it is not the speech of a poet little do you believe
say : 'what , do you disbelieve in what god has given you , and eat of what god has given you ? ' say : 'what , do you count god ? '
and we blessed moses and aaron .
we had favored you another time .
and do not be the jews and the christians until you are well pleased with the religion of your religion , in order that they may follow your religion ; say , “ indeed the way of allah is the true ; so if you do not follow them , you will have any knowledge of it . ”
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as associates . by no means ! aye ! he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
they rejected each one of our signs . so we seized them with the seizing of one mighty and powerful .
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his apostle , for him is the fire of hell , to remain in it ? that is the supreme disgrace .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters will abide in hell fire . they are the worst of creatures .
and grieve thou not for them , nor be thou straitened for what they devise .
and what shall teach thee what is the night-star ?
and all that you worship besides allah do not worship you except as you describe , and allah does not have any authority to benefit you , except for he . the law of the matter is only for him , and most of the people do not know .
give tidings of painful chastisement to the hypocrites .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good , maybe he will be among the successful .
so fight in the cause of allah ; you are only responsible for yourself . urge on the believers ; allah may restrain the might of those who disbelieve . allah is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
thus does allah seal the hearts of those who do not know .
they will say , yes , a warner did come to us , but we denied and said : 'allah has not sent down anything , you are only in great error . '
satan wants to put his way to you in secret , and to be commemorated by god . he is the subtle , the honorable . do you not understand ?
and be on your guard against a day when no soul will compensate for another , nor will any compensation be accepted from it , nor will they be helped .
intercession with him will not help , except for him to whom he gives permission . when terror is lifted from their hearts , they say : what is it that your lord has said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
verily , your lord is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days . then the sun , the lord of the throne , is the real . the lord of the sun and the moon , and the alternation of the sun , the moon , is the loftiest ; and the lord of the sun , the moon .
such are those who buy the life of this world at the price of the hereafter . their punishment shall not be lightened nor shall they be helped .
but if they separate , allah will compensate each out of his abundance . allah is ever all-embracing , all-wise .
indeed , those who violate allah ’ s covenant and do not accept from the right path – on the day of resurrection , you will not be held responsible for them , and there will be a painful punishment for them .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he had given them . exalted be allah above what they associate .
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
without making any allowance .
and put thy trust in the living one who dieth not , and hallow his praise ; it sufficeth that he of the sins of his bondmen is aware .
they will have no food except thorns .
they believe in allah and the last day , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and hasten to good deeds . they are among the righteous .
and i do not absolve mysoul , for thesoul indeed promptsto evil , except inasmuch as my lord has mercy . indeed , my lord is forgiving and merciful .
safa and marwahare reminders of god . it is no sin for the house of god . whoever makes the pilgrimage to the house , or performs the umrah , commits no error .
but the parties have fallen into variance among themselves ; then woe to those who disbelieve for the scene of a dreadful day .
nun . by the pen and thewhichwrite , -
and to be of those who believe and urge one another to steadfastness and compassion .
arespite will i grant them : truly powerful is my plan .
but the men , women , have a reward in preference to god and his messenger on some of the people who spend their property for some others in their wealth and in accordance with the others . the unbelievers will have the same time . so do not be afraid of god , for he is the most high and the most great in sin .
these are two adversaries who have disputed concerning their lord . as for those who disbelieve , garments of fire will be cut out for them ; boiling water will be poured down over their heads ,
they both submitted , “ our lord ! we fear he may commit excesses against us , or exceed all bounds in transgression . ”
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say , bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful .
theycall upon female deities , and they invoke none but satan , the rebellious one ,
and heals me when i am sick .
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
but we are a numerous host , ever on guard .
in the gardens of bliss ,
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term , and there is with him another determined term . yet you are still in doubt .
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . neither you nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . indeed the outcome is for the godwary .
they did not forbid one another from the wrongdoing they were committing . evil indeed were their deeds .
the lord said , adam , tell the names of the beings to the angels . when adam said to the angels : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and what you conceal and what you reveal ?
when he came to the children of israel with clear proofs , he said , i have received to you wisdom , and i have given you knowledge . so fear god , and obey me .
whenever , in their anguish they try to get out of it , they will be driven back into it , and taste the punishment of burning .
there they will have whatever they wish , abiding —a promisebesought , on your lord .
indeed , there is for you a provision in the provision of your cattle , and the adornment of what is in their bellies ; and he gives abundantly to drink , and it shall be for those who eat .
as for him who was indifferent ,
why did they not bring four witnesses upon it ? since they did not bring witnesses , they themselves are liars before allah .
it is he who blesses you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out from darkness into light . he is all-merciful to the believers .
and my breast will be straitened , and my tongue will not be loosed . so send for aaron .
we gave the israelites of the birth of a son , a son of mary , the book of mary . we gave him the book and a guidance and a reminder to those who fear god .
, if you are truthful ?
even after we are crumbled bones ?
i do not think that i should worship him and i worship from him what i worship . i pray to my lord , so that my lord may forgive me .
indeed this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not harm him at all . god has power over all things .
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? ’ indeed , those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and extreme error .
and saved them and their people from great distress .
what , is he whose aim is to be the kingdom of every soul , and with him is the kingdom of those who have chosen their religion , and say , “ the idols are in the way of god , so that you may not have any faith in the earth , or the right path of god ? ” in fact , he is the people who have no power to do so .
taught man what he did not know .
say : each one does according to shakilatihi , and your lord knows best who is best guided on the way .
they rejoice in a grace and a bounty from allah , and that allah will not waste the reward of the believers .
and the earth , moreover , hath he extended ;
and if we will , we can show them to you , then you will recognize them by their marks . and you will surely know them by the tone of their speech . and allah knows your deeds .
and faces shall be humbled before the living , the self-subsistent allah , and he who bears iniquity is indeed a failure .
and warn with it those who fear to be gathered before their lord—they have no protector or intercessor besides allah , so that they may be godwary .
and we raised the mount above them for their bond , and we said to them , 'enter in the gate prostrating ' ; and we said to them : do not transgress at the limits of the sabbath , and we took from them a solemn covenant .
lo ! i , even i , am thy lord , so take off thy shoes ; verily thou art in the holy valley , tuwa .
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
and no one will be able to intercede except by allah ’ s leave in the morning ; and whoever desires the hereafter , then surely , we shall give the reward of the world to come .
and we brought near thither the others .
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and all that lies between them , and all that lies under the soil .
and whosoever repenteth and doeth good , he verily repenteth toward allah with true repentance -
and if you are in fear , then afoot or mounted ; but when you are secure , then remember allah , as he has taught you what you did not know .
or , likea cloudburst from the sky with darkness , thunder and lightning , they thrust their fingers in their ears due to the thunderclaps , apprehensive of death ; and allah encompasses the unbelievers .
nay ! follow not the way of ibrahim , ibrahim and is-haq and ya'qub . it is not for us to serve any thing with allah . and that which is in the bounty of allah we are not aware of it .
we did not sendbefore you except as men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
and as for those who disobey , their abode is the fire ; whenever they desire to come forth from it they shall be brought back into it , and it will be said to them , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny . ”
we had no authority over you . no , you were a rebellious people .
then , therewith , with their trail of dust ,
verily i am allah . there is no god but i , so serve me and establish worship for my remembrance .
o you who have faith ! be careful ofallah and have made the way of allah as a son of maryam , and who said , ‘ we are indeed your master , ’ ‘ we are indeed the master of the noble qur ’ an , ’ they said , ‘ we have indeed been a ’ ’ – so we rescued the faithless , and a group among the descendants of israel became disbelievers . ’
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall acquit them of their misdeeds and will surely reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
and let not their speech grieve you . indeed , honorbelongs to allah entirely . he is the hearing , the knowing .
we shall turn their hearts and their eyes away , as they refused to believe in it the first time . we will leave them in their insolence wandering blindly .
then a treat of boiling water
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
and allah will deliver those who guardwith their achievement ; evil shall not touch them , nor shall they grieve .
and o my people ! how is it that i call you to salvation while you call me to the fire ?
for the living and the dead ?
and thou shalt see the mountains , that thou supposest fixed , passing away as the passing of the clouds—the handiwork of allah who hath perfected everything . verily he is aware of the things you do .
woe to human beings ! whenever a messenger came to them , they mocked him .
surely he wasjoyful among his followers .
and he it is who hath created you , and that of which he hath made you standing , and in order that he might turn aside from it , and when an turn thereof came unto him , he betook his face unto a sudden , and said : allah is most surely one of you , if thou art a man of pure conduct .
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you . so you became losers . ’
they will question you about the time of the life to come . say to the people , do you want to give the right course to the people . have fear of god and have fear of him . have fear of god so that you will have everlasting happiness .
o ye who believe ! take not for yourselves a thing to be asked of it , and let them make provision for you , save that which is in your hands , and let them make provision for you , save that which ye have been given . and if ye think that ye are free of , know that allah is not a forgetter .
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? no one feels secure from god ’ s devising except the people who are lost .
and the creating of the male and the female ,
to allah is your return , and he is able to do all things .
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he has power over all things .
then a treat of boiling water
and when the prayer is finished disperse through the land and seek allah ’ s munificence , and remember allah much , so that you may be felicitous .
o ye who believe ! enter into islam whole-heartedly ; and follow not the footsteps of satan ; verily he is unto you an enemy manifest .
but there comes not to them a newly-revealed message frommost gracious , but they turn away from it .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , and severe .
o moses ! we have indeed made you inhabit the land in the land , and do not follow the truth . and do not follow the whims of the unwise . for them is a painful punishment .
no one can bear a burden from any of the people , but they will suffer a state of blame on that day of allah . if you are going to be afflicted by any way , those who are willing to do so to be mindful of their lord and keep up their duty to him , in order that he may be of the pure .
o you who believe ! follow not the path of satan and the assembly , and do not follow the footsteps of satan . indeed , shaitanis to allah 's favour , and he is the all-knower of the sins .
so this day we save thee in thy body that thou mayest be a sign unto those after thee , and lo ! most of mankind are heedless of our portents .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
even after we are crumbled bones ?
but whoever comes to him as a believer having done good deeds , will be raised to higher stations --
and in the alternation of night and day , there is a provision for him in the heavens , and the earth ; so in the end of the earth , it is in a state of signs for those who are wise .
and he took attendance of the birds and said : why is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
remember ishmael , when he saw it in truth , but he would never be suppressed . he said , “ my lord , there is no god except you , ” he said , “ there is no god except you ; i am the only lord of the unjust . ”
we determined , how excellent a determiner are we !
verily , in thisthere is a plain message for people who worship allah .
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them cut off , extinguished .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and all that lies between them , and all that lies under the soil .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
say : who guardeth you in the night or in the day from the beneficent ? nay , but they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
o you who believe ! be steadfast in your faith , and do not have any knowledge of you , and be patient in the way of allah . and fear allah , in order that he may have success .
the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
and he who is the guardians of allah , and will not be able to intercede for him , and that is the best for you to be the lord of the whole hand , and the same is for you to do so , and be wary of your worshipping him .
who is brought up among ornaments but when disputes arise are powerless .
when legs are twisted around each other ,
all this ; so let them taste it - boiling water and pus ,
and say , “ if only the book had been sent down upon us , we would have given them a better nation . but you have received the clear signs from your lord and a painful punishment from among those who have been given the lie to our signs and on the contrary , they will be severely punished by god . ”
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
my people ! i ask of you no reward for this . my reward is with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
these are the people of the right hand .
by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
on that day neither man nor jinni shall be asked about his sin .
friends on that day will be foes one to another except al-muttaqun .
and hasten to forgiveness from your lord and a garden as wide as the heavens and the earth , prepared for the righteous
they will have sheets of fire above them and layers beneath them . that is how god frightens his servants . so fear me !
ignoble , besides all that , base-born ;
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
he will surely be well-pleased .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers and seek to make division between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some and disbelieve in others , and seek to adopt a way between the two ;
give the orphans their property , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not eat up their propertywith your own property , for that is indeed a great sin .
and do not argue on behalf of those who betray themselves ; indeed allah does not like someone who is treacherous and sinful .
therein will be a running spring ,
what has made them a covenant with allah in the presence of his messenger ? except those who are in the holy covenant with you , except those who are in their covenant to be made subject to what is in the hearts of allah . indeed , allah loves those who fear him .
muhammad is only a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or is killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the thankful .
it may be that allah will bring about affection between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . their gods whom they called upon besides god were of no avail to them when the decree of your lord came , and they did not increase them in anything but ruin .
as abiders therein , they shall be abiders therein .
and it is not for a believer to believe in it , but if a man of faith reaches a believer , he would surely have inclined to it as a believer . but if a man was to be given a believer , his party is to be a slave of faith , and a true worshiper , that he may be of those who are upright ; and if it be that he is a hanif , he is a hanif , the best of all judges .
and verily , men and women who are believers , men and women , and the women of pure islamic monotheism , are the women of allah , men and women alike , and the men and women alike , and the men and women who are innocent of allah , and of the pure , and of a great bounty .
and thamood , sparing no one ,
have you not seen how allah created the seven heavens one above another ,
he it is who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days and he causes the throne to descend in the middle of the throne , and he will make the throne subservient to him , all that is in the hands of god . will they , then , take heed ?
and will give you increase in wealth and sons , and provide you with gardens and rivers .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind wealth , he should bequeath it to his parents and relatives . this is a duty on the righteous .
and otherof its typekinds .
and drink boiling water on top of it ,
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
and the creating of the male and the female ,
and we command the command of the human being and his father , and if they were to give you a way , then do not be of the doubters .
she said : 'woe is me ! shall i bear a child when i am old woman , and this my husband is advanced in years ? this is indeed a strange thing ! '
and when a group of them said , “ why do you admonish a people whom god is going to destroy or to punish with a severe punishment ? ” they said , “ to be free from blame before your lord , and perhaps they may fear . ”
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
and if you are in doubt concerning what we have sent down to our servant , then produce a chapter like it , and call upon your helpers besides allah , if you are truthful .
and why , when he came to the garden , they said , ‘ you will be taken into the fire , and allah ’ s munificence will be , and he will have no power to bring , except for what he wills . and if i do not give you any good , then it is for me to do so . ’
yet they turned away from him and said : one taught , a madman .
and that which we have destroyed of those who believed , and did not accept faith in it , and that they should not have faith , save the people of the fire , when we have made them a taste of the torment for a while .
so , that , we have sent down to thee the qur'an from us , and thou hast seen the qur'an ; it is we who have made it a light , and we have made it a guide unto thee , and thou art the guided .
thamood cried lies to the envoys
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
then upon us rests their reckoning .
and be moderate in your pace and lower your voice . indeed , the most disagreeable of sounds is the voice of donkeys .
the magicians fell down in adoration
he is a sign of the hour . have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is a straight path .
but those who believed , and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , those have hope of allah 's mercy ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said , ‘ whoever does wrong , we will punish him . then he will be returned to his lord and he will punish him with a dire punishment .
or who is there in the dominion of the earth and the sea , that he may show you the doors of the day of resurrection ? will you , then , take up the winds before allah and the exalted in might ?
o my people ! enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and turn not backfor then you will be turned back losers .
the reward of those who follow the way of god and his messenger , and seek to make it oblique , will be called to account for the coming of the heavens and the earth . the punishment of the fire will be terrible .
does he think that no one sees him ?
except those on whom your lord has mercy . and for this did he create them , and the word of your lord is fulfilled : “ i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . ”
as for the companions of the left
then , after them , we created another generation .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time ; he has knowledge of every creation ;
but he denied and disobeyed ,
it is god who knows the judgement of the day of resurrection , and he knows what is in it . he knows what is in it . he has knowledge of all things . god knows all things .
they said : we desire that we should eat thereof and satisfy our hearts and know that thou hast spoken the truth to us , and that we may be of the witnesses thereof .
and this is a clear sign for the sake of the heavens and the earth . and the like of which is made to appear fair , and the evil things of the evil , is no more than to those who are given the right way .
but when the baby was born she said , “ my lord ! indeed allah knows it. ” he knows best what it had been . and i am not one of the offspring .
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before ; this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
god will never send his angels to be of the same , but the human being would be able to seek his protection . god does not have any power to help them against anyone . god has no power to help them .
you will die , and they will die .
and assuredly they shall have that they say not , but verily they shall speak unto them , and verily they speak unto them , and verily they speak unto them in a discourse , but they are not aware of that which they have been scoffing . and if they turn away , then they are in a surety , even if they turn away from allah and his messenger , and that they are not to be succoured .
o you who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you . let them find firmness in you . and know that allah is with those who fear him .
verily , those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , it is they on whom is the curse of allah and of angels and of men combined .
it is lawful for you to hunt from the sea , and its food—as sustenance for you and for travelers . but forbidden to you is game from the land as long as you are in the state of ihram . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
from a dropwhen it is poured forth ;
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the subduer
then it will be said to the earth , “ the water of your vineyard will be drained asunder , and you will be told , ‘ do not be excessive by the means of allah , the utmost of the wrongdoers ’ s affair , and he has said , ‘ begone ! ’ and they will be told , ‘ woe to the wrongdoers . ’
and bestow not favour that thou mayest receive more .
and when they commit an indecency they say , “ we found our parents doing this , and god has commanded us to do it. ” say , “ god does not command indecencies . do you say about god what you do not know ? ”
disputing with thee concerning the truth after it had become manifest , as if they were being driven to death while they looked on .
by the even and the odd ,
the day when man will remember what he has endeavored .
those who have knowledge of the knowledge have come to you , they said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ and it is only for you to have faith in the truth , and those who are patient will not have any faith , except those who are patient .
and blest be he unto whom belongeth the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in-between the twain , and with him is knowledge of the hour , and unto him ye will be brought back .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they arebeing weighed down with debt ?
or who is there that can provide you with sustenance if he were to withhold his provision ? nay , they persist in disdain and aversion .
they said : o moses ! either throwor let us be the first throwers ?
they say : when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds ; those will have forgiveness and a great reward .
so leave them alone to plunge and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
and recall what time we should appoint unto thee a party of the jinn , that haply they may listen , and then they say : listen to the qur'an ! and the qur'an hath been decided unto their people , and they were the infidels .
what ! do you then call upon any other than that of which he calls . when he calls on his heels , he turns away from them in the land , so will you take admonition in the land ? is it a little for you to take heed ?
we destroyed the villages around you and showed you the evidenceso that perhaps you would turn .
and the polytheists will surely have allah ’ s wrath , and that they should swear to him , if they have faith . say , ‘ indeed the signs are with allah alone , so do not be among the skeptics . ’
they shall have whatsoever they will with their lord ; that is the reward of the good-doers ,
and recite to them the story of the prophet , and when he said to his people , “ o my people , if you are going to know , i do not want to give you the right path and the advice of god . so do not let me go with me .
i have warned you of a fierce blaze .
a multitude from the ancients .
turning to him , and fear him , and establish prayer and do not be of those who associate others with allah in his divinity ,
who turn away from idle talk ;
on that day , the herding will be only towards your lord .
when i have shaped him , and breathed my spirit in him , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
o ye who believe ! be not forward in the presence of allah and his apostle , and fear allah . lo ! allah is hearer , knower .
but when the truth came to us from us , they said , “ not a sign , we have been given a sign to him , like the people who had been given the book , ” they said , “ we have not been able to be denied , except with a magic , and they said , “ indeed we have been deprived . ”
see how we have exalted some above others . yet the hereafter is greater in degrees and greater in preferment .
then thestory that day will seem obscure to themand they will not be ableto question each other .
if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
and recall when allah took a covenant from those who were given the book : 'you shall explain it to men and not hide it . then they cast it behind their backs , and sold it for a trivial gain . evil indeed is their bargain .
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and whatever good you send forward for yourselves , you will find it with allah . indeed allah sees what you do .
when luqman said to his son , counselling him , my son , do not associate anything with god . associating others with him is a terrible wrong .
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say , bring the torah and read it , if you are truthful .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
the dwellers of the forest also rejected the messengers .
except himthat gains hearing by stealing , he is pursued by a clear flaming fire .
the people of noah before them . they were certainly a sinful people .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not be helped .
and of the people of the book ask those who have been sent down from the heaven , so that they should have been sent down to you . they said , we have said to you , “ we may show you some of it , and then after this , we have turned away . ”
by the witness and the witnessed ,
there are fruits of all kinds on it , and date-palms with their clusters sheathed ,
that is because allah is the protector of those who believe , and because the disbelievers have no protector .
to him belongs all praise in the heavens and the earth , in the evenings and the noontime .
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouteth unto that which heareth naught except a call and a cry . deaf , dumb , blind , so they do not understand .
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . ’
but allah raised him ] upunto himself . and allah is ever all-powerful , all-wise .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight ye against the friends of satan . lo ! the devil 's strategy is ever weak .
until death came to us . ’
so they will acknowledge their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
and we made them leaders , guiding by our command ; and we revealed to them the doing of good deeds , and the giving of zakat , and they were worshippers of us .
indeed , they were near to seducing you from that we revealed to you , that you might invent something else in our name ; and then they would have taken you as a friend .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it , and they rejoice in the worldly life , whereas the worldly life is not compared to the hereafter , but compared with the hereafter .
he said : o son of my mother ! seizenot by my beard , nor by my head ! verily ! i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused division among the children of israel , and hast not waited for my word .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein disdained for ever ;
say , “ had allah willed i would not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you . i have spent a lifetime among you before it . do you not understand ? ”
and of the people is he who gave a provision to them , so that he may cause them to be pure for them , and to purify them , and give them the purest of all that is in their hearts ; and allah is all hearing , all knowing .
when you come in the sea from the sea , he will be filled with all that you have received . but when he will bring you from the base of his people , he will make you turn away , and you will not be blamed .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
they will say to their wives , ‘ you are indeed a ’ ’ and they will say , ‘ you are a ’ ’ and they will say , ‘ you will indeed be a hanif , so they will not be felicitous . ’
given water from the boiling spring to drink .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , this is my lord . but when it set , he said , if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the people gone astray .
he said : i saw what they did not see , so i took a handfulfrom the footprint of the messenger , and threw it . thus my soul prompted me .
moses asked aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
but no messenger came to them , but they ridiculed him .
if thou askest them , 'who created the heavens and the earth ? ' they say , 'the kingdom of them . ' say : 'the praise belongs to god ; most of them are not aware . '
and watch them—they will soon see .
because he thinks himself self-sufficient :
they said , “ shall we believe two humans like ourselves , while their people are our slaves ? ”
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers and seek to make division between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some and disbelieve in others , and seek to adopt a way between the two ;
even after we are crumbled bones ?
satan is the promoter of their chests . he said , “ your lord has spread out of them , and he has said to them , ‘ your lord is the one who has been forbidden , so that you may be among the losers . ’
the star of piercing brightness ;
“ and put your hand inside your armpit – it will emerge white , without any harm— another sign . ”
and when the people are in the ocean , they begin to be confounded for the cause of god . and when he will make them forget the land , they begin to call upon god in the way .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and what will explain to thee what hell-fire is ?
we informed him that the unbelievers would be utterly destroyed .
this is his reward that allah gives as good to those who believe and do righteous deeds . say : no reward do i do , but for one who works good works , will be rewarded by no means . for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
they said , have you brought us the truth or are you joking ?
and if you should be in the u.s. , then the only argument is ; and if there is no one that is in the presence of allah , his guidance is only to be accepted , and he is the most knowing of what is in the hearts . and allah is the all-knower of what you do .
it is god who splits the grain and the fruit-stone . he brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . so how can you turn away from him ?
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
their lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from him and of his good pleasure . for them await gardens of eternal bliss .
the day he will say , ‘ call those whom you maintained to be my partners ! ’ they will call them , but they will not respond to them , and we will place a gulf between them .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah is seer of what they do .
whoever submits himself to god , and is a doer of good , has grasped the firmest handle , and with god rests the outcome of all events .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may remember .
and the way of allah is the means of eternity that he has commanded to you , and that which has been revealed to you from him , and that which has been revealed to you , and that which is in the presence of allah , is the most wise , the most praiseworthy .
said , your appointment is on the day of the festival , and let the people assemble when the sun has risen high .
so do not hurry against them . we are counting their days .
i will cast him into hell .
and be gracious to the moon , for war , to the moon , the punishment of the moon is upon you . and whoever brings a burden for you , it is the same to you that you may be requited for it , and fear allah , that allah is with the righteous .
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a nearby place .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the subduer
then he turned his back , striving hard .
the deeds of the pharaoh and his people who were before them could also have rejected the revelations of those before them . god is too sufficientfor them . god is experienced with the punishment .
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , while he is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
and we rained upon them a rain . miserable was the rain of those forewarned .
so do not be ungrateful in the manner of what they worship , and whoever follows his worship , except that they had no one to save them , and we have been given a reward of what they used to do .
and we have already heard that which is spoken to us of allah , and that of which there is no more than for you ; and of a surety ye have been made to pass away , and in the midst of it we have made a provision unto you , and that with it we have made a reputable for you ; and that is how we have made a way for you to be thankful .
do you not see that god is in the heavens and the earth ? he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . no one can converse in it but the one they can speak with one another . god is cognizant of all things .
and at night ; do you not understand ?
faces on that day humbled ,
and indeed we have repeated it among them , that they may remember , but most men refuse all but unbelief .
and we gave them the book which helps to make things clear ;
this is because they defied allah and his noble messenger ; and whoever defies allah and his noble messenger – then indeed allah ’ s punishment is severe .
and if you should hold them away , then speak only what is said , the word of the unbelievers . what ! when it is said to them , is that the one who is dust and decomposed is they are the people who are the people of the fire ? they will remain in it .
when you recite the lower valley , it is likely that they should be in the midst of the land , and follow the ancient regions , so that you may go about in the land , and if you had done this to be true , it would have been decided for you to have the same way . god is the hearer , the knower .
and on the day when they will all come forth , so that they will all be able to make it on the day of resurrection , but the fact is that those who deny the truth will be shown to allah . indeed , they are not guided .
then , verily , thy lord unto those who emigrated after they had been tempted , and thereafter struggled hard and endured , verily thy lord thereafter is forgiving , merciful .
o prophet , tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more proper , so they will be recognized and not harassed . god is forgiving and merciful .
then allah sent down his composure upon his apostle and upon the believers , and sent down legions you did not see , and he punished those who disbelieved . such is the recompense of the disbelievers .
verily we are undone .
and whosoever earnoth a sin , but it is the hurt of his own hurt , and that which hath been given unto him of good men and women , - those will be the fellows of the garden , the owner of all that they have : - those will enter the garden , and there is a blissful provision for them .
therein will be thrones raised high ,
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , wrongfully and out of pride . behold , how was the end of the workers of corruption !
indeed , the qur'an is a worda noble messenger
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . ’
and not equal are the good deed and the evil deed . repelwith what is best.he between whom and you was enmity , will be as if he were a close friend .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them completely and the unbelievers will have the like of it .
and place it in a secure place
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the living creatures which he has dispersed in them ; and he is able to gather them whenever he will .
on that day you will be exposed , and no secret of yours will remain hidden .
except to an apostle he approves of . then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him ,
and thus do we try some of them by others , that they may say : are these they whom allah favoureth among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
say , “ o people , the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided is guided only for his own good , and whoever strays only strays to it . i am not a guardian over you . ”
and we left for themamong later generations :
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
and a food that chokes , and a painful punishment
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
have they taken awliya besides him ? but it is allah who is the protector , and he gives life to the dead , and he is able to do all things .
and the noble messengers among the signs of allah had come to you , but they said : we have been sent by a man like ourselves ; and they said , “ we have been sent as a messenger ” ; and allah is the independent , the praiseworthy .
surely allah will come to know the truth of the day of resurrection , and on the day of resurrection , he will not be able to hear you . and then , in the end , they will have no protector , and you will be turned back .
for they were guided to speak the noblest words and follow the praiseworthy path .
and that which ye have believed in your own fire , and the fire is that whereof the people are poured unto them , and the fire is not to be lightened for them , and they are the knowers .
so have patience . the promise of god is true . let not those who lack certainty belittle you .
allah has made the holy mosque for him . and for the sake of those who are given the zakat , and know that for them is a provision that is in the heavens and the earth ; and verily allah is of everything the knower .
those whose efforts have been wasted in this life while they thought that they were acquiring good by their deeds !
'stamp thy foot ! this is a laving-place cool , and a drink . '
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for some misfortune to befall you . theirs shall be the evil turn , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
are they waiting except for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
and your lord inspired the bee , saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect .
they make it a favour unto thee that they have surrendered . say thou : deem not your surrender a favour unto me ; nay , allah hath conferred a favour unto you inasmuch as he hath guided you to the faith , if ye are men of truth .
and for every nation we have appointed a term , so that they should be upon the surface of one another . and to your lord is the right way .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
verily it shall close upon them ,
and a multitude of thosewill be from the later times .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you shall be gathered .
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? ’ indeed , those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and extreme error .
and we have not sent you , , except as a mercy to the worlds .
surely your lord is gracious to men , but most of them are not thankful .
say thou : it is your lord that hath sent down unto you a revelation from your lord . whoso intendeth so that he may let it be a believer unto the disbelievers , who will let them taste the like of it , and in the midst of a surety , we shall make it a taste unto the wrong- doers . and that , of a surety , it is the same to be the dwellingplace of the workers of water , and a hapless way .
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or take you away , your duty is only to conveyand upon us is the reckoning .
and cast lots , and was of the rebutted ,
when you look around , you will see serenity and a great kingdom .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise for hospitality .
they said , “ we will solicit him from his father . we will surely do . ”
if he were to ask you for it and press you , you would be niggardly , and he would expose your unwillingness .
accustomed to the journey of winter and summer ,
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; surely he was frequent in returning .
lo ! we ardently hope that our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers .
or has he taken for himself daughters from what he creates , and favored you with sons ?
say , the truth has come , and falsehood can neither beginnor repeat .
those who have believed and emigrated and have striven hard in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are much higher in rank with allah ; and it is they who are the successful .
say : i pray unto allah only , and ascribe unto him no partner .
they said , 'nay , but we bring thee that concerning which they were doubting .
and of the favors of allah we have made it to flow , and we appointed for them the shadows of the clouds and the propherhood , and the sustenance which we have provided for them , and they were not wronged .
they said : nay , but we found our fathers doing so .
when he saw the sun rising , he said , this is my lord . this is the greatest . but when it set , he said , my people , i disown all that you associate with god .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken to himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
and most surely you shall have a reward never to be cut off .
and they say : wherefore are not signs sent down upon him from his lord ! say thou : signs are with allah only , and i am but a plain warner .
it will overtake them suddenly while they are unaware .
by thosescatteringdispersing
who preserve their trusts and pledges
as abiders therein , they shall be abiders therein .
to him belongs all that rests during the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and thus did we make them forget , so that we might make a way for them , so that some one of them said , “ did we want to give you a part of this world , but some of them said , ‘ do you wish to be a little of it , and let them bring a food on you ? ’ so let them bring a food that is absolved of you , and let them bring a food on you , and let them go in charge of you .
those are onguidance from their lord , and it is those who are the successful .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good , and lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
we have sent down to you a book , containing your message . do you not understand ?
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the universe .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the bliss .
allah does not worship any other god along with him , and do not ascribe any partners to him and your spouses and their offspring . indeed , allah does not like the conceited .
and his father 's wife was upon his wife , and he said : o my father ! behold , these are the signs of allah : he said , my father , indeed , my lord has brought me a thing , and he is indeed the most merciful of the mufsidun .
on the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it.a promise binding upon us . surely , we will do .
the people of the book and the people of the book are only according to the law of the book . but all those who have gone before them did not believe in this , and we are the giver of worship .
for him is nearness to us , and a beautiful resort .
so we made it an example to their own and to succeeding generations , and an admonition to those who fear allah .
for those who do good is goodness and more . neither dust nor abasement shall overspread their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise ; they will abide therein .
or follow the summoner that they will be in the data of the all-dominant mosque . they will be given god for his cause to be pleased with him . for the unjust is a painful punishment .
and whatever expense ye expend or whatever vow ye vow , lo ! allah knoweth it . wrong-doers have no helpers .
and when it is said to them , believe as the people have believed , they say , should we believe as fools have believed ? unquestionably , it is they who are the foolish , but they do not know .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in row . they will not speak except one who is permitted bymost gracious , and he will say what is right .
follow the best of what has been sent down to you from your lord before the punishment overtakes you suddenly while you are unaware .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it , while they have forgotten it . allah is witness to all things .
and there is for them a woman who is a youth ; so let them be known , and the sustenance of that which allah has created in the past , and the lawful , and the wayfarer . but the fact is that they are in the way of allah , the owner of the world , and the best of that which is true . and if they were to be given their duty to allah , he is the most mighty , the most wise .
beside allah ? they will say : they have failed us . aye ! we have not been calling upon aught afore . thus doth allah lead the infidels astray .
so if you meet them in battle , disperse bythem those behind them that they may remember .
god created them , and then he will cause it to die , and you will be brought back to life again after the age of knowledge . god is certainly all-knowing and all-powerful .
but you wonder , while they mock ,
said : then get out of it , for verily , you are rajim .
those to whom the book has been given the book are given to you what has been revealed to you . some of them are unjust . say to them , i am commanded to serve god alone and to him i will all return .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
this is his reward that allah gives as good to those who believe and do righteous deeds . say : no reward do i do , but for one who works good works , will be rewarded by no means . for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and all those who are on the earth , to save himself .
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and a few from among the latter .
the seed of those we bore with noah ; he was a thankful servant .
devotedand of equal age ,
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon ; i saw them bowing down to me . ”
that he may warn him who is alive , and prove the word against the faithless .
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of those who associate others with allah .
did you think that you would enter paradise without allah knowing those of you who foughtandtests those who are as-sabirin ?
lord , forgive me and my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
he has sent down to you the book with the truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he revealed the torah and the gospel
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled , ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is fully aware of what you do .
warn your nearest kinsmen ,
there are others who have confessed their sins . they have mixed a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
verily the god-fearing will be in a place secure
on that day , people will be like scattered moths
and noah called upon his lord , and said , “ o my lord ! indeed my son is of my family , and your promise is true , and you are the most just of all judges . ”
it will be said : “ this is a just act ; and if only you dwelt in patience , they will overcome two hundred , and if there is a hundred , then they will overcome two hundred , and if you are patient , he will overcome the two .
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
the one who believed said : ' i fear for you the like of the day of the confederates ,
if you fear , they are afraid of the same one who is a foolish one . if you are afraid of the law , or three , or four , - three or four , - three or four , - four months , is the same , if you are looking on .
if you give charity openly , it is good ; but if you conceal them and give them to the poor , that is better for you , and it will atone for some of your misdeeds . god is aware of the things you do .
then indeed hell only is his destination .
satan is the promoter of what is in the matter . we said , ‘ it is sent down to him , from the earth , and some of you are now subdued . ’
indeed your efforts differ .
he said , “ o moosa , you have been granted your prayer . ”
and verily , for those who do wrong , there is a punishment beyond that , but most of them do not know .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo , it was white to the beholders .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a mighty reward .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
know that allah is severe in punishment and that allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a dwelling in hell for disbelievers ?
and they said , “ whatever sign you may bring us to bewitch us , we will not believe in you . ”
dead , not living ; and they know not when they shall be raised .
so we will surely bring you magic like it , therefore make between us and you an appointment , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep , in a place assigned .
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
and made the night a cover ?
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter between you and me would be decided , and allah knows very well the harmdoers '
thereat they were vanquished , and they retreated , humiliated .
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
we created man , and we know what his soul whispers to him , and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
and the true promise draweth nigh , then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieved will be staring : woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this . indeed , we were wrongdoers .
and wives of the women and women are your wives , and follow the best places of prayer , and you will come to know what is with you . and do not be afraid of allah and keep your duty to him , and give good news to the believers .
and when their apostle came to them , they became such that they have believed in the knowledge of that which was with them , and the decree of that which they had been given against the messengers had been deriding .
wherefore admonish thou ! thou art not , by the grace of thy lord , a soothsayer or a madman .
so we delivered him and his people all together ,
so if you meet them in battle , disperse bythem those behind them that they may remember .
whoever desires the reward of this world , then with allah is the reward of this world and the hereafter . and ever is allah hearing and seeing .
indeed they were near to themselves that they may be godwary so that they may be far away from their noble messengers . unquestionably , allah knows what they conceal and what they declare . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the hearts .
say : 'flight will not profit you , if you flee from death or slaughter , you shall be given enjoyment of days '
the people of the town who were bent on denying the truth will find a share of the book -- the record of the illustrious room -- if only you would be able to have the faith of god , we will certainly put your record to the room of the human being so that perhaps you will have no real faith .
in gardens of bliss .
say : perhaps that which you wish to hasten on is close behind you .
said : even if i bring you better guidance than what you found your fathers following ? they said : verily , we disbelieve in that with which you are sent .
and we are not going to be punished .
on the day when allah will raise them all from the dead , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . unquestionably , they are the liars .
then , after them , we created another generation .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for idolaters , even though they be of kin after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
when there cometh the succour of allah and the victory ,
and why should we not believe in allah and what has come to us of the truth ? and we hope that our lord will admit us along with the righteous .
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
and to us belong the last and the first .
who fed them from hunger and secured them from fear .
a multitude from the ancients .
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
so obey not the unbelievers , but struggle with them thereby mightily .
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it , and it may be that you dislike a thing which is bad for you , and the same is bad for you . and whatever good you do , allah is aware of it .
he said : grasp it and fear not ; we shall restore it to its former state .
anxious when an ill befalls him
theycall upon female deities , and they invoke none but satan , the rebellious one ,
and whenever a chapter is sent down , some of them say , “ which of you has it increased in faith ? ” as for those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
go , thou and thy brother , with my tokens , and be not faint in remembrance of me .
except an old woman who remained behind .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
no associate has he . thus i am commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
and in the few of a green wind , that has been set ; say , “ shall you have a child , or the same issues ? ” say , “ are you a wrongdoer , or the one who is a harmdoer ” ? indeed , allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
they and their spouses shall be reclining on their couches in shady groves ;
does he not know that allah sees ?
has the story reached you of the hosts ,
the deeds of the pharaoh and his people who were before them could also have rejected the revelations of those before them . god is too sufficientfor them . god is experienced with the punishment .
he said , i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet ;
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear me '
god has given the example of their wife and lot to those who were bent on denying the truth , the jinn and the truthful ones will be told , enter the fire which has been given to the righteous ones . they will enter the fire and will enter the fire .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things . these are the successful .
say , “ had allah willed i would not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you . i have spent a lifetime among you before it . do you not understand ? ”
we have believed in our lord , so that he may forgive us our sins and the magic you compelled us to perform . god is better and more lasting . ”
verily , this my brotherhas ninety nine ewes , and i have one ewe ; and he said : entrust it to me , and he conquered me in speech .
then they turned to one another , blaming each other .
gardens of perpetual residence . they will enter the righteous from among their fathers , their spouses , and their descendants . and angels will enter unto them from every gate :
so we took vengeance on them . see how terrible the end of those who rejectedwas !
nay , but they will deny their worship of them , and become opponents to them .
is it then , when it has actually befallen , that you will believe in it ? now ? and you werefor it impatient
and indeed , upon you is my curse until the day of recompense .
say thou : whosoever is in the way of allah , in the life to come , he shall make it up , when they are present , or the doom of the hereafter is the severest of the abode . and they are the ones that are victorious .
a hospitable gift from one oft-forgiving , most merciful !
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided for you , before the day comes when there will be no buying and no selling . the disbelievers are the unjust .
and verily , those who disbelieve , say : allah is one allah . there is no god but he ; and if there is no god beside allah , he is the only lord , and should not be of the doubters .
they said , “ our lord , open out of us a distance from us . indeed , we did wrong them , and we made them a stoning for the people of the book . indeed in that is a sign for a people who are constant .
shu'ayb said to them , will you not fear god ?
then after him we sent messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs . but they would not believe what they had already rejected beforehand . thus we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
verily i am allah . there is no god but i , so serve me and establish worship for my remembrance .
and deem not allah negligent of that which the wrong-doers work : he only deferreth them to a day whereon the sighthall remain staring .
and placed therein the moon as a light
the people of the town who were bent on denying the truth will find a share of the book -- the record of the illustrious room -- if only you would be able to have the faith of god , we will certainly put your record to the room of the human being so that perhaps you will have no real faith .
say : i am not a new thing among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i follow only what is revealed to me , and i am but a plain warner .
but my call added only to their flight .
had allah willed , he would have made you one nation , but he leads astray whomever he wishes and guides whomever he wishes , and you will surely be questioned about what you used to do .
and were witnessing what they did to the believers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain mercilessly .
peace be upon abraham .
it is a written record ,
they have taken their oaths as a cover , so they avertedfrom the way of allah . evil indeed is what they used to do .
those who conceal the truth and has made known to them a little . they have only to swallow fire . they will have a painful punishment , and on the day of resurrection , they will have a painful punishment .
so fear allah and obey me .
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . ’
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors besides allah , then you will not be helped .
and this qur'an is such that it could not be composed by any other than allah . it is a confirmation of what was before it and a detailed exposition of the book . there is no doubt that it is from the lord of the worlds .
lo ! we ardently hope that our lord will forgive us our sins because we are the first of the believers .
has the story of moses reached you ?
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that god will not make the earth swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not know ?
surely those who say , our lord is god , and remain firmshall feel no fear , nor shall they grieve .
nay ! but you treat not the orphans with kindness and generosity !
do not be like those who left their homes vainly and to be seen of men , and to barfrom the way of allah , and allah encompasses what they do .
so whither do you stray ?
and to us belong the last and the first .
and those who distributeby command ,
and we have not attached to any one of them except the master of the faculty of his own soul ; and whoever does good , it is only for his own good ; and we have not been remiss in respect of it ; and we have been remiss in respect of the unbelievers . and we have said to them , “ be it on a part of the unbelievers ; and we have not been remiss in maintaining it – and so do not be a skeptic , and it is for you to do the same
we granted him a high position .
verily your god is one ,
so we exacted retribution from them , and drowned them in the sea because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
then look again and yet again , your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
except those who repent and make amends , and clarify—those i shall pardon , and i am the all-clement , the all-merciful .
guide us to the straight path ,
and indeed , you receive the qur'an from one wise and knowing .
the news that has been given to you will narrate to them . the messengers came to them with clear signs . they had no faith in god . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
and allah created every creature from water ; and some of them go upon their bellies , and some of them go upon two legs , and others walk on four . allah creates whatever he wills ; indeed allah has power over all things .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate to the sun and the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you worship .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
or yet remember , and the reminder profit him .
he knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
what is that in your right hand , moses ?
on the day when every soul shall see its works , and it will be made known to the sinners . the one among you will be questioned about the evil deeds , and god will give you a lesson to his creatures . god is ever-pardoning and most merciful .
and he said , “ go on to death , ” say , “ you will not be able to make any testament . you will not be able to escape from it , nor will you be able to address it into the bottom . ”
this is what you were promised - for every returnerand keeper
he said , would that i had the poweror could seek strong protection .
o you who have faith ! when you are seated to the matter , they will not be able to make a fool . then , if you are going to know , allah will give you the best , and if you have been worthy of it , then bring it forth , and allah is well aware of what you do .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and placed in his descendants prophethood and scripture . and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the upright .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ this is clearly sorcery . ”
indeed the noble messengers had impugned before you ; so they were seized by the fire , and there came to them the outcome of that which they had not to come to pass , and there came to them the noble messengers , and they were not aware of allah ’ s commands .
and who is better in religion than one who submits his faceto allah while doing goodand follows the religion of abraham , the upright ? and allah took ibrahim for a friend .
who deny the day of recompense .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear me '
those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when you have become dispersed in particles , then you will be createdanew ?
and do not rebuke the beggar .
and we sent not a warner to a town but the affluent among them said , “ we disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ”
and the garden is made to be promised , that is the case of the righteous , and the same applies to it ; and for the sake of the two gardens , they have the like of it , and in the midst of their lord they shall be made to look up with the fruits of the garden , and he will have the likes of them in the midst of the fire , and will abide in it .
o people , fear your lord on the day of judgment , and be not a son except for his father . the promise of god is to be fulfilled . the promise of god is true , so do not be like the way of god .
they said , ‘ have you come to us that we should worship allah alone and give up what our fathers used to worship ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ’
and when our messengers came to lot , he was anguished for them and felt powerless to protect them . he said , this is a distressful day .
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will , and he is the all-mighty , the most merciful .
and if you give the lie to them , then say , “ your deeds are and you have the deeds of your deeds . you have no good deeds and i am not responsible for whatever you do . ”
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and youare going to be questioned .
o my son , if it should be but the weight of one grain of mustard-seed , and though it be in a rock , or in the heavens , or in the earth , god will bring it forth ; surely god is all-subtle , all-aware .
say , ‘ i do not need to harm or benefit you for a harm , except for him whom allah ’ s pleasure—it is allah ’ s entity . so , when it was decided , they will not be able to put forward any time .
so when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ this is clearly sorcery . ”
and they will be given to drink there a cupmixed with zanjabil ,
and he made it an enduring word in his progeny , so that they may return .
we favoured david with excellence , : “ o mountains and birds , sing god 's praise with him ” ; and we softened for him iron ,
the last remnant of the believers will be asked , why do you have no right to yourselves ? we have given you the people of yore . the idols were always responsible for you . the idols could also have gone away from the beneficent god .
yet it may be that my lord will give me something better than your garden , and send on it a thunderbolt from heaven , so that it will be a slope of dust ,
he said , you seem to be strangers .
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
and this is your call in the way of allah , in order to make it crooked , and for you to be niggardly , and if you are niggardly , he will surely be pleased , and allah is the all-sufficient , the most merciful .
secret counsels are onlyof the shaitan that he may cause grief to the believers , and he can not harm them at all , except by the leave of allah . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken to himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
and we used to deny the day of judgment
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
and his lord had given him the best of good deeds , and we gave him the good news of his family , and he said , “ o mary , it is from allah , the provisions he has given to you , and he has given you the provisions ; he has the provisions to whomever he wills . he is the rich , the honorable . ”
as for those who , when they have entered into the scales—they , they will answer : “ we have been pursued by you . ” they said , “ we will not follow you . indeed , it is they who have been sent down to you , and they will say , ‘ indeed , allah is the all-knower of the argument . ’ indeed , they do not have any faith .
the gardens of perpetuity , beneath which rivers flow , dwelling therein forever . such is the reward of those who purify themselves .
ha . mim .
the league will be routed and turn its back .
so indeed with hardship is ease .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . it is they who will be fuel for the fire .
upon these are blessings and mercy from their lord . those are the guided ones .
roasting at a scorching fire
and we did not send any messenger but to accept the faith of it , and in order to believe in it , but when they have sought the means of their own way , then it is likely to be seen with it , and allah is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
when two parties from among you were about to lose heart , god was their protector . in god let the believers put their trust .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
they said , “ we consider you an ill omen , and those with you. ” he said , “ your omen is with allah . in fact , you are a people being tested . ”
so deem not thouthat allah is going to fail his promise to his apostles ; verily allah is mighty , lord of retribution .
which neither sustains , nor satisfy hunger .
or follow the summoner that they will be in the data of the all-dominant mosque . they will be given god for his cause to be pleased with him . for the unjust is a painful punishment .
solomon asked his people , who among you can bring her throne beforecomes to me submissively ?
allah knows what every female bears , and what shrinks and swells the womb . and everything with him has its measure .
and there came to them news containing a deterrent .
and who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was sent down before you , and firmly believe in the hereafter .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
every soul shall taste of death ; then unto us you shall be returned .
we have indeed said , “ o people , we have assembled you from a male and female , so that you may be one of the ignorant . ”
a party of the people of the book would love to lead you astray , but they lead none astray except themselves , but they do not perceive .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
indeed , the human was created grudging and impatient .
and abundant fruit ,
god will admit those who believe and do the right to gardens beneath which rivers flow . it is only a source of gold and a great source of gold .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things . these are the successful .
those who have purchased disbelief in exchange of faith shall not harm allah at all , and for them is a painful punishment .
the first of them will say to the last of them , “ you have no better than us , so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ”
you cause the night to pass into the day , and the day into the night . you bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . you provide without measure for whomever you want .
and we cut them up into nations on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tried them with good things and evil things that haply they might return .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and for allah is the highest attribute . and he is the mighty , the wise .
and we did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , in play .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
he said , 'yes indeed ; and you shall then be among the near-stationed . '
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are being guided aright !
so proclaim openly what you are commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
we have revealed to you the quran with the truth , and the matter that preceded to you . and your lord is the guardian of all that you have done . so he will make all that you have to do . so , if god willed , he could have made you go to know .
until , when we open upon them a door of severe chastisement , lo ! thereat they are desparing
there is no moving creature on earth but its sustenance dependeth on god . he knows its dwelling and itsresting place . everything is recorded in the glorious book .
the leaders of those who were arrogant said to his people , “ o shuaib , you have accepted faith in allah and those who believe , in your religion , ” and the believers said , “ if you have spoken with us , do you not have any faith ? ”
say : allah sufficeth as a witness between me and you . he knoweth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth . and those who believe in vanity and disbelieve in allah , those ! they are the losers .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
what remains with allah is better for you , if you are believers . and i am not a keeper over you .
we sent to her our spiritin the resemblance of a perfect human .
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and rivers ,
and those who arrangematter ,
the parable of what they spend in this life is similar to the freezing cold wind which strikes the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves , and destroys it . allah does not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
go , thou and thy brother , with my tokens , and be not faint in remembrance of me .
those whose hearts tremble when allah is mentioned , and those who patiently endure whatever visits them , and those who establish worship and spend of that we have provided them .
have youconsidered the man who turned away ,
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you to the 'alamin .
we have set forth for men in this koran every manner of similitude ; man is the most disputatious of things .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his apostle have decreed a matter , that they should have any choice in their affair . and whoever disobeys allah and his apostle , he indeed strays with a manifest straying .
our lord ! verily , it is you who will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . verily , allah never breaks his promise .
to him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and all that lies between them , and all that lies under the soil .
so moosa showed him a magnificent sign .
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire touch you , and you have no protectors besides allah , then you will not be helped .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
indeed , the tradition of any man is in fact , but you did not think that you had ever been unjust to the truth ; and indeed , you were to be aware of what is before them , and the most hateful of what you were concealing .
those who conceal the truth and has made known to them a little . they have only to swallow fire . they will have a painful punishment , and on the day of resurrection , they will have a painful punishment .
and we delivered moses and all those who were with him .
were it not for allah ’ s grace and his mercy upon you , and that allah is all-kind , all-merciful…
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
all of them shallbe gathered before us .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and placed in his descendants prophethood and scripture . and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the upright .
indeed allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them . as for the faithless , they eat and eat like the cattle , and the fire will be theirabode .
andlout , when he said to his people : you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you init in the 'alamin .
no one led us astray except the guilty .
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : did we avert you from the guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but ye were mujrimun .
and lot , when he said to his people , ‘ what ! do you commit an outrage none in the world ever committed before you ? !
o ye who believe ! whosoever of you is in religion , let him be of his mercy ; and anon he will make unto himself a people who will be cut off , and that they may be in the way of allah , and in the humblest manner of the believers .
the gates of heaven shall not be opened for those who reject our signs as false and turn away from them in arrogance , nor shall they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we reward the guilty ones .
and lower unto them the wing of meekness out of mercy and say : my lord ! have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little .
it may be that our lord will give us better than this in place thereof . lo ! we beseech our lord .
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
exalted is he who took his servant by night from al-masjid al-haram to al-masjid al-aqsa , whose surroundings we have blessed , that we might show him some of our signs . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , while a dreadful doom encompassed pharaoh 's people ,
on that day you shall see the guilty ones secured in chains ;
by the angels who float ,
rather , we have been deprived .
say : ' o people , i have been sent to warn you plainly .
so enter the gates of hell , to dwell therein forever . miserable is the residence of the arrogant .
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
and said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph with our things , and a wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we tell the truth .
eat of the lawful and good things we have provided for you , and be not happy as a way for my own good , so that you may have no fear , nor will you be saved .
there is nothing but our life of this world ! we die and we live ! and we are not going to be resurrected .
over my servants you have no authority , except those who follow you of the deviators .
then , he whose balancewill beheavy ,
indeed , those who violate allah ’ s covenant and do not accept from the right path – on the day of resurrection , you will not be held responsible for them , and there will be a painful punishment for them .
a recompense for all that they did .
then there will be noexamination except they will say , by allah , our lord , we were not polytheists .
we savedand his family except his wife who remained with the rest .
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or take you away , their return will be to us , and god will witness the things they do .
and in some parts of the nightoffer the salatwith it , as an additional prayerfor you . perhaps your lord will raise you to a highly praiseworthy position .
and recite to them the news of ibrahim .
surely allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is a straight path .
verily man is in loss ,
i swear by the evening glow ,
o you who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on friday , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off bargaining . that is better for you if you know .
and the angels will be on the sides thereof , and eight will uphold the throne of thy lord that day , above them .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my faults on the day of judgement .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
and whosoever blindeth himself to the admonition of the compassionate , we appoint for him shaitanto be a qarinto him .
they said , burn him and support your gods , if you want to .
so they turned away from him , and departed .
but no messenger came to them , but they ridiculed him .
and it was said , “ o nooh , he has vanished from the ark , and ” ; only the fact is that he has spoken to us , and you will be seized by a terrible punishment .
to thamood we sent their brother salih saying : 'worship allah ' but they were two parties quarrelling with each other .
when he said to his people : will you not fear allah ?
where they will abide for ever , never wanting a change .
we have sent to you , , as a messenger , and we sent to noah and ishaq and yaqoub , and we gave to david the prophecy and solomon , and we gave to david , solomon , job , and solomon . we gave her a good distinction .
he said , “ my lord , my bones have become feeble , and my hair is aflame with gray , and never have i been unblest in my prayer to you . ”
so indeed with hardship is ease .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came unto you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and forces that ye saw not , and allah was ever seer of what ye do .
but if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the testator , and makes a reconciliation between the parties , there is no blame upon him . god is forgiving and merciful .
like those shortly before them . they tasted the evil result of their affair , and they will have a painful punishment .
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
and it was revealed to noah : “ none of your people will believe except those who have already believed , therefore do not grieve over what they do . ”
it is god who knows the judgement of the day of resurrection , and he knows what is in it . he knows what is in it . he has knowledge of all things . god knows all things .
and the hypocrites are in the case of men , and this is just one of the same ; and they enjoin that which is evil . and they enjoin that which is disreputable , and they are the overcomers .
and what made you hasten from your people , o moses ?
alif . lam . ra.a scripture the verses whereof are perfected and then expounded.from one wise , informed ,
behold ! how they propound similitudes for thee ! they have strayed and can not find a way .
unto him therefore we shall indeed make easy the path to hardship .
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a tremendous reward .
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error . '
they will say , glory be to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , they worshipped the jinn ; most of them had faith in them .
has the news not reached you , of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and there is a painful punishment for them .
it is he who created you , but one of you is an unbeliever and one of you is a believer ; and god perceives what you do .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not escape allah and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was a disease said : these peoplemust be deluded by their religion . but whoever puts his trust in allah , then surely allah is mighty , wise .
andthose who take guardians besides him , allah is watchful over them , and you are not their keeper .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
god has never begotten a son , nor is there any god besides him . otherwise , each god would have taken away what he created , and some of them would have gained supremacy over others . god is too exalted to be considered equal to anything else .
who is brought up among ornaments but when disputes arise are powerless .
and we appointed companions for them , who made what is before them and what is behind them seem fair to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and humans that passed away before them . they were indeed losers .
with clear proofs and scriptures . we have sent down the reminder to you so that you may clarify for the people what has been sent down to them , so that they may reflect .
they have not any knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
they rejected him and then the torment of the gloomy day struck them . it was certainly a great torment .
gardens and vineyards ,
they said , “ o moses , we will never enter it , ever , as long as they are in it . go , you and your lord , and fight . we will stay here . ”
and when they said , “ o my people ! why do you give me a sign. ” in response , they said , “ o my people ! why do you give me a successor ? ” in fact , allah has made their hearts seem decorous to him ; and allah does not guide the defiantly disobedient people .
saying : verily , we were afraid of our families .
and when you do not do this , then remember the name of allah , and then remember the remembrance of allah even as he has led you to your people , and he will say , “ our lord , give us what you have in this world , and surely , he is in despair . ”
a warning to mankind ,
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands worked it not . will they not then be grateful ?
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
who gave a little , and then stopped ?
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
and placed therein the moon as a light
abiding therein forever . and wretched is their burden on the day of resurrection ,
then he became a clot ; then he created him and formed him .
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
verily , we have sent youwith the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
they said , “ call upon your lord to show us what her color is. ” he said , “ he says she is a yellow heifer , bright in color , pleasing to the beholders . ”
the day they are thrust toward the fire of hell with athrust , ,
and do not defraud people of their belongings , and do not spread corruption in the land .
say , “ bring forth those who testify to the truth that god has given you , and if they do not testify to our verses , you will be not followed by them and those who do not believe in our verses and are those who do not believe in our signs . ”
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will not fail his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning .
but no one will be able to worship any other gods with him , or do not consider anything equal to him . say , we have been commanded to be one of the obedient .
when legs are twisted around each other ,
asent downfrom the all-beneficent , the all-merciful ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be thankful .
the indubitable !
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
it will be said : “ this is a just act ; and if only you dwelt in patience , they will overcome two hundred , and if there is a hundred , then they will overcome two hundred , and if you are patient , he will overcome the two .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
but if they turn away , say , “ god is enough for me ; there is no god except he . in him i have put my trust , and he is the lord of the great throne . ”
and whoever does an atom 's weight of evil shall see it .
and for you therein arebenefits and that you may attain upon them a need in your breasts ; and upon them and upon ships you are carried .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what the hearts contain .
and indeed it is a certain truth .
allah will accept the repentance of those who believe in this in the life of this world and in the hereafter , and on the day of resurrection , they will be convinced . and that will be the unjust .
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and give it as drink to those we created of numerous livestock and men .
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
it is we who revive the dead and write down what they have forwarded and what they leave behind , and we have figured everything in a clear book .
if you do not , then take notice of war from god and his messenger . but if you repent , you shall have your principal , unwronging and unwronged .
lo ! those who believe , and those who believe , and those who are judaised , unto allah 's angels , are the slaves of the fire , - the appointer of the men of old , and allah will judge between them . lo ! allah is a witness over all things .
when the signs of allah came to them , they said , “ this is what they are going to do . ” but the fact that they had already sought to be victorious in the way of allah , and then they called him a liar . so , when they have rejected the truth , they called him a liar .
marry the spouseless among you and those who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is bounteous and all-knowing .
what ! have they taken for themselves gods from allah ? say : the truth is with you ; and to me is the reminder , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and most of the people of the nations are averse .
he said , “ my lord , forgive me and my brother , and admit us into your mercy ; for you are the most merciful of the merciful . ”
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , if what is in your hearts , or what is in your hearts ; so he will forgive you , and allah has power over all things .
he said : i am only a messenger of your lord that i may give you a pure boy .
o my father ! verily there hath come unto me of knowledge that which hath not come unto thee ; so follow me , and i will guide thee on a right path .
do not consider yourselves above god : i come to you with clear authority .
so that he made them like straw eaten .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
matterfrom us . indeed , we were to send
he said : worship ye , then , beside allah , that which profiteth you not at all , nor it hurteth you
or is it that youask them for some recompense ? but the recompense of your lord is best , and he is the best of providers .
as abiders therein , they shall be abiders therein .
and by the self-reproaching soul !
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is bound to be fulfilled .
these will be given their reward twice over , because they have persevered , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have provided them .
there is not a township but we shall destroy it before the day of resurrection , or punish it with dire punishment . that is recorded in the book .
and'ad and thamud , and the dwellers in ar-rass , and many generations in between .
they said , “ our lord , open out of us a distance from us . indeed , we did wrong them , and we made them a stoning for the people of the book . indeed in that is a sign for a people who are constant .
and persisted obstinately in wickedness supreme !
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
nor did we make them bodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best the guided ones .
and on the day when allah will gather the apostles , and he will say , “ what is your idea , that you do not know ? ” and it is said , “ we do not know what you have been fabricating . indeed , allah is the all-knower of the unseen . ”
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but choose a middle course between that .
indeed , the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day are at rest by the night and the earth , and the alternation of the heavens and the earth , and the variety of the land , and in the midst of the heavens , and the earth is open .
enjoin prayer on your people , and be steadfast in maintaining it . we do not ask you for provisions , rather , it is we who provide for you , and the happy end is for piety .
out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron who himself was a prophet .
for the day of judgement .
indeed , there is a party of two men who will be inclined to one another , so that a group of you might be inclined to the faith of allah , and the last group of them was that he may have the faith of allah . indeed , there is a great success in it for those who have altered it .
and it is he who originates creation , then repeats it , and it is easier for him . his is the loftiest description in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent spreaderare we !
so , that , then , let the people of the book know that it is the means of allah that they can provide for his mercy and the mercy of allah is from him , and he is the owner of mighty grace .
and by oath of the promised day .
and he took attendance of the birds and said : why is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and gathered his people and declared :
and assuredly they shall have that they say not , but verily they shall speak unto them , and verily they speak unto them , and verily they speak unto them in a discourse , but they are not aware of that which they have been scoffing . and if they turn away , then they are in a surety , even if they turn away from allah and his messenger , and that they are not to be succoured .
by the soul and him who perfected it
so he emerged before his people from the sanctuary , and signalled to them that they should glorifymorning and evening .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return .
then , when allah had delivered you , , o people , they are going to be in the midst of the earth , as a human being . but you will be repaid in the life of the earth , and you will have the deeds of your worldly life , and you will have to return to us .
until , when ya'juj and ma'jujare let loose , and they swiftly swarm from every mound .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
he said : my lord knowethwordin the heavens and on earth : he is the one that heareth and knoweth .
this is hell which you were promised .
said : then get out of it , for verily , you are rajim .
he knows all that is before them and all that is behind them , and to allah are all affairs returned .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make us clear to us , so that we may see what he wills . indeed , it is clear to us that we should be the victors . indeed , we were to be guided . ’
allah it is who hath created seven heavens , one above the other , and he hath set up the command of the earth , and that which is in it , and that allah is knower of all things .
and had we willed , we could have obliterated their eyes , then they would race tothe path , and how could they see ?
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we have given them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , god is terrible in retribution .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it , and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the all-forgiving .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what he has given you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
so we brought forth such as were therein of the believers .
he said , ‘ my lord ! appoint for me a sign. ’ he said , ‘ a sign for me. ’ ‘ he said , ‘ a sign for you is the ability of no speech except for three days , and celebrate the praises of your lord , in the morning and the evening . ’
allah does not worship any other god along with him , and do not ascribe any partners to him and your spouses and their offspring . indeed , allah does not like the conceited .
for them are glad tidings in this life and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme success .
if some of you should go about , it is likely that allah will bring you to other gods than that of which you have come . and the muslims , and the muslims , are the ones who have submitted themselves to allah , and the martyrs , and the martyrs and the deprived .
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you suddenly , or openly , shall any be destroyed except the harmdoing nation '
and the record of every person is that of the book , and you are going to see what is written on account of what is written to them , and they say , “ woe to us , and your lord does not oppress anyone . your lord does not oppress anyone . ”
indeedmessengers were mocked before you , but the scoffers were surrounded by that , whereat they used to mock .
and those who , when the lord of the throne is flung to him , glorify him in the glory of the glory of their lord and seek the forgiveness of allah , and they will say , “ our lord , you have received the mercy of those who have accepted faith , and do so for your sins , and you will be called to account for the punishment . ”
this is a clear statement for mankind , a guidance and an admonition unto those who ward off
we sent noah and abraham and placed the prophethood and the book among their offsprings , some of whom are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who were mightier in might than they , so they went about in the land , could they find a refuge ?
allah ’ s precedent with those who passed away before ; and you will not find any change in allah ’ s precedent .
concerning the guilty :
we would have been sincere worshipers of allah '
those who disbelieve , whether you forewarn them or not , they will not believe .
but only as an admonition unto him who feareth . * chapter : 20
some of them believed in it and some held back from it . hell is sufficient forburning .
and whenever the messengers came to them , they said , “ there is no other god except allah . ” they said , “ if our lord had wished , we would not have accepted our faith . indeed , we will not believe in you . indeed , we will never believe in you .
andtestifies to the best , -
upon thy heart , that thou mayest be one of the warners ,
and leave the earth level and bare ,
lo ! those who make a covenant with you , they make a covenant with you , but allah is going to place their covenant with him . and he who hath made a covenant with him will be that which they are wont to do .
and soon will your lord give you so that you will be well-pleased .
so fear allah and obey me .
by those who winnow with a winnowing ,
we sent to her our spiritin the resemblance of a perfect human .
and a sign for them is that we carried their offspring in the laden ship .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and produced thereby some fruits as provision for you , and subjected for you the ships , and subjected for you rivers .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us in the evening and in the morning .
on that day no intercession will avail , except from him whom the most beneficenthas given permission and whose word is acceptable to him .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
so whoever does righteous good deeds while he is a believer , his efforts will not be rejected . we are congnisant of it .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but be not prodigal ; he loves not the prodigal .
is thatbetter entertainment or the tree of zaqqum ?
and if you obey most of those on earth , they will mislead you from the way of allah . they follow nothing but conjecture , and they do nothing but lie .
hast thou not turned thy vision to those who claim sanctity for themselves ? nay-but allah doth sanctify whom he pleaseth , and they shall not be wronged a single date-thread .
though they will be put in sight of each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
and it is he who has provided you with your wealth and your skins , and you do not follow it , but you will be made to turn in your bellies , then you will not be able to make your succeed , nor do you make provision for yourselves .
whoever brings virtue shall receiveten times its like ; but whoever brings vice shall not be requited except with its like , and they will not be wronged .
and certainly we sent a noble messenger from the people , and we said to them : worship allah , and keep your backs , so that you may turn away from them and see what sort of allah befell those who denied .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
he who does not respond to the caller of god can not weakengod on earth , nor can he have protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
in what discourse after thiswill they , then , believe ?
and so itran with them amidst the mountainous waves , and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself , o my son ! embark with us , and be not with the disbelievers .
you will surely experience state after state .
when you recite the lower valley , it is likely that they should be in the midst of the land , and follow the ancient regions , so that you may go about in the land , and if you had done this to be true , it would have been decided for you to have the same way . god is the hearer , the knower .
a soul willknow what it has put forth and kept back .
thamud denied the warnings ,
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
and whatever you give in usury , in order that it may increase the creditors ’ property , will not increase with allah ; but what you give in charity , desiring allah ’ s approval—these are the multipliers .
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him . indeed , they were a transgressing lot .
and do not be saddened by those who rush into disbelief . they will not harm allah a thing . allah does not want to give them any share in the hereafter . there is a great punishment for them .
allah will not call you to account for a slip in your oaths , but he will take you to task for that which your hearts have earned ; and allah is oft forgiving , most forbearing .
so if you have to come to know the time of the messengers , then a group of them would be given to you , you will not be able to present any time with me . say , you will never be able to fight with me , nor will you be able to retaliate .
are these not the ones of whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them at all ? : 'enter paradise ! you shall have no fear , nor shall you grieve . '
and whoever does not turn away from the two , then is one of the two seas ; and he who does not have any time before , will be made known by the best of the world , and the most honourable among the disbelievers .
it is allah , there is no god but he . and he is the exalted in might , the owner of the throne , the most high .
will you not then remember ?
our lord is too exalted to have either a wife or son .
and beside these there shall be two gardens .
then throw him in the blazing fire .
we have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps , and made them missiles against the devils ; and we have prepared for them the chastisement of the blaze .
what , do they not know that god does not punish them at all , while they are to be seen of the torah ? only his wage is the kingdom of the house , but most of them are not aware .
we shall certainly test you until we know those who strive hard for the cause of god and those who are steadfast , and try your news .
then made his offspring from the extract of base fluid ,
he said : fear not , surely i am with you both , hearing and seeing .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
but he whose deeds weigh light in the balance
and others of them who have not yet joined them . he is the mighty , the wise .
he said : soon shall we see whether thou hast told the truth or lied !
so give the relative his rights , the needy , and the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek allah ’ s pleasure , and it is they who are the felicitous .
as for the companions of the left
and those that flow with ease and gentleness ;
he knows the unseen and the seen . he is the majestic and all-wise .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them , in whose dwelling places they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
say : allah knows what is in the cave , and what is between the heavens and the earth . he is the knower of the heavens and the earth , and he is the most awarding of what is .
would you order righteousness on others and forget it yourselves ? yet you recite the book , will you not understand ?
and placed in it lofty and broad stablisers , and gave you sweet water to drink ?
and created you in pairs ,
she said : 'woe is me ! shall i bear a child when i am old woman , and this my husband is advanced in years ? this is indeed a strange thing ! '
if they argue with you , tell them : god knows best what you are doing .
—a reward and a sufficing bounty from your lord ,
the day when their excuses shall not profit the evildoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
what led you into hell fire ?
say : 'what think you ? if god should make the night unceasing over you till the day of resurrection , what god other than god shall bring you light ? will you not hear ? '
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn away from them , and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words in their affairs .
and they will have no auliya'to help them other than allah . and whoever allah sends astray - for him there is no way .
it is allah , there is no god but he . and he is the exalted in might , the owner of the throne , the most high .
then , after that , we sent grief to thee , that she should be a party of the believers , a party of them that was wont to say : “ what ! do we not bring down any thing upon you ? but it is the same for us , that you may have no knowledge of it , and the same is that you have done it , if only you may have any knowledge of it , and the same is that you have done it , if only you can see ? and it is
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . allah relenteth toward whom he will . allah is knower , wise .
they plotted and planned , but we too planned , even while they perceived it not .
they have taken their oaths as a disguise and bar from god 's way ; so there awaits them a humbling chastisement .
they said , ‘ have you come to us that we should worship allah alone and give up what our fathers used to worship ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ’
no indeed ! do not obey him , but prostrate and draw near .
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error . '
when the caravan departed , their father said , i smell joseph 's scent . i hope that you will not accuse me of senility .
and the earth -- we have spread it forth , and cast therein firmly set mountains and caused to grow thereinof every well-balanced thing .
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the illustrious book .
alif . lam . mim .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
or , likea cloudburst from the sky with darkness , thunder and lightning , they thrust their fingers in their ears due to the thunderclaps , apprehensive of death ; and allah encompasses the unbelievers .
allah ! there is no god but he , the living , the self-subsisting , eternal .
or do you want to question your messenger as moses was questioned before ? whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
as for those who , when they have entered into the scales—they , they will answer : “ we have been pursued by you . ” they said , “ we will not follow you . indeed , it is they who have been sent down to you , and they will say , ‘ indeed , allah is the all-knower of the argument . ’ indeed , they do not have any faith .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
endure with patience , for your endurance is not but from god . and do not grieve for them , and do not be distressed by their plots .
on the day when they will see the shout , and the sun will not be accepted , and the whole matter will be made apparent to them . they will be blamed , and the punishment of god is severe .
and obey allah and the messengerthat you may obtain mercy .
if a provocation from satan should provoke thee , seek refuge in god ; he is all-hearing , all-seeing .
those who have rejected god ’ s covenant will not be brought back to us , or the tradition of the people before them . we are bound to be so like a people who have no faith in the truth . we are bound to be clear .
he said , “ it was she who sought to seduce me . a witness from her family testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , she speaks the truth and he is one of the liars .
and your devotions amidst the worshipers .
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
they will say , glory be to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , they worshipped the jinn ; most of them had faith in them .
then he produced for them a calf , abody , which seemed to low . they said , this is your god and the god of moses , but he forgot .
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
and man saith : what aileth her ?
and if they turn away , then know that allah is your protector - an excellent protector and an excellent helper .
and if we had so willed , we could certainly have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me will come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
and of them are your lords who listen to you , and listen to you until you have spoken to the word of your saying , and what is said to them , “ what is the matter with you , that allah ’ s aversion is upon their hearts ? ”
and indeed it will be aregret for the faithless .
this is no less than a message tothe worlds .
even if every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
so , if you are one of those who were given a child , or a woman who is killed , you will have no one to help them . but if you repent , you will have the most merciful .
they used to hew out dwellings from mountains feeling secure .
who show off
we had favored you another time .
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , so he sent down tranquillity upon them and rewarded them with a victory near at hand
they said : have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you might become supreme in the land ? we will never believe in you .
and that which she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her ; verily she was of an infidel people .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
send the israelites with us .
and ina'adwhen we sent the fatal wind against them .
the likeness of those who slandered the book is that they should follow it , and then they did not follow it , as they were proud . the example of the unbelievers will surely be the most guided .
they said , “ we miss the king ’ s cup ; and for him who brings it is a camel-load , and i personally guarantee it . ”
they say , “ they have fabricated a fact about allah . if he wills , he can do away with it , and you will not be able to frustrate him . indeed allah knows what lies within the hearts .
by the pluckers , violently plucking ,
and fight them until there is no more persecution and religion should be only for allah . but if they desist , then surely allah sees what they do .
and of the people of musathere is a community who leadwith truth and establish justice therewith .
say , “ do you have any one to guide you from the right path ? ” say , “ the guidance is only for the truth ; so what is the matter with you , that you do not know ? ”
but no one will be able to worship any other gods with him , or do not consider anything equal to him . say , we have been commanded to be one of the obedient .
nor did we make them bodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
in the morning they called out to one another ,
for he thought and he plotted ; -
those who have purchased disbelief in exchange of faith shall not harm allah at all , and for them is a painful punishment .
and those who believe and do righteous deeds , allah will give them the full reward of their deeds , and will increase them from his bounty , but they will not be able to make amends .
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
what has created for them from allah , the food of the food and the cattle , and they say , ‘ this is allah ’ s pleasure ? ’ and what they have fabricated is allah ’ s precedent , and for them is a great outcome .
nay , they are in doubt , they sport .
and at night ; do you not understand ?
and if the signs of our clear revelations were to fall upon them , they say : this is just one of you who will avert from your path . and say : this is plain magic . and those who disbelieve say : this is plain magic .
god has never begotten a son , nor is there any god besides him . otherwise , each god would have taken away what he created , and some of them would have gained supremacy over others . god is too exalted to be considered equal to anything else .
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from it and from every agony , then you ascribe partners . ’
and we have made the sky a roof withheld . yet they turn away from its signs .
i am the best of the servants of god . i do not know the future and the future . i do not know the future . i am the guardian of the unjust ones .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good , maybe he will be among the successful .
and of the people of the book ask those who have been sent down from the heaven , so that they should have been sent down to you . they said , we have said to you , “ we may show you some of it , and then after this , we have turned away . ”
that is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have indeed been annulled .
and indeed , those who disbelieve would almost make you slip with their eyes when they hear the reminder , and they say , “ he is crazy ! ”
then we shall save our messengers and those who believe . even so , as incumbent upon us , we deliver the believers .
he said , “ you will certainly have the upper hand of his own soul , so he causes you to kill his own soul . but they do not know the right path , except for the cause of god . we have decided to do so with their own good deeds .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
this is the result of their deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his auliya ' , so fear them not , but fear me , if you are believers .
and remember our servants ibrahim and ishaq and yaqoub , men of power and insight .
wherein he will neither die nor live ,
and if you are in fear , then afoot or mounted ; but when you are secure , then remember allah , as he has taught you what you did not know .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
but allah bears witness to that which he has sent down to you . he has sent it down with his knowledge , and the angels bear witness . and sufficient is allah as witness .
he only orders you to evil and immorality and to say about allah what you do not know .
so be wary of allah and obey me .
and waymarks ; and by the star they are guided .
so fight in the cause of allah ; you are only responsible for yourself . urge on the believers ; allah may restrain the might of those who disbelieve . allah is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting punishment .
we helped him against the people who rejected our revelations . they were a wicked people , so we drowned them all .
those before them denied , then the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
we sent noah to his people . i have come to you with a clear warning :
they ask , “ when will be the day of judgement ? ”
if they could find a shelter or caverns , or a place of concealment , they would turn stampeding to it .
on the day when the earth is changed into another earth , and the heavens , and they will emerge before allah , the one , the irresistible .
and when they came to be at the time , they will be told , “ therefore do not bring them a single trace of it , and the example of the one that is in your hands will be given to you , and so will you have the upper hand of god , and those who are upright in the matter of god will be warned . ”
an exact recompense .
and we left for him among the later folk :
by thethat run , with panting ,
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . neither you nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . indeed the outcome is for the godwary .
and they shall not be absent from it .
it will be but one shout , then see , they are watching
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions though the polytheists should be averse .
and whatever good they do , they shall not be denied it . allah knows the cautious .
why do you not bring down the angels , if you are truthful ?
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the doubters .
thou guidest not whom thou likest , but allah guides whom he will . and he knoweth best those who are guided .
gardens of eternity will they enter , wearing therein bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments there will be of silk .
the book of moses had been sent down by the book of moses and his guidance . this is the speech of the illustrious book .
and whosoever is allah , , there is none to succour him , but you will come to know the consequences of the blazing fire , when they see the punishment , they will say : are ye to return ?
but the transgressors among them changed the word from that which had been said to them ; so we sent down upon them wrath from heaven for their wrongdoing .
so by your lord , we will surely gather them and the devils – all of them – and bring them round hell on their knees .
and be thou patient on the friends of those who are that they are those that are believers on the morrow , and subdue their lord 's praise in the morning and the evenings , and the good-will of the world to come , and thou hearest the flower of the world , and that he may be of the inheritors .
say : ' i have the stores of the god . ' there is no doubt about it . i have not been aware of it , but follow what is revealed to you . are you not aware of the present things ?
when there cometh the succour of allah and the victory ,
if you were to feel afflicted , or have a good heart , or a heart , they will be grieved , and if there comes to you a setback , they will be pleased , but if you are patient , they will have no power to harm you , for god knows all that you do .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
and so itran with them amidst the mountainous waves , and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself , o my son ! embark with us , and be not with the disbelievers .
permission is given to those who are fought against , and allah is able to give them victory ;
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in god 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
by god , he will guide the book , and he will guide them to the right path , and will lead them into the light of the right path , and will lead them to the right path .
put your hand inside your pocket , and it will come forth white without blemish—among nine miracles to pharaoh and his people . they are immoral people .
god will never send his angels to be of the same , but the human being would be able to seek his protection . god does not have any power to help them against anyone . god has no power to help them .
and what , of a surety he will desire that he should be of the kinds of date-palms and grapes and shall grow of it to be of every kind of fruit and of crops ? yet it was a plane that will bring forth his face and a great end .
and as for him whose measureis light , those are they who lose their souls because they used to wrong our revelations .
let those fight in the way of allah who sell the life of this world for the hereafter , and whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or conquers , we shall give him a great reward .
and whoso committeth a delinquency or crime , then throweththereof upon the innocent , hath burdened himself with falsehood and a flagrant crime .
they said , ‘ we are powerful and possess a great might . it is for you to command , so consider what you will command . ’
and whosoever harms after he has been harmed there is no blame on them .
our lord ! verily , it is you who will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . verily , allah never breaks his promise .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
surely those who believe and do the right will have a continuing reward .
peace , a word from a merciful lord .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
of him seeksevery creature in the heavens and on earth : every day insplendour doth he !
for you there is some of the cattle that you have to take to hold in , and some of them they ride , and some of them to eat and eat of some of what allah has given you . indeed , he is to you a clear enemy .
upon close-wrought couches
striking sparks of fire ,
and with pharaoh of the tent pegs
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will multiply it for you and forgive you , and allah is all-appreciative , all-forbearing ,
they said , ‘ tell me , what is the matter with you , that they do not doubt what is in the heavens and the earth ? ’ he is the originator of the heavens and the earth , so that he may forgive you , and we have said , ‘ you are only a fabricator , ’ and they used to say , ‘ you are only a forger . ’
'serve you none but god '
say : 'what think you ? if what you say is true , then will it be sent down to you , if it is from allah , what is the matter with you , if you were to disbelieve ? ' and indeed , it is in the remembrance of allah that the torah and the gospel do not have faith . allah does not guide the harmdoers .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
and thou didst that thy deed which thou didst , and thou wast one of the ingrates .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
and a few from among the latter .
he said , “ o moosa , you have been granted your prayer . ”
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they shall be as abiders . that is the supreme achievement .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the wrongdoers for the punishment of a painful day .
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus we reward the doers of good .
god has begotten children . they are certainly liars .
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sightand hearts . little thanks you give .
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in god 's book until the day of resurrection , and this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent god is the most beneficent .
did you not see how did your lord deal withaad ?
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had not been given my book ,
your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
know they not that allahs expandeth provision for whomsoever he will , and stinteth it for whomsoever he will ! verily herein are signs for a people who believe .
and they went early in determination , able .
they worship besides god what can neither benefit them nor harm them . the unbelievers are defiant against their lord .
and we have made a covenant with you , and placed upon it the mount , and we set upon it a command . and they said , ‘ do not be in the least , but fall not down in your arrogance , if you are muslims . ’
is itthat we shall not die ,
and heaped therein mischief .
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and him who entereth my house believing , and believing men and believing women , and increase not the wrong-doers in aught save ruin !
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
there is not a thing but with us are its stores , and we send it down only in precise measure .
when you recite the lower valley , it is likely that they should be in the midst of the land , and follow the ancient regions , so that you may go about in the land , and if you had done this to be true , it would have been decided for you to have the same way . god is the hearer , the knower .
and the jews , the christians say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the jews follow nothing ; and the christians say , “ allah will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ . ”
when we inspired in thy mother that which is inspired ,
had the unbelievers fought against you , they would have turned their backs . then they would not find a protector or a helper .
we know very well how they listen when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , 'you are only following a man bewitched ! '
so , when we have recited it , follow its recitation .
if a provocation from satan should provoke thee , seek refuge in god ; he is all-hearing , all-seeing .
know they not that allahs expandeth provision for whomsoever he will , and stinteth it for whomsoever he will ! verily herein are signs for a people who believe .
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
wherefore call unto allah , making religion for him pure , though the infidels be averse .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a betterthan it or return it ; surely god keeps a watchful count over everything .
o ye who believe ! spend of that which is in the presence of those who have made a provision of the grain of the grain , and do not take it up , and do not be of the doubters . and it is not for you to be pleased with the most praiseworthy .
those before them denied , then the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and persisted obstinately in wickedness supreme !
and indeed hesaw him ] at a second descent .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of thy lord , the mighty , the bestower ?
they will hear therein neither gossip , nor lies .
and they say : fables of the ancients which he has written down , so they are dictated to him morning and evening .
then we sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years .
and he subjected to you the sun and the moon , continuous , and subjected for you the night and the day .
on that day they will offer their submission and all that they had fabricated will have vanished .
and heaped therein mischief .
he taught him eloquent speech .
o you who have faith ! when you are seated to the matter , they will not be able to make a fool . then , if you are going to know , allah will give you the best , and if you have been worthy of it , then bring it forth , and allah is well aware of what you do .
for what sin she was slain ,
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there who can help you after him ? so in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
and in the hereafter , we shall surely show them a sign , in order that they may be guided , and in order that they may be aware of it , and that the truth may be that you know the truth .
and it is he who has provided you with your wealth and your skins , and you do not follow it , but you will be made to turn in your bellies , then you will not be able to make your succeed , nor do you make provision for yourselves .
let him beware ! if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock -
and from among the people , there is no one but one of them ; but one of them is just one religion ; so among them is one religion , and in the differences of your lord , it is the proper justice .
why do you not bring down the angels , if you are truthful ?
lo ! this qur'an guideth unto that which is straightest , and giveth tidings to the believers who work righteous works that theirs will be a great reward .
leave them to the religion of mary , and to mock at them , and in order to be one of those who have no power to do so . they will have a share of what they have done , and they will have a painful punishment .
and do not be surprised by the deities they call upon , apart from god , so that they will not be able to be able to answer him . thus do we assign to them a people that will go to their lord , then to their lord we will return .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , he will inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it , while they have forgotten it . allah is witness to all things .
and indeed , we are able to show you what we have promised them .
and whence can you know of the time when it comes to you , then they follow it ? if you are going to be pursued , they will surely say , this is from allah , and if you do not know .
have they not seen that we have appointed a safe sanctuary , while all around them men are being despoiled ? do they then believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
say : who is lord of the seven heavens and lord of the mighty throne ?
o ye who believe ! obey allah and obey the apostle , and render not your works vain .
o you enwrapped one .
and if they turn back , then turn away from you , for we have not sent you to warn them , for indeed , you have no one to help them . indeed , it is the kind of kindness and the mercy of allah . indeed , it is most kind of pity and merciful .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
honourablel scribes .
what , is he whose aim is to be the kingdom of every soul , and with him is the kingdom of those who have chosen their religion , and say , “ the idols are in the way of god , so that you may not have any faith in the earth , or the right path of god ? ” in fact , he is the people who have no power to do so .
he said , “ do you dislike my gods , o abraham ? if you do not desist , i will stone you . so leave me alone for a while . ”
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the most merciful , they say , and what is the most merciful ? should we prostrate to that which you command us ? and it increases their aversion .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and make them inheritors ,
“ and fear allah , and do not disgrace me . ”
so be thou patient under the word of thy lord , and proclaim the praise of thy lord before the rising of the sun and the moon , and hallow him , the praise of the sun and the moon , that haply we may give thanks .
what , have they come to know their own gods ? or have they come to it ? ' say , “ so do not be waiting with your own eyes . ”
he said , “ no , go both of you with our signs . we are with you , listening .
those who believe and keep their duty .
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you . when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him away , and they neglect not .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
the pharaoh said , you have believed in him before i have given you permission . he is your chief who has taught you magic . but you will soon know .
and say to the faithful , their eyes cast themselves and they guard themselves away from their own selves ; they will have nothing to do away with their houses , or their daughters , but their offspring are the same , so that they may have the same faith , or the same applies to their family .
whereas allah hath created you and that which ye make ?
so in the morning it became as if harvested .
that is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have indeed been annulled .
these are the people who spend their property for the messenger of allah , to make it crooked , and that which is in the heavens and the earth . but they are not aware of the unseen .
besides god ? can they help you or even help themselves ?
and the feeding on a day of hunger .
then your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would inflict terrible suffering on them . your lord is swift in retribution , yet he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and he does not fear its sequel .
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they shall be brought ,
and he turned away from them , and said , “ o my bitterness for joseph. ” and his eyes turned white from sorrow , and he became depressed .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
our lord , we have heard only a means of warning . we have believed in your lord , and we have accepted it . so forgive us and have mercy upon us .
but when they have to give by measure or weight to men , give less than due .
and they went early in determination , able .
did you think that we created you in vain , and that to us you would not be returned ?
by the much-frequented fane ;
and for you therein arebenefits and that you may attain upon them a need in your breasts ; and upon them and upon ships you are carried .
do not be like those who left their homes vainly and to be seen of men , and to barfrom the way of allah , and allah encompasses what they do .
they will say , “ pray to me , ” and when you came to them , they will say , “ o you who have come to you , in the night , then , there is a sign for you , so do not be a supporter of it ; and god is sufficient as a protector . ”
god is the promoter of his illustrious messengers , and you have no means to strengthen it for him , nor has he made a means of sustenance for you . god has the power over all things .
he said , “ do you believe in it before i have given you permission , before i have given you permission ? indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing— you will certainly know that we have the power to do so and you will be pursued by a great deal .
the unbelievers must not think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite only for them to further advance in their sins . they will suffer a humiliating torment .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
have they not pondered over the word , or has anythingcome to them that did not come to their forefathers ?
then he drew near and hung above suspended ,
moses said , do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me .
they will not hear therein ill speech or commission of sin -
so your lord poured a scourge of punishment over them .
this is the supreme triumph .
thus do we expound the revelations that the way of the unrighteous may be manifest .
say , itis the greatest message ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling-place .
storming into the midst .
he knows all that is before them and all that is behind them , and to allah are all affairs returned .
what ails you then , how you judge ?
he said , “ go down from here , all of you , one of you an enemy . then , if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance will not go astray , nor will he be miserable . ”
the exalted abovedegrees , owner of the throne ; he sends the inspiration by his command upon whom he pleases of his servants , that he may warnof the day of encounter .
will they not then meditate on the qur'an , or are there locks upon their hearts ?
say , ‘ we have faith in allah and what we have given you and what is after you , and we gave ishaq and ishaq and yaqub , and we are not differing . ’
o you who have faith ! do not be careful ofallah and be wary of allah , and do what he has sent ahead . indeed , allah is acquainted with what you do .
we seduced you . we were seducers . ”
the blind and the seeing are not alike
say : 'to allah belongs intercession altogether . his is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; then unto him you shall be returned . '
and wait ! we too are waiting . ’
praise be to allah , who has given me , in my old age , ishmael and isaac . indeed , my lord is the hearer of supplication .
samood gave the liein their inordinacy ,
such is allah , your lord , there is no god except him , the creator of all things , so worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
so in the morning it became as if harvested .
and it was revealed to noah : “ none of your people will believe except those who have already believed , therefore do not grieve over what they do . ”
on the day when every soul shall see its works , and it will be made known to the sinners . the one among you will be questioned about the evil deeds , and god will give you a lesson to his creatures . god is ever-pardoning and most merciful .
allah ! there is none worthy of worship except him . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful in statement than allah ?
he will say , oh , i wish i had sent aheadfor my life .
o ye who believe ! eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and be grateful to allah , if it ishe whom ye worship .
allah alternates the night and the day . indeed in that is a lesson for those who have eyes .
have they not observed the things god has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before god in all humility ?
they will say , “ if only a man has been cast into the field , then when it has come to pass , in the end will be the same for you . so you will think that you will be like a humiliating punishment .
abiding therein forever . and wretched is their burden on the day of resurrection ,
he said : know ye what ye did unto joseph and his brother in your ignorance ?
what is the matter with you , that you should be commanded in it , and keep up prayer and be obedient to god ? he is well aware of what you do .
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
they will say : nay ! you -- no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
ha mim
or enjoineth piety ?
and indeed we know that they say , it is only a human being who teaches him . the tongue of the man they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
or do they say , he invented it ? say , then bring a surah like it and call upon whomever you can , besides allah , if you are truthful .
do you see any remnants of them ?
and of those who have despaired of the matter of your wives , should be of your wives , if they should be afraid of the word of the two times . and if the two should be , confine them to the law of the sun and those who have no power to do so . and whoever is careful ofallah , then surely allah will change the way of those who fear him .
there is no blame on the prophet in respect of that which allah has decreed for him . this has been allah 's way with those who passed away before . and the command of allah is a decree determined .
and on the earth are signs for those who have faith with certainty ,
and be it as he who has made clear to every thing that is in the matter of his lord , the messenger , and the apostle , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the people who have no faith in allah , it is the same for him . but most of the people do not believe in this .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
and when he turns away , he strives in the land to make mischief therein and to destroy the crops and the cattle ; and allah does not love corruption .
to worship god who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
i swear by the lord of the easts and the wests that we are certainly able
every one has a direction to which he turns ; so vie with one another in good works . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
and god encloses them from beyond .
from the evil of the sneaking whisperer
a party of the people of the book would love to lead you astray , but they lead none astray except themselves , but they do not perceive .
this is a clear statement for mankind , a guidance and an admonition unto those who ward off
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself but afterwards seeks allah 's forgiveness , he will find allah oft forgiving , most merciful .
if you should divorce a divorce before them , they will be given to you the same time . but for you is a source of game , but if you do not want to receive any good , it is the same for you to do so . god is well aware of what you do .
those whose efforts have been wasted in this life while they thought that they were acquiring good by their deeds !
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
their salatat the housewas nothing but whistling and clapping of hands . so taste the punishment because you used to disbelieve .
a provision for you and your cattle .
the believers are only those who believe in god and his messenger and then doubt not but strive with their wealth and their lives in the cause of god . those -- they are the truthful ones .
the case of god is far away from those who are bent on denying the truth and are made to be shown to the merciful . they are the ones that give to the most gracious , and so it is that the law of the righteous will be in the presence of god . so it is the same for the unbelievers who will have the same way .
it is he who has made the earth a bed for you and made you live as a cloud . the heavens and the earth will be sent down to you , so that you may have the means of god , so that you may have a means of sustenance .
the day when their guile will not avail them at all , nor will they be helped .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
accursed be the conjecturers
none but god can avert it .
do not consider anything equal to god . god knows , but you do not know .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
tell my servants who have believed to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before the coming of the day in which there will be neither mutual bargaining nor befriending .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may attain piety .
he said , “ my lord , as you have blessed me , i will never be a supporter of the criminals . ”
but he was not long in coming , and said , i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
he is only a man who invents a lie about allah , and we are not going to believe him .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
such is the chastisement ; and the punishment of the hereafter is assuredly greater , did they but know .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden when they vowed to gather the fruits in the morning
it yields its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . god presents the parables to men so that perhaps they will take heed .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when there came unto you hosts , and we sent against them a wind and forces that ye saw not , and allah was ever seer of what ye do .
o ye who believe ! spend of that which is in the presence of those who have made a provision of the grain of the grain , and do not take it up , and do not be of the doubters . and it is not for you to be pleased with the most praiseworthy .
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth , and he is all-wise and all-knowing .
he it is who has sent forth a people from among people , and he has made it clear to them , and he teaches them the bookand the hikmah , and teaches them the book and the wisdom , in truth .
and on the day of resurrection thouseest those who lied concerning allah with their faces blackened . is there not in hell an abode for the arrogant ?
and by oath of the night when it turns back .
and thou didst that thy deed which thou didst , and thou wast one of the ingrates .
and they worship besides allah that for which he has sent down no authority , and that of which they have no knowledge , and for the zalimunthere is no helper .
— because he has wealth and children .
and we have made a covenant with them , and they said : we are the ones who have been given part of this thing . so , as for the messenger , we have been remiss in respect of the things they had received . and in fact , they were not aware of .
nearer unto thee and nearer ,
this is a chapter which we have sent down and made obligatory , and in it we have sent down clear verses in order that you may take heed .
let him beware ! if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock -
we relate to you their story in truth . they were young men who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
to send down upon them stones of baked clay .
he said , “ this is what your own hands have sent before , will you be able to dispute with allah ? ” he will say , “ what is the matter with you that they do not have any faith in you ? indeed , i too am waiting with you , and i do not have been waiting with you . ”
and they will cry : o malik ! let your lord make an end of us . he will say : lo ! here ye must remain .
except his wife . we have decreed that she will be of those who remain behind .
and in your own selves . do you not see ?
but he turned away with his warlords , and said , “ a sorcerer or a madman . ”
we loosed against them a wind clamorous in a day of ill fortune continuous ,
he said , “ my lord , i have called my people night and day .
and then what they were promised comes upon them ,
'lord ' said moses , 'expand my chest ,
we know very well how they listen when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , 'you are only following a man bewitched ! '
what ! do you then call upon any other than that of which he calls . when he calls on his heels , he turns away from them in the land , so will you take admonition in the land ? is it a little for you to take heed ?
storming tempestuously
and this is a proclamation from allah and his messenger , and the day of resurrection , that allah and his apostle will be said : surely allah and his apostle are in the presence of the unbelievers ; and if you turn back , then indeed , that allah is the weakener of the deniers .
say , “ god has spoken the truth ; so follow the religion of abraham the monotheist ; he was not one of the polytheists . ”
who created you proportionately and fashioned you
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
have they , then , seen the earth , that we may see how was the end of those who were before them ? and how was the end of those who were in the power , and he is the all-mighty , the all-powerful .
and indeed it has been revealed to you and to those before you : ‘ if you ascribe a partner to allah your works will fail and you will surely be among the losers . ’
but whosoever turns away from my remembrance , his shall be a straitened life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . '
and the earth -- we have spread it forth , and cast therein firmly set mountains and caused to grow thereinof every well-balanced thing .
whoever desires the fleeting life , we hasten for him therein what we will for whom we please . then we consign him to hell , where he will burn , condemned and rejected .
and it is allah who sends the winds , so that they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land , and revive therewith the earth after its death . likewise will be the resurrection .
and indeed he loves wealth to the extreme .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend one another ’ s wives or of your offspring , and do not be conscious of your own accord . so be wary of allah , and let them know that allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
so let not him who believeth not therein and followeth his own desire turn thee away therefrom lest thou perish .
you can not thwart him on the earth , and you have no friend or helper apart from him .
when the earth shall be rocked
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls to me ; so let them respond to me and let them believe in me , in order that they may be led aright .
o ye who believe ! take your bondman in the case of those who have lived before you in the morning , and in the morning , and in the morning : some of your time will be visited by the time of which ye had no right ; and in order that ye may be able to follow it , and in order that allah may make clear to you his communications ; and allah is knowing , wise .
say , o people , i have been sent to you as a messenger . god is the only one who controls the heavens and the earth . he will have no better than he . so accept faith in god and his messenger , so that you may be guided .
and when the believers saw the confederates , they said : this is what allah and his apostle had promised us , and allah and his messenger have spoken the truth . and it only increased them in faith and submission .
he verily deemed that he would never return .
and he swore to them , “ i am your well-wisher . ”
and they will say , “ we believe in it ” ; but how can they attain it from a place far away ?
the building which they have built will never cease to be a misgiving in their hearts unless their hearts are torn into pieces . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and obey allah and his messenger , and do not go forth . but if they go to one another , then do not go with the other ; but if you go to one another , then surely allah is with the steadfast .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , and barter not my revelations for a small price , and me alone should ye fear .
satan is the promoter of what is in the matter . we said , ‘ it is sent down to him , from the earth , and some of you are now subdued . ’
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardon an offense - indeed , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
have they taken awliya besides him ? but it is allah who is the protector , and he gives life to the dead , and he is able to do all things .
it is a written record .
as for those who have knowledge , know that it is the truth from the lord and that which is in your hands . it is the truth from the lord to those who believe .
in whatever form he pleased ?
eat of the lawful and good things we have provided for you , and be not happy as a way for my own good , so that you may have no fear , nor will you be saved .
it is we who revive the dead and write down what they have forwarded and what they leave behind , and we have figured everything in a clear book .
marry the spouseless among you and those who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is bounteous and all-knowing .
and madesmooth for him .
taste thou ! truly wast thou mighty , full of honour !
have they not seen that we have created for them of our handiwork , livestock that they own ?
allah does not worship any other god along with him , and do not ascribe any partners to him and your spouses and their offspring . indeed , allah does not like the conceited .
over my servants you have no authority , except those who follow you of the deviators .
when you return to them they will swear to you by god so that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home , a recompense for what they did .
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
god knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
have they not pondered that those who believe in their hearts , and do not fear allah , in a state of dealing with allah 's cause , and do not be like those who have been sent down a portion of it , and most of them were disobedient .
and there is nothing comparable to him . ”
and indeed , in the truth , there is a provision for you , in the case of one who is well aware of what is in their bellies , and so will we make you grow , and you will eat of it .
and he had recited it to them , they would not have believed in it .
and the people of the woods , who are with them , to be free of blame . they said , o my people , be innocent of my own people , and do not be afraid of me . have you then no sense ?
to bring all the wise magicians to you .
and do not consume one another ’ s wealth illicitly , nor offer it to the judges that you may sinfully consume a portion of other people 's wealth sinfully while you know .
these are verses of the wise book ,
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
then , even as your hearts were stronger , it was as if they were stumps of uprooted clay . and of a surety , he will be of those who are free from blame , and of them some are not aware . and allah is not unaware of what they do .
an exact recompense .
the deeds of the pharaoh and his people who were before them could also have rejected the revelations of those before them . god is too sufficientfor them . god is experienced with the punishment .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
and verily , for those who have wronged is a portionlike the portion of their predecessors , so let them not ask me to hasten on .
when the wife of 'imran said : o my lord ! surely i vow to you what is in my womb , to be devoted . accept it from me . indeed , you are the hearing , the knowing .
how will it be when we gather them for a day in which there is no doubt , and every soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged ?
when they are unbelievers , they started to take you plots to make war on you , or kill themselves . god is the best of all providers .
indeed , we have sent down to you that which is in the book , that it may explain to mankind that in order that they may be guided ; and whoever goes aright , he has indeed led his way astray ; and you are not to be blamed .
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far ,
and others are deferred to allah 's decree , whether he will punish them or accept their repentance ; and allah is knowing , wise .
so , i call the receding stars to witness ,
certainly we have brought to them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
it is all the same to him whether you speak in secret or aloud , whether you hide it by night or walk in the light of day .
and thus have we sent it down as evidences , and verily allah guideth whomsoever he intendeth .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
and then , when he wished , resurrected him .
who obey the commands of their lord and fulfil their devotional obligations , whose affairs are settled by mutual consultation , who spend of what we have given them ,
and on that day , we will strike them up as you like , or leave them as a torch . so the day when the trumpet will be split , they will all be brought together .
the thamud and 'ad denied the consequential calamity .
as for those who were faithless , they were destroyed before you , and they were to be successors to what you had , but the end of their own people will be like those who have gone before you , and they will have the likes of all their own desires , as they desire .
so the fate of both is that they will be in the fire , to remain in it . that is the recompense of the wrongdoers .
their salutation on the day they meet him will be , peace ! he has prepared for them a generous reward .
indeed , those who have rejected a reminder of you , have certainly been invented for you . indeed , the worst of what you had been inventing is indeed a slander and a great punishment .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us in the evening and in the morning .
and when the messengers shall come to pass , they will not cease to be in doubt concerning that which they have been scoffing . lo ! in that case they will be a surety given to us the wrath and a loss of loss . then none will we punish against the guilty .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together :
o people who believe ! accept faith in allah and his noble messenger and in the lightwhich he has sent down to him , and who has been sent by allah ’ s noble messenger , and whoever has denied the noble messengers , has indeed strayed in the wrong .
we gave moses the guidance , and bequeathed upon the children of israel the book
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or allah , the one , the subduer
they said , “ o you who have believed , we have believed in it , so that they may have a noble messenger with it , and a guidance from the noble qur ’ an ” – so it will be a guide for the truthful .
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
when the caravan departed , their father said , i smell joseph 's scent . i hope that you will not accuse me of senility .
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you earn . and you will not be asked of what they used to do .
so fear allah and obey me .
and that allah may testthe believersand destroy the disbelievers .
and remember thy lord , and turn away from the backs of him . 'what , have i not been rewarded with thee ? ' they say , 'is not our god ; we are heedless of this '
say , “ if there were other gods with him , as they say , they would have sought a way to the lord of the throne . ”
these are the heirs of paradise
and when the anger of musawas appeased , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
lo ! we sent noah unto his people : warn thy people ere there come unto them torment afflictive .
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes rolledand the hearts leapt to the throats , and you were imagining matters regarding allah .
and allah created every creature from water ; and some of them go upon their bellies , and some of them go upon two legs , and others walk on four . allah creates whatever he wills ; indeed allah has power over all things .
so invoke not with allah another ilahlest you be among those who are punished .
and when it is said unto them : make not mischief on the earth , they say : we are peacemakers only .
to worship god who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
say thou : he it is who hath brought you forth , and hath assigned unto you ears and eyes and hearts . little thanks it is ye give !
i would desire that you be laden with my sin and your sin , and so become among the inmates of the fire ; this is the reward of the wrong-doers .
yet lasting is the majestic and munificent face of your lord .
and the sky will be split open—for it will be frail on that day—
the throes of death bring the truth : “ this is what you were trying to avoid ! ”
are you confident that the one in heaven will not cause the earth to collapse beneath you as it spins ?
and my breast will be straitened , and my tongue will not be loosed . so send for aaron .
and when we bestow favor upon man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him he is in despair .
why did they not bring four witnesses upon it ? since they did not bring witnesses , they themselves are liars before allah .
do not believe in the ones who do not believe , but do not follow the religion of one who follows your religion . say , ‘ indeed it is allah ’ s munificence , and he is the most munificent of it . ’ say , ‘ ‘ indeed it is allah ’ s munificence , so that he may be of the immaculate . ’ ’
unto thy lord that day is the recourse .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and they will be safe from the terror on that day .
they will have sheets of fire above them and layers beneath them . that is how god frightens his servants . so fear me !
so we restored him to his mother that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them do not know .
we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his apostle , for him is the fire of hell , to remain in it ? that is the supreme disgrace .
who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord , and he turns away from it ? indeed , we have set a seal on their hearts , and if they do not bring you to guidance , they will not be able to guide it .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
and that which ye have been wont to mount in the presence of your own lord , and then he hath made you unsteady , and the word was proclaimed unto you , and that ye may not be sad of that which allah hath made for you , that ye may be heedful ; and that which allah hath made for you is of those that cause corruption .
he will say , by god ! you had nearly ruined me .
and as for the one who lived in the cities , he raised its toll on it , he said , ‘ shall we be able to destroy the like of it ? ’ indeed , it is the same to be the same for people who have gone before them ; and so do not sit in front of it , and in the end they will be brought up .
that is the extent of their knowledge . surely your lord knows best those who stray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise for hospitality .
on that day you shall see the guilty ones secured in chains ;
and among us are the righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
and the fruits of the garden is that , in which there is no doubt ; and if you see any man , then know that i have given you a rich , and i do not speak to the most merciful .
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it , and it may be that you dislike a thing which is bad for you , and the same is bad for you . and whatever good you do , allah is aware of it .
who created and shaped ,
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
and when you are journeying in the land there is no fault in you that you shorten the prayer , if you fear that those who disbelieve may cause you harm , surely the unbelievers are your manifest enemies .
and when it was said , “ the promise of allah is true , and the hour , there is no doubt about it . you said , we do not know what the hour is , we assume it is only speculation ; we are not convinced . ”
and that the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter may incline to it , and that they may be pleased with it , and that they may earn what they are going to earn .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter lies about god .
is he who guards himself with his face against the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? and it will be said to the evildoers , “ taste what you used to earn . ”
excepting a deliverance from allah and his messages . and whosoever disobeyeth allah and his apostle , he verily shall have the fire of hell , therein dwelling forever .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
if they were to be before them , they would have surely been in a state of blame of themselves . and you will say , ‘ we testify to the witness of their own souls , and you will say , ‘ we testify to the witness of their own souls , and if we were to do so , we will indeed be unjust . ’
and when he learns something of our revelations , he takes them in mockery . for such there is a humiliating punishment .
whatcould befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? allah knows them well .
no one disputes the signs of god except the unbelievers . let not their activities in the land deceive you .
and when the qur'an is recited to them , they do not prostrate themselves ?
: theseare but a small band ,
and the hours of the garden shall be visited by the mercy and mercy of allah until the day of resurrection , when the apostles are of allah ’ s mercy , and he is of those who have faith .
to make it a lesson for you—so that retaining ears may retain it .
in that case we would have made you taste a doublein this life and a double death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
nay , but they do not believe in it , and indeed , it is a grave which they have earned , and indeed , it is a thing which they had earned , and if they go back , they are indeed lying towards it .
these depend on guidance from their lord . these are the successful .
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none save allah ; and allah sufficeth as a reckoner .
and casts forth what is within it and becomesempty ,
so let them ask thee for one who hath no desire to be one of the children of ya'qub . say : allah 's favour to you will be that of which ye have no one . and if ye were to be requited , then it is only the same for mankind , that he may make a mistake unto them , and allah hath full knowledge of all things .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and youare going to be questioned .
they make it a favour unto thee that they have surrendered . say thou : deem not your surrender a favour unto me ; nay , allah hath conferred a favour unto you inasmuch as he hath guided you to the faith , if ye are men of truth .
the argument of our signs was true . when we bestowed upon them some of his people , he made them independent of the truth , and whoever we had given to one of the people of the tent-pegs , we shall surely have made such things as their heritage .
he said , “ this is a mercy from my lord ; but when the promise of my lord comes , he will blow it to bits , and the promise of my lord is true . ”
there is none in the heavens and the earth but he comes to the all-beneficent as a servant .
we and our fathers were promised this before ; this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
and when they are flung into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will plead for death .
o prophet ! say to the captives who are in your hands : 'if allah finds any good in your hearts he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful . '
verily there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we have believed , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he had given them . exalted be allah above what they associate .
andlout , when he said to his people : you commit al-fahishahwhich none has preceded you init in the 'alamin .
on that day the trumpet will be blown and whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be stricken with any one from the heavens and the earth . then , the people will be neglected , and they will see .
when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated except iblis ; he said , “ shall i prostrate before one whom you have created from clay ? ”
so give the relative his rights , the needy , and the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek allah ’ s pleasure , and it is they who are the felicitous .
and not a sign we showed them but it was greater than its fellow , and we seized them with torment , in order that they might turn .
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
so shall it be ; and whoever retaliates similarly to the affliction he has been made to suffer , and then is tyrannized - allah will surely aid him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
so be patient , as the prophets , and the prophets , and the prophets , with their own hands , and be not active , on the day when the messengers are given to it , and when they are threatened with the truth , it is the same for the sinners .
high indeed be he exalted above that they say !
on that day , people will come out of their graves in different groups to seetheir own deeds .
and to solomonthe wind , blowing forcefully , proceeding by his command toward the land which we had blessed ; and we are aware of everything .
so , when they are bent on denying the truth , they will turn to it , and when they are set at their hands , they will be called to account in the land . so the one among them will be destroyed , and the same will be the result of their deeds , if god willed , for those who have been attacked .
surely those who believe and do the right will have a continuing reward .
it is he who has made for you the earth as a cradle and threaded roads for you and sent down water from the sky . we have brought forth with it various kinds of plants .
fear him who created you and the earlier generations .
verily , in thisthere is a plain message for people who worship allah .
he said : do you give me glad tidingswhen old age has overtaken me ? of what then is your news ?
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
and the jinn and the hypocrites , and allah has created them , and allah is the doer of all that they do .
we have sent to you , , as a messenger , and we sent to noah and ishaq and yaqoub , and we gave to david the prophecy and solomon , and we gave to david , solomon , job , and solomon . we gave her a good distinction .
he said , “ o my son , do not relate your vision to your brothers , lest they plot a plan against you . satan is man 's sworn enemy .
who gave a little , and then stopped ?
orwe show thee that wherewith we threaten them , verily we are going to prevail over them .
and theright on the high-road .
we know best who deserve to be burnt in .
some faces on that day shall be beaming with happiness ,
what ! do you approach men , and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? ’ but the only answer of his people was , “ bring upon us the punishment of allah , if you are truthful . ”
so do not weaken and do not grieve , and you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
and a sign for them is the night ; we strip it of the day , and lo ! they are in darkness .
and those whom they invoke besides allah do not create anything but are themselves created .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
it is all the same for them whether you ask forgiveness for them or not . god will not forgive them . god does not guide the evil-doing people .
therein to tarry for ages ,
guard yourself against the fire prepared for unbelievers .
they wanted to harm him , but we humiliated them all .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe the similitude of the wife of fir'awn when she said : my lord ! build for me a house in thine presence with thee in the garden , and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from a people transgressing .
those who fear being afraid of what they have done , do not forget their own souls , and the people of paradise will be in the gardens of dwelling with their lord . that is the reward for what they do .
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
on the day when he will gather you all together , on the day of resurrection , the day the judgement will be established for him . whoever accepts faith in the day of judgment , he will pay them in full a pleasant paradise , wherein he will live forever .
and the day of judgment will inevitably take place .
do not give the feeble-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but provide for them and clothe them from it , and speak to them with kind words .
and to the thamud , their brother hud . he said , “ o my people , you have no god other than him ; so he is worthy of god , so that you may be able to forgive him ; indeed , my lord is the most near .
alif . lam . mim .
he who fears will mind ,
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , even as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
tell them : i do not ask any recompense of you for this other thanwhoever likes may take the way to his lord .
as a blessing from us : thus do we reward those who give thanks .
my people , do whatever you will , and so will i. you will come to know who will suffer a humiliating punishment and who is a liar . wait and i too will be a liar .
pharaoh pursued them with his troops , but the sea overwhelmed them , and completely engulfed them .
he will cry out for destruction
and the mount sinai ,
and that upon him is the second creation
for the beggar and the outcast ,
those who do not believe in the signs of god invent lies and they are liars .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
and of the people is he who gave a provision to them , so that he may cause them to be pure for them , and to purify them , and give them the purest of all that is in their hearts ; and allah is all hearing , all knowing .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
then it will be said to those who were unjust , taste the everlasting punishment ; are you recompensedsave what you used to earn ?
so neither you nor those you worship
so be wary of allah and obey me .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? these will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , “ these are they who lied against their lord. ” beware ! the curse of allah is upon the wrongdoers .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it , and they rejoice in the worldly life , whereas the worldly life is not compared to the hereafter , but compared with the hereafter .
the knowledge of the day of resurrection is only with allah . and to him will all be brought back in the best manner . the most perceptive of the people will say : “ our lord , we are the ones who will give you the salvation , but most of the people do not know . ”
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
what ! have they taken for themselves gods from allah ? say : the truth is with you ; and to me is the reminder , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and most of the people of the nations are averse .
have youconsidered the man who turned away ,
and they ask you about the hour , when it will be said to them , “ the knowledge of it is with my lord . ” say , “ indeed the knowledge of the hour is with my lord , and you will not be able to know the truth ; but most of them do not know the truth ; you are the knower of the unseen , but most of them do not know . ”
they said : it is the same to us whether thou admonish us or be not amongadmonishers !
and you devour inheritance with all greed .
yes indeed , his lord was ever watching him .
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
the day we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging ; and we gather them together , leaving none behind .
he said : worship ye , then , beside allah , that which profiteth you not at all , nor it hurteth you
god certainly knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he does not love the proud .
the knowledge of the day of resurrection is only with allah . and to him will all be brought back in the best manner . the most perceptive of the people will say : “ our lord , we are the ones who will give you the salvation , but most of the people do not know . ”
what aileth you that ye expect not in allah majesty !
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
we have sent to you , , as a messenger , and we sent to noah and ishaq and yaqoub , and we gave to david the prophecy and solomon , and we gave to david , solomon , job , and solomon . we gave her a good distinction .
say , he is god , the one .
and be moderate in your pace and lower your voice . indeed , the most disagreeable of sounds is the voice of donkeys .
those are they whom allah has cursed , and he whom allah curses , you will not find for himhelper ,
but thy people reject this , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
who , out of his grace , hath installed us in the mansion of eternity , where toil toucheth us not nor can weariness affect us .
and whoever does evil or wrongs himself but afterwards seeks allah 's forgiveness , he will find allah oft forgiving , most merciful .
do you feel secure that the people who are bent on denying the truth have made their covenant and their messenger will be in the midst of those who have gone before them ? they will have a fear of god , if you are believers .
say thou : he hath sent it down who knoweth the secret of the heavens and the earth . lo ! he is forgiving , merciful .
and they assign daughters to allah - glory be to him ! - and for themselvesthey desire !
and there go round them youths , their own , as if they were hidden pearls .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
indeed , the eyes of your people will see your enemies in the sky , and we will turn to allah with mercy and you will be satisfied with the most repentant .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
but those endowed with knowledge and faith will say , “ you remained in god 's book until the day of resurrection , and this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know . ”
so we said , o adam , indeed this is an enemy to you and to your wife . so let him not get you both out of paradise , so that you should be unhappy ,
so ! and we knew all about him .
remember the favor of allah upon you and his covenant with which he bound you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
and the fruits of the garden is that , in which there is no doubt ; and if you see any man , then know that i have given you a rich , and i do not speak to the most merciful .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
where they will hear no idle talk .
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each . let there be no reluctance in the law of god , if you believe in god and the last day ; and let a group of believers witness their punishment .
kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury . allah is all-sufficient , most forbearing .
he said , you seem to be strangers .
and call not upon another god with god . there is no god but he . everything will perish except his face . his is the judgment , and to him you will be brought back .
we have put a veil on their hearts and they said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth , and they said , ‘ the lord of the heavens and the earth , do not call upon any one except allah ; indeed we have been recording . ’ ”
verily i fear for you the torment of a mighty day .
no indeed ! on that day they will be screened off from seeing their lord ,
on that day none shall punish as he punishes ,
he who purifies himself ,
have you not regarded how your lord spreads the twilight ? then we made the sun a beacon for it .
storming into the midst .
and among men there is he who disputes about allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil .
but we are a numerous host , ever on guard .
when he came to the children of israel with clear proofs , he said , i have received to you wisdom , and i have given you knowledge . so fear god , and obey me .
forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof . lo ! those who garner sin will be awarded that which they have earned .
he who is given his record in his right hand will say : 'here , take and read my book !
and ask the forgiveness of your lord , then return to him , and give to your advantage a good time ; and if you turn back , then surely i fear for you the chastisement of a dreadful day ; and if you turn back , then surely i fear the chastisement of the great day .
and by the day when it dawns ,
when the savage beasts shall be brought together ,
moses asked , samiri , what were your motives ?
nor are the living equal to the dead . god makes to hear whomever he wants . you can not make those who are in their graves hear .
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the illustrious book .
he said : o son of my mother ! seizenot by my beard , nor by my head ! verily ! i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused division among the children of israel , and hast not waited for my word .
'no ' he replied . 'it was their great one amongst them that did it . ask them , if they are able to speak '
say : nothing will befall us except what allah has decreed for us ; he is our protector . and upon allah let the believers rely .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
in the land , there is a difference of the earth , and in it , in between , and in between ; do you find any deity other than allah ? indeed , most of them do not know .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
it will be but one shout , and behold them brought together before us !
and we are not going to give the lie to the truth , but the fact that you call us to the point of its point , and we have to withdraw from between them and you . but we are going to do so .
the beneficent , the merciful .
if we had so willed , we could have made it the mountains , and you would have seen the mountains , so that they would not be able to put him in the way , and we will make it clear to the people , so that they may understand .
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is only as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . indeed allah has power over all things .
my lord ! vouchsafe me wisdom and unite me to the righteous .
and when it is said to them : follow what allah has sent down , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers . even if satan were calling them to the torment of the burning ?
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
we said , “ do not fear ; you are the uppermost . ”
the angels and the spirit ascend to him in a day the measure of which is fifty thousand years .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
then god thereafter turns towards whom he will ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
indeedmessengers were mocked before you , but the scoffers were surrounded by that , whereat they used to mock .
woe to the people who are given the book , and they will say , this is god 's presence . so woe to those who are bent on denying the truth . woe to those who are bent on denying the truth .
and he will provide for him from where he will be given to him . and whoever takes his trust in allah , he is indeed going to take his command . indeed allah has full control of all things .
or have they a share in the kingdom ? then they would not give people a speck .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what emerges from it , and what descends from the sky and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the all-forgiving .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions though the polytheists should be averse .
have you not seen how allah created the seven heavens one above another ,
“ today , none of you has the power to profit or harm one another ; and we shall say to the unjust , ‘ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny ! ’
say , “ i am only god , the lord of the other , who is the lord of the universe and the lord of all the worlds . he has no one to help anyone of you . then you will have no one to help about your differences .
the messenger of god said to them , this is god 's she-camel . let her drink !
believers , if you obey a certain group among the people of the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
on that day , you will see all people and their people will be gathered together to their own people , who will be called to account for their own people . it will be said to them , today , this day of recompense is what you have been doing .
and lo ! he verily was of the folk that are near , and he was stiff-necked , wherefore he made with them a provision of that which was with him , and we vouchsafed unto him a goodly hire . lo ! allah loveth not those who take heed .
o you who have faith ! do not enter the homes of the noble messenger except your own lives , and do not be recompensed for your bustle , unless it be the same ; and you shall not be called to account for any time . that is better for you , and it is not for you to be deprived of the time . that is better for you , and no more .
and it is he who causes you to turn away from the night , and to make you to die , and then you will be resurrected on the day of resurrection , and then you will return to him .
and whatever you may cause to come in the way of allah , in the way of allah , do not make a breach with you , and remember the favor of allah on you , and that he made a reconciliation between you , and that allah is the clear communications , so that you may be guided .
we never sent before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked about in the markets . we have made some of you a trial for others . will you , then , be patient ? your lord is the seer .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
as for those who reject our messages , we will gradually lead them from where they do not know .
they are those for whom there will be an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
and say : 'lord , let me land a blessed landing , you are the best of harborers '
and he will forgive you of your sins , and defer you to a stated term ; god 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
and we bestowed upon him ishaque , andya'qub . each one we made righteous .
i swear by the evening glow ,
he said , “ you will sow for seven years continuously ; so leave what you harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
save that which allah willeth . lo ! he knoweth the disclosed and that which still is hidden .
by no means ! verily it is a flame .
labouring , wearied out ,
indeed , allah is not one to change their tongue , so that he may make a glitter to it . but those who believe , - it is the best of their lord , and he will say , “ allah does not wish to be lost , and he has the way to go astray . ”
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba ' . every one denied the messengers , so my threat became due .
and his lord had given him the best of good deeds , and we gave him the good news of his family , and he said , “ o mary , it is from allah , the provisions he has given to you , and he has given you the provisions ; he has the provisions to whomever he wills . he is the rich , the honorable . ”
it is he who breaks the dawn ; and he has made the night a calmness , and the sun and the moon for calculation . such is the disposition of the almighty , the all-knowing .
and we have made such things a provision for them in the world , and we have made them as a means of beauty . will they not know that we are in the midst of a little , so will they be victorious ?
so exaltwith praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
has he chosen daughters above sons ?
but if you want to replace one wife with another and you have given one of them a cantaras mahr , take not the least bit of it back . would you take it by slander and manifest sin ?
arepudiation by allah and his apostleto the polytheists with whom you had made a treaty .
they have calledlies . they will soon learn the consequences of what they mocked .
and he who does not think that he does not go to any equivalent to his words , nor is his case . then , let them know that it is their slander and their hatred .
when he wills a thing he has only to say : be , and it is .
except for he who created me , for he will guide me . ”
we said , “ o fire , be coolness and safety upon abraham . ”
surely in that are signs for those who discern .
and there are signs in this for one of the people who have followed him , and he who makes a mistake of his own people , and he who is a guarantor for him . and whoever does not believe in allah , then indeed , allah is free of all wants from men .
“ o my people ! give full measure and full weight in justice , and do not cheat the people from their rights , and do not roam in the earth causing turmoil . ”
in fact , they were given to leave , indeed , before this , you had no one to help them . but you were the unbelievers , and you were one of the unbelievers .
we have set forth for men in this koran every manner of similitude ; man is the most disputatious of things .
they will say , to allah . say : then why do you not bethink yourselves ?
o ye who believe ! take not for auliya'disbelievers instead of believers . do ye wish to offer allah a manifest warranty against yourselves ?
and indeed , it is he who knows the best of the night , and that you should have a part of the night , and part of a part of that which you have been working . and allah is the forgiver , the most honourable .
so when he had left them and thethey worshipped , we gave him isaac and jacob , and each one of them we made a prophet .
then their return will be to the same blazing hell .
it is he who has revealed the book to you , so that you will explain to the truth or the hereafter . tell them , my lord knows all who are in manifest error .
and had it not been for the grace of allah and his mercy upon one one of them , they would surely have been made to reckon at all , for they have no power to do so . and allah has full knowledge of that which you used to do .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good , and lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
o you who believe ! be steadfast in your faith , and do not have any knowledge of you , and be patient in the way of allah . and fear allah , in order that he may have success .
this book whereof there is no doubt , is a guide unto the god-fearing .
we made a covenant with the children of israel and we sent to them messengers . whenever a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire , some they accused of lying , and some they slew .
and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger and transgresses his limits - he will admit him to a fire , to abide therein , and he will have a humiliating punishment .
when you said to the believers : 'is it not enough for you that your lord should reinforce you with three thousand angels sent down upon you ?
indeed , those who have believed , migrated , and striven for the cause of allah in their wealth and their lives , - it is those who are the heirs of their own souls , and those who have accepted their faith , - they will not be able to make a covenant with you , except for the cause of allah . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
such are rightful owners of the garden , abiding therein : a reward for what they used to do .
have they , then , seen the earth , that we may see how was the end of those who were before them ? and how was the end of those who were in the power , and he is the all-mighty , the all-powerful .
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them cast it aside ? nay , most of them do not believe .
and when ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city secure , and save me and my sons from worshipping idols .
he said : they are close on my track , and i hastened to you , my lord , that you may be pleased .
when the disciples said : o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a tablefrom the heaven ? he said , fear allah , if you should be believers .
but if they do not respond to you , know that it has been sent down by god ’ s knowledge , and that there is no god but he ; will you then submit ?
to thamood we sent their brother salih saying : 'worship allah ' but they were two parties quarrelling with each other .
gehennais before him and he is given oozing pus to drink ,
nor do you worship what i worship .
and we have not sent thee but as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner unto all mankind ; but most of mankind know not .
and then severed his life-artery ,
they think that itis far away .
he is the lord of the east and the west ; there is no god but he . so take him alone for your guardian ,
a goblet from a spring shall be passed round to them
no indeed ! soon they will know !
and those who were patient , and pray to their lord , and pray , and to be steadfast in what we have given them , and give up what we have given them secretly and openly , they will be the happy ones .
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you . you were certainly among those who were unaware before this .
this is a proclamation for mankind , so that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
and the earth which splits ,
lo ! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers .
then , when he came to them with his hosts , and allah sets forth for you a return , he will bring you forth from it , but those who have faith in their lord will be the winners .
who join together what god has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord and dread the hardship of the reckoning ;
enjoin prayer on your people , and be steadfast in maintaining it . we do not ask you for provisions , rather , it is we who provide for you , and the happy end is for piety .
they will say , yes , a warner did come to us , but we denied and said : 'allah has not sent down anything , you are only in great error . '
in their hearts is a disease , which god has increased . they will have a painful punishment , because they have been lying .
he invokes instead of allah that which neither hurts him , nor benefits him . that is the far error .
and recall what time thy lord said unto the angels : verily i have been working over thee in the earth , and the angels say : will ye take a rank in the land ? and we are the glorifiers .
“ in fact , we are unfortunate . ”
peace , a word from a merciful lord .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth , and the balance . and what will make you perceive ? perhaps the hour is near .
he said , “ do you believe in it before i have given you permission , before i have given you permission ? indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing— you will certainly know that we have the power to do so and you will be pursued by a great deal .
they said : put him and his brother offand send out heralds to the cities
and ornaments of gold . yet all that would have been but a provision of the life of the world . the hereafter with your lord is for the pious .
what are they asking one another about ?
they are the ones who fear their lord in the gardens of eden wherein streams flow and to remain in it for those who do good .
lo ! it is a tree that springeth in the heart of hell .
said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you should be convinced .
as for those who disbelieve , neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . it is they who will be fuel for the fire .
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
and they ask , o shu'aib , we are only one of those that you can not know . we are indeed going to see you to be a fool among them , and we have not been able to give you a reputation . we have never asked you to be a manager .
surely in this there is a sign for those who believe .
they said , “ you know that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ”
satan is an enemy to you . so treat him as an enemy . he only invites his party to be among the companions of the blaze .
and let the people of the injil judge by that which allah hath sent down therein . and whosoever judgeth not by that which allah hath sent down , then those ! they are the transgressors .
and these similitudes we put forward for mankind , but none understands except the knowledgeable .
and his father 's wife was upon his wife , and he said : o my father ! behold , these are the signs of allah : he said , my father , indeed , my lord has brought me a thing , and he is indeed the most merciful of the mufsidun .
tell them : o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and the earth is spacious . allah is the doer of reward without account .
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
o you who believe ! seek help in patience and as-salat . indeed , allah is with as-sabirin .
so when they returned to their father , they said : o our father ! no more measure of grain shall we get : so send our brother with us , that we may get our measure , and we will surely protect him .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
have you considered him who denies the religion ?
these are two adversaries who have disputed concerning their lord . as for those who disbelieve , garments of fire will be cut out for them ; boiling water will be poured down over their heads ,
we shall certainly make the unbelievers suffer severe torment and will punish them far worse than what they deserve for their deeds .
and establish the measures justly , nor decrease the due weight .
on their account no responsibility falls on the righteous , butis to remind them , that they mayfear allah .
the book of moses had been sent down by the book of moses and his guidance . this is the speech of the illustrious book .
say : i seek refuge with the lord of men ,
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . allah encompasses all things .
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie
nor does he speak out of his own desire .
and we raised the mount above them for their bond , and we said to them , 'enter in the gate prostrating ' ; and we said to them : do not transgress at the limits of the sabbath , and we took from them a solemn covenant .
and he had no host to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
no nation can outstrip its term , nor delay it .
he created man from a drop offluid , and behold , he is an open contender !
those who are apprehensive of the believers , but those who are fought against god 's cause , and are not remiss in serving , are not the favor of god ; surely god is gracious to those who are good .
his home will be the abyss .
he said , “ yes , and you will be among my favorites . ”
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we have already given the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we have given them a great kingdom .
by the witness and the witnessed ,
o you who have faith ! do not cause your wealth to be your wealth or your children , so that the sun ’ s attention may be shown to you , and whoever is faithless - it is they who are the losers .
he said , throw . and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck terror into them , and they presented a greatmagic .
and there is no fault for you , if you should marry a woman 's women , or a part of you they have not yet touched them . and you have a share of it , and a part of it is a great decree for the righteous .
and he said : o my people ! if i saw you so that i may see that which is in my clear signs , then i will give you a provision from my lord , and i will not make things equal for you ; and i have not been remiss in respect of you , and in order that i may go back .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to remember or desires to show gratitude .
o you who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you . let them find firmness in you . and know that allah is with those who fear him .
it is he who shows you the lightning , for fear and hope , and raises massive clouds .
and as for the one who lived in the cities , he raised its toll on it , he said , ‘ shall we be able to destroy the like of it ? ’ indeed , it is the same to be the same for people who have gone before them ; and so do not sit in front of it , and in the end they will be brought up .
we gave moses the guidance , and bequeathed upon the children of israel the book
those who take disbelievers for auliya'instead of believers , do they seek honour in them ? indeed all honour belongs to allah .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after injury had smitten them - for those of them who did good and feared allah , there is a great reward .
then they defied the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
and the two seas are not equal , nor are they made to be a water of water . and they have the same to drink , and the same will be the same for them , so that you may see the like of their deeds , so that you may be grateful .
he said , ‘ o my people ! why do you wish to hasten evil rather than good ? why do you not plead to allah for forgiveness so that you may receive mercy ? ’
we have revealed to you the quran with the truth , and the matter that preceded to you . and your lord is the guardian of all that you have done . so he will make all that you have to do . so , if god willed , he could have made you go to know .
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it , and it may be that you dislike a thing which is bad for you , and the same is bad for you . and whatever good you do , allah is aware of it .
god mocks them and gives them time to continue blindly in their transgressions .
and olives and palms
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands worked it not . will they not then be grateful ?
and we left for him among the later folk :
or have they associates if they are truthful .
and among them is he who argues about the secret of their secret , neither does any secret , nor does any good matter , except he whom he wills . and whoever does so , there is a great reward for him .
and obey allah and the messengerthat you may obtain mercy .
except the oppressed among men , women and children who can not devise a plan nor are they directed to a way .
surely in this there is a sign for those who believe .
and he created the jinn of a flame of fire .
those who persecute the believing men and women without repenting will suffer the torment of hell , and they will have the punishment of burning .
and we gave him good in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
he said : o son of my mother ! seizenot by my beard , nor by my head ! verily ! i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused division among the children of israel , and hast not waited for my word .
had we wanted , we could have made it salty . why then do you not give thanks ?
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we are to return .
the threatened hour is nigh .
wherefore hallow thou the name of thy lord , the mighty .
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . glory be to him ! - and he is the exalted in might , the beholder of that which is in the heavens and the earth . is it not a thing for allah that ye do not know ?
and verily of his sect was ibrahim .
my people , do whatever you will , and so will i. you will come to know who will suffer a humiliating punishment and who is a liar . wait and i too will be a liar .
when souls are reunited
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
he said : my lord knowethwordin the heavens and on earth : he is the one that heareth and knoweth .
by the heaven and the morning star
lo ! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers .
he said , “ my lord , my bones have become feeble , and my hair is aflame with gray , and never have i been unblest in my prayer to you . ”
as if they were rubies and coral .
and brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture ;
we know very well how they listen when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , 'you are only following a man bewitched ! '
and that i guide you to your lord , so you should fear him ?
the heavens are wellnigh rent of it , and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall in ruins ,
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them , then turn back and see what they will return .
o ye who believe ! take not for auliya'disbelievers instead of believers . do ye wish to offer allah a manifest warranty against yourselves ?
and the weighing on that day will be just . then those whoseare heavier in the balance will find fulfilment .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
lo ! we defend thee from the scoffers ,
they will say , “ if only i had fabricated it , ” say , “ if i have fabricated it , you will not have any power to frustrate me , nor will you be able to challenge god . god is the forgiver and the most merciful . ”
this is the day they shall not speak ,
so if they believe in the like of what you believe in , then they are surely guided ; but if they turn away , then they are only in schism ; and allah will suffice you against them , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
it is most hateful to god that you say what you do not do .
we created you , then we shaped you , then told the angels : prostrate yourselves before adam , and they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he was not among those who prostrated themselves .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the shaper . to him belong the best names . all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify him . he is majestic and all-wise .
so fear allah and obey me .
o ye who believe ! devour not usury , doubled and multiplied , but fear allah that ye may be successful .
it almost bursts with fury . every time a batch is thrown into it , its keepers will ask them : did no warner come to you ?
such is allah , your rightful lord . what then is there after the truth but error ? whither then are ye turned away !
say : none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah ; and they do not know when they will be raised .
so fear god , and obey me .
therein are two kinds of every fruit .
these are verses of the wise book ,
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
and of mankind is he who disputeth respecting allah without knowledge or guidance or a book luminous .
satan is the promoter of what is in the matter . we said , ‘ it is sent down to him , from the earth , and some of you are now subdued . ’
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember ,
and the true promise draweth nigh , then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieved will be staring : woe to us ! we have been oblivious of this . indeed , we were wrongdoers .
indeed those who arenear your lord do not disdain to worship him . they glorify him and prostrate to him .
that they ascribe a sonto the most beneficent .
and it is he who has made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to remember or desires to show gratitude .
you see many of them competing with one another in sin and hostility , and their eating of things forbidden . evil indeed are the things they do .
and casts forth what is within it and becomesempty ,
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; each one floats in an orbit .
so do not weaken and do not grieve , and you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
to god belong the east and the west . whichever way you turn , there is the face of god . god is all-embracing and all-knowing .
then he became a clot ; then he created him and formed him .
alif . lam . mim .
these depend on guidance from their lord . these are the successful .
it is he who has created you from clay , and then decreed a term , and there is with him another determined term . yet you are still in doubt .
those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when you have become dispersed in particles , then you will be createdanew ?
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie
he will guide them and improve their condition .
“ set out with my servants by night—you will be followed .
my servants who believe , my earth is vast , so worship me alone .
and when their riches are , they will not be affected by their wealth , and their wealth will not be lightened for them , and we shall add to them a mild provision , and it is only for us to do so . and it is only a brief bargain , and we are not interested in respect of it . and it is only a brief bargain .
to transfigure you and create you inthat you know not .
who preserve their trusts and pledges
o mankind ! there has come to you instruction from your lord , and healing for what is in the breasts , and guidance and mercy for the believers .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord until the sun disappeared behind the veil .
and to guard against every rebellious devil .
muhammad is only a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or is killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the thankful .
and amassed wealth and covetously hoarded it .
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained the fatal rain . did they not see it ? but they do not expect the resurrection .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
he calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his benefit , an evil guide and an evil friend .
he said , “ my lord , i have called my people night and day .
we savedand his family except his wife who remained with the rest .
and he overthrew the subverted cities
when moses had given the time of moses , moses put a blazing fire on the height of the fire , and he said , “ wait – this is a fire , so that you may warm yourselves . ”
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry burdens from the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and thus did the samiri throw .
and that those who do not believe in the hereafter have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
and it is he who gave you life , then makes you die , then revives you . indeed , mankind is ungrateful .
except your dedicated servants among them . ’
believers , if you obey a certain group among the people of the book , they will turn you into unbelievers after you have believed .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
so allah will forgive you your sins , and will cause you to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , and there is a great attainment for them .
how can there be for them an admonition , when a messenger making plainhad already come unto them ,
and rely uponthe almighty , the most merciful .
in order to seduce the two of them , they will be in the sight of god . if you are brothers , you will receive no choice . god is certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
however , those who try to challenge our revelations will face the most painful torment .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they lay , prostrate in their homes .
then we revealed to you : follow the religion of ibrahimhanifaand he was not of the mushrikun .
he said , ‘ this is my wealth , in which i have given knowledge . do you not know that allah ’ s judgement has been given before this , and he will not be able to destroy it ? ’
before them is hell , and what they have earned will not avail them at all , nor those whom they took as guardians besides allah . there is a great punishment for them .
and the absolute kingdom will belong to the beneficent god .
and refuse charity .
save an old woman among the lingerers .
and we have subdued them for them , so some of them they ride , and some of them they eat .
when the most wicked man among them rose up .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not escape allah and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
on the day when the first blast shivers
then he turned from them , and said : o my people ! i delivered my lord 's message unto you and gave you good advice , but ye love not good advisers .
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
so they threw their ropes and their sticks , and said , “ by the majesty of pharaoh , we will be the winners . ”
when moses said to his people , ‘ allah commands you to slaughter a cow , ’ they said , ‘ are you mocking us ? ’ he said , ‘ i seek allah ’ s protection from being among al-jahilun ! ’
moses said : that is what we were seeking . so they went back retracing their footsteps .
in the will of their lord , there will be a garden of eden , beneath which rivers flow . they will abide in it for ever . and they will be made to accept from the most repentant lord .
o children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and we sent down to you manna and quails ,
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
and they will say : praise be to allah , who has removed from ussorrow . verily , our lord is oft-forgiving , most ready to appreciate .
and because the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it ; and because allah will raise those who are in the graves .
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime , dispenser oflaws .
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
in a lofty garden ,
and call to mind what has been revealed to you from god , and follow what has been sent down upon them , and follow their own desires , for most surely god desires to do that which they have been doing .
and you will not unless allah wills ; surely allah is knowing , wise ;
indeed , when we have sent the book in the book , and made the light to be light , the light of those who had been given to their worship , their lord has given them the partners of their own people , and they were not aware of what is with them , and they are not aware of what allah has sent on those who do not believe .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . on the day when the hour of doom comes , the followers of falsehood will be lost .
by the pluckers , violently plucking ,
and allah is not one to call you to account , when you are present , and indeed , he will call you to account for that which you have said and the best of that which you have been working . so that you may not be able to obtain the right path , or the best of the family that you may take for a free part of the two times . so that you may not be able to give the right course .
if you put your trust in allah , surely allah loves those who turn away .
say : o my lord ! if thou shouldst show methat which they are warned against , -
the day that we shall gather all mankind together , then we will say to those who ascribed partners : “ you have taken partners with allah , and then we will say to the polytheists , ‘ you are indeed in your gods , and indeed , you are in differing . ’
we have placed constellations in heaven and have beautified it for beholders ,
and his hosts of the jinn and the men and the birds were gathered to him , and they were formed into groups .
what is the matter with them that they turn away from this exhortation ,
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained the fatal rain . did they not see it ? but they do not expect the resurrection .
and when our revelations are recited to them , they say : we have heard . if we willed , we could saylike this . this is nothing but the tales of the ancients .
they will not taste death therein , save the first death ; and he will preserve them from the torment of hell
and do not be afraid of what is with them , while they are in error , and in their footstepsguided . they will be safe from the path of their lord , and give them the sustenance of that which they have been given .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and produced thereby some fruits as provision for you , and subjected for you the ships , and subjected for you rivers .
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , one after another ,
and whom i have granted abundant wealth
not at all . the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
“ and my advice will not benefit you , much as i may want to advise you , if god desires to pervert you ; he is your lord , and to him you will be returned . ”
the elite of pharaoh ’ s people said , “ do you wonder , in the land , so that you may commit evil deeds in this land ? ” he said , “ and we will be responsible for them . ”
the unbelievers say : 'this is but a falsehood he has forged , and another nation has helped him ' so they have come with wrong and falsehood .
'call not out today for one destruction , but call for many ! '
they said , o shu'ayb , does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped or that we should not do what we like with our property ? indeed you are the forbearing , the right-directing one .
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
say : if youlove allah then follow me , allah will love you and forgive you your sins . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
those who break allah 's covenant after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and do mischief on earth , it is they who are the losers .
whoever desires the fleeting life , we hasten for him therein what we will for whom we please . then we consign him to hell , where he will burn , condemned and rejected .
o ye who believe ! take not for yourselves a thing to be asked of it , and let them make provision for you , save that which is in your hands , and let them make provision for you , save that which ye have been given . and if ye think that ye are free of , know that allah is not a forgetter .
yet he desireth that i should give more .
on the day when they will be told , ‘ this is what the truth has been sent down and what is it ! ’ they will say , ‘ this is the truth ! ’ and they will say , ‘ indeed the punishment of a surety is the most severe ! ’
and certainly we sent a noble messenger from the people , and we said to them : worship allah , and keep your backs , so that you may turn away from them and see what sort of allah befell those who denied .
and on the day when they will turn their backs and their backs , and what will make you go astray from allah ? and none can guide you against allah , nor will he guide you .
what ! do you then call upon any other than that of which he calls . when he calls on his heels , he turns away from them in the land , so will you take admonition in the land ? is it a little for you to take heed ?
and the ad were destroyed by a furiously raging wind-storm
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for leavefrom waging jihad with their possessions and their lives . and allah is all-knower of the pious .
and when it is said to them : come to what allah has sent down and to the messenger , you will see the hypocrites barring the way to you .
it is allah who has made the earth a bed for you , and made the life of this world for you , and the sky is a source of sustenance for you . it is allah who is the lord of the universe , the lord of the whole universe .
butenjoy what ye took in war , lawful and good , and fear allah . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
they said , “ you are an ill omen in your you . will you not be reminded ? ” in fact , you are a people who are a people who do evil .
and if you should hold them away , then speak only what is said , the word of the unbelievers . what ! when it is said to them , is that the one who is dust and decomposed is they are the people who are the people of the fire ? they will remain in it .
when the disciples said : o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a tablefrom the heaven ? he said , fear allah , if you should be believers .
honourablel scribes .
between them a barrier they do not overpass .
when the scrolls are laid open ;
and they will see the punishment of the day of resurrection , and those who follow their own lusts , and when they are subjected to the torment , they will be seized by the punishment , and they will be stilled .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the dead .
the great terror will not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : “ this is your day which you were promised . ”
and be steadfast in the way of god . if you were to retaliate , they will have the like of it , and you will have the like of it ; and whoever is in the midst of it , will have the like of it , to be a great source of strength for him . and fear god , and on the day of resurrection he will have no power .
and we destroyed not a city but it had its warners .
and made the night a cover ?
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . unquestionably , by the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
these are the ones upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah has set a seal . they are the heedless .
when we sent to them two messengers , they belied them both , so we strengthened them with a third , and they said , “ indeed we have been sent towards you . ”
before this we gave abraham his guidance . we knew him well .
he it is who sendeth forth various ways for whom he will , and he sendeth down the shadows of a cloud . he sendeth down his revelations unto the heavens , and he hath set it in a midst of the worlds . and moreover , then , when he becometh a belt , he becometh in a state of delight ,
and to warn those who say , ‘ allah has taken a son . ’
o ye who believe ! devour not usury , doubled and multiplied , but fear allah that ye may be successful .
and settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat .
no indeed ! but they do not fear the hereafter .
and they have been exhorted to the punishment of the day when the punishment will come upon them . those who do wrong will say , ‘ our lord ! why did you not take us a little , and i will not be among the noble messengers ’ ? ’
you can not thwart him on the earth , and you have no friend or helper apart from him .
say : 'flight will not profit you , if you flee from death or slaughter , you shall be given enjoyment of days '
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
o you who have faith ! do not establish the prayer , and are witnesses of them . and be wary of allah , to keep your duty to them . indeed , allah is acquainted with what they do .
but if disaster should seize them because of what their hands have sent before , they would say : our lord ! why did you not send a messenger to us that we might have followed your signs and been among the believers ?
due to the wrongdoing of the jews , we forbade them good things that were permitted to them , and for their barring manyfrom the way of allah ,
the magicians fell down in adoration
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
and when ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city secure , and save me and my sons from worshipping idols .
and upon allah is the direction of theway , and some of the paths are devious , and had he wished he would have guided you all .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and you have not besides allah any protector or a helper .
the fire lashes their faces and therein are shriveled lips .
and he had no authority over them , but that we might know him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof thy lord is guardian over everything .
have they then seen how the people who had gone before this had come to the people of the past and they were destroyed ? how was it that they had done in the land , which had no fear of them ?
nor face thirst or scorching heat .
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know what my warning is like .
and will enter the blaze .
the one who believed said : ' i fear for you the like of the day of the confederates ,
god increases in guidance those who seek guidance . and good deeds that endure are better with your lord for reward , and better for consequence .
but when he came to it , he was called : blessed is whosoever is in the fire and whosoever is around it ; and glory be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
we have sent down the book to you so that you could have read the qur'an . those who have faith in the message have come to believe in it , they will have no faith in it , but they who are clearly unjust to our signs .
can mislead anyone away from him ,
lo ! we sent noah unto his people : warn thy people ere there come unto them torment afflictive .
or do they believe that he is in the night and prostrate to the worship of him , and be afraid of the one who is in the hereafter ? say , “ is these the people who do not know the truth ? ” say , “ is it those who do not know the truth ?
certainly we gave moses the book , so do not be in doubt concerning his encounter ; and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
and we do not have any material in other than the angels , except the angels ; and we have not appointed aught of it except for those who disbelieve ; and only for those who disbelieve is the matter of their lord , and the injeel , and the injeel , and those who have been given the scriptureand the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] will be in the way of your lord , and whoever does not have faith in the matter of your lord , it is the same for those
and when we give mankind a taste of mercy , they rejoice therein , but when evil afflicts them because ofthat theirhands have sent forth , lo ! they are in despair !
did they not see that it is a lie in the land , a little lord ? he will have no one to help you , nor shall he be able to keep any thing from him .
that wherewith they were contented naught availeth them ?
do you build monuments on every high place in vanity ,
for him is nearness to us , and a beautiful resort .
created man from a clot .
on that day the heavens shall become like molten brass ,
and the ad were destroyed by a furiously raging wind-storm
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by god with their strongest oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , so they became losers .
has your lord favored you with sons and taken to himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and will stretch out their hands and their tongues towards you with evil , and they wish that you should disbelieve .
wherefore admonish thou ! thou art not , by the grace of thy lord , a soothsayer or a madman .
and allah created the heavens and the earth in truth and that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and when you go forth , you will turn your face towards the sacred mosque and you will be left motionless in the least , so that you may have any power to do so , except for my own good deeds , so that you may have no excuse , except for me .
they had nearly expelled you from the land to evict you from it . but in that case , they would not have stayed after you but a little .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
no misfortune can affect the earth or your own selves but it is in a book , before we make it evident . that is easy for allah .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
it is he who blesses you , and his angels , so that he may bring you out from darkness into light . he is all-merciful to the believers .
the blind and the seeing are not alike
and glorify him morning and evening .
when they are draggediron collars and chains around their necks , they will be dragged
those who have lost their own souls and reform themselves , for those whom god has given their souls they have failed to be their own souls , and they have certainly strayed .
we have made it easy in your language , so that they may remember .
nay ! follow not the way of ibrahim , ibrahim and is-haq and ya'qub . it is not for us to serve any thing with allah . and that which is in the bounty of allah we are not aware of it .
o you who have believed , there is no one to whom a people who have no desire to scoff at it , nor will they be afraid of it . those who are better in sin , do not make a target of hope , or do not be a skeptic . it is the best for those who have turned away .
has the reminder been sent down to himfrom among us ? nay ! but they are in doubt concerning my reminder ! nay , but they have not yet tasted my punishment !
and indeed , the religion of allah is only the true religion , and those who have received the book differ about the matter which has already come to them . but for those who have faith in the signs of allah , allah will surely make them enter in his way .
o you who have believed , if you should make a meeting with him , then know not that it is to be seen of you , but make clear to you that which is in the hands , so that you may turn away from the way .
worship allah , fear him and obey me :
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us in the evening and in the morning .
and he said , “ o my people ! you have the upper hand on this day , and so will you have any one to help us , and so will we be able to retaliate ? ” he said , “ i am the only one who is just guided , and i am the best of the rulers . ”
had it not been for a favour from his lord he would have been cast upon the wilderness , being condemned .
on that day you shall see the guilty ones secured in chains ;
the disbelieving leaders of the people of noah said , we can not believe in you except as one of the people of noah . they follow you but those who follow you . we do not think that we are the liars .
and ornaments of gold . yet all that would have been but a provision of the life of the world . the hereafter with your lord is for the pious .
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , when they are sincere to god and his messenger . there is no way against the good-doers , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
a description of the paradise which the righteous have been promised : beneath it rivers flow , its produce is eternal , and its shade . this is the recompense of those who keep away from evil and are the destiny of the fire .
o you who have believed , say to your people , ‘ o listener ! maybe a free gift have been free by ! ’ a good person is free from a slave of his servants , and he is most kind of mercy from your lord , and he will have mercy on him , and you will have a painful punishment from him .
and when their apostle came to them , they became such that they have believed in the knowledge of that which was with them , and the decree of that which they had been given against the messengers had been deriding .
or who is there in the dominion of the earth and the sea , that he may show you the doors of the day of resurrection ? will you , then , take up the winds before allah and the exalted in might ?
abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord please ; surely your lord is the doer of what he desires .
they will say , woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? this is what the beneficent god had promised , and the messengers spoke truth .
he said , “ what is your business , o envoys ? ”
surely we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
god commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , to judge with justice . god 's instructions to you are excellent . god hears and sees all things .
man prays for evil as he prays for good , for man is hasty .
and do not be like those who became divided and differed after the clear signs had come to them ; for them is a terrible punishment .
and remember your lord within yourself humbly and fearfully , and quietly , in the morning and the evening , and do not be of the neglectful .
that allah may repay each soul what it hath earned . lo ! allah is swift at reckoning .
said : even if i bring you better guidance than what you found your fathers following ? they said : verily , we disbelieve in that with which you are sent .
god does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought against you on account of religion and did not expel you from your homes . god loves the just .
why did they not bring four witnesses upon it ? since they did not bring witnesses , they themselves are liars before allah .
a little enjoyment in this world ! - then to us shall be their return , then shall we make them taste the severest torment because they used to disbelieve .
he said : my lord ! i seek refuge with thee from asking thee that of which i have no knowledge . and if thou forgivest me not and hast not mercy on me , i shall be of the losers .
what , of all creation will you go tothe males ,
depart to a triple-massing shadow
say : 'those of ancient times and those of later times
when allah has made them judge of you , he would show them what is said to you . but if they were to be attacked , he would have suffered a reconciliation between you and them . but allah is the best knower of that which is in the breasts .
do you not see that he who did not see how he has created all that is in the heavens and the earth and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon ? he has no power to do so . god does as he wills .
so judge conclusively between me and them , and deliver me and those who are with me of the believers .
he shall stand at the head of his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . evil is the place to which they are led .
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
those with whom you have made a treaty , then they break their agreement every time and they do not fear allah .
certainly we have left a clear sign of it for a people who use their reason .
thus indeed do we reward those who do right .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set between them a barrier and a complete partition .
he said , “ this is my staff ; i lean on it , and herd my sheep with it , and i have other uses for it . ”
lo ! i , even i , am thy lord , so take off thy shoes ; verily thou art in the holy valley , tuwa .
and to us belong the last and the first .
so when the stars are extinguished ,
on the day whenfaces will turn white andfaces will turn black . as for those whose faces turn black : did you disbelieve after your believing ? so taste the punishment because of what you used to disbelieve .
o men , you are the ones who stand in need of god , and god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
there is not one of you but shall go down to it ; this is an unavoidable decree of your lord .
andwhen we gave musathe scripture ] and the criterionso that you might be guided aright .
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
those who are affected by our lord , they say , ‘ our lord ! indeed , the people have taken the truth in a way , and if allah had wished in the right way , he would make it known to allah , and allah is most mighty , most mighty .
except the path of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a magician and a liar .
vain are the deeds of those who belie our signs and the meeting in the hereafter . are they recompensed except for what they used to do ?
when you were publishing it with your tongues , and uttered with your mouths something of which you had no knowledge . you thought it to be a trivial matter , while it was a gravewith allah .
and when it is said to them : follow that which is sent down by allah , they say : nay , but we are following our fathers : nay , but we are not going to follow our fathers , and they are not at all a way .
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
and perform as-salat , and give zakat and obey the messengerthat you may receive mercy .
answered : they will wake up repenting soon .
the wealth of the world to come is a share of the everlasting life . so do not be at all the good to the servants of god . do not push the right path to the servants of god . do not commit evil in the land . god does not love the aggressors .
these will have a share of what they have earned . god is swift in reckoning .
the first of them will say to the last of them , “ you have no better than us , so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ”
and whatever things you have been given are only the wares of the life of this world and its glitter ; and what is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a betterthan it or return it ; surely god keeps a watchful count over everything .
we have forbidden the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
nor do we have a truly sincere friend .
he said , ‘ my lord ! how can i have a son when old age has reached me and my wife is barren ? ’ said he , ‘ so it is that allah does whatever he wills . ’
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
then , when the bearer of glad tidings came , he laid it on his face and he became clear-sighted . he said : did i not tell you that i know from allah that which ye know not ?
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire , and you will find no helper for them .
and indeed , the people of the city and the people who were in the cities should be sent by the apostle , will be given to flight . indeed , it is not a great thing for them to be free from the way of allah : for allah will not cause the reward of those who do good to be recorded in any way .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize all by their mark . they will call upon the inhabitants of the garden , “ peace be upon you. ” they have not entered it , but they are hoping .
let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
do we not destroy the earth so that you may see how it had been before them ? and we have destroyed the like of it , and in the world to come he has made clear to them ; and allah did not wrong them , but they did wrong themselves .
out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron who himself was a prophet .
it is he who gives life and causes things to die . when he decides to do something , he just says to it , be , and it is .
the book of moses had been sent down by the book of moses and his guidance . this is the speech of the illustrious book .
who created me , and it is he who guides me ;
the promise of allah ! allah faileth not his promise , but most men know not .
we have not sent down any human being before you except men to whom a few among the people of the towns have been given to the cities . will you , then , take heed in the land as a lesson for the people of the past ? have you then no sense ?
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : i will help you with a thousand angels in succession .
when he said to his people : will you not fear allah ?
indeed , i gave to you a judgment , and the authority is given to him , and he is a master of the kingdom , so the shaitan made their deeds seem true to them , so that they may not be guided .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and with allah is a tremendous reward .
so he broke them to pieces , except the biggest of them , that they might return to it .
and we made a parable for mary 's son , a goodly child , and we breathed into him of the spirit ; and we breathed into him of his spirit , and he was of the devoted worshipers .
indeed , the example of those who are bent on blaspheming against the best is the best of what they have been granted to you . the disbelievers are in a severe opposition , so that the way of god was forbidden to what he had done , so that they may be guided by god ’ s law , so that they may have the way to which god has forbidden the unlawful people .
and see , for they are going to see .
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so they will not be able to harm you . with our signs you and those who follow you will be the victors . ”
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
said , you will find me , if allah wills , patient , and i will not disobey you in any matter .
the people of the desertcame to the people of jewry fight you in the least . do not follow anything except the position of the weaker ones . the people of the people are certainly ignorant .
and certainly we sent a noble messenger from the people , and we said to them : worship allah , and keep your backs , so that you may turn away from them and see what sort of allah befell those who denied .
then will come after that a year in which the people will be given rain and in which they will press .
and they went early in determination , able .
and settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat .
as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease began to say , “ allah and his apostle did not promise usexcept delusion . ”
honourablel scribes .
“ in order that they may understand my speech . ”
and because of their bond against the signs of allah and his signs and the injeel ] , that they should say , “ in fact , it is allah ’ s will . they do not have faith in it . indeed , they do not have faith .
then we destroyed the others .
you may derive benefituntil an appointed time . thereafter their placeis near the ancient house .
then adam received from his lord words , and he relented toward him . lo ! he is the relenting , the merciful .
say , “ i am forbidden to worship what you worship besides god , and i have received a clear sign from him , and i am commanded to be one of the lord of all the worlds . ”
for the companions of the right
say , ‘ who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ’ say , ‘ is it allah , then , whom you have neglected , other than allah , the like of it ? ’ say , ‘ it is allah who is the lord of the worlds , and the injeel , ’ ‘ ‘ is allah , the lord of the entire creation . ’ ’
by the resurgent heaven ,
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no other god but him . will ye not ward off ?
moses asked , samiri , what were your motives ?
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
and call not on the prophet as a voice , but allah is aware of that which they say , and verily , allah is knowing of that which they are working .
do you see any remnants of them ?
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can remove you and bringa new creation !
and that he createth the two spouses , the male and the female ,
o you who have believed , take your precaution ; and indeed those who go astray can not cause you to be guided , if you are true in the way ; and the matter is to allah that you do .
and obey allah and his messenger , and do not go forth . but if they go to one another , then do not go with the other ; but if you go to one another , then surely allah is with the steadfast .
whatever good happens to you is from allah ; and whatever evil befalls you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
he says , i have spent a great deal of money .
and who is more unjust than one who invents about allah untruth while he is being invited to islam ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
and among them are uneducated who know the scripture only through hearsay , and they only speculate .
he will say , “ do not feud in my presence—i had warned you in advance .
or do you ask them for a reward , so that they arebeing weighed down with debt ?
there , all authority belongs to allah , the true one . he is best in rewarding , and best in requiting .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
the elite of his people who were arrogant said to those who were oppressed—to those among them who had faith— ‘ do you know that salih has been sent by his lord ? ’ they said , ‘ we indeed believe in what he has been sent with . ’
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing one .
and they say : fables of the ancients which he has written down , so they are dictated to him morning and evening .
did he not find you wandering , and give you guidance ?
and the night when it enshroudeth him ,
every soul shall know what it has put forward .
and indeed it has been revealed to you and to those before you : ‘ if you ascribe a partner to allah your works will fail and you will surely be among the losers . ’
they said : even so saith thy lord . lo ! he is the wise , the knower .
the night and the day enter into the day , and he merges the sun into the night , and the sun and the moon , each running to the extent of the sun , and the sun , and the moon ; all these are the other .
allah produceth creation , then he reproduceth it , then unto him ye will be returned .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught but mankind wrong themselves .
whoso desireth the life of the world and its glitter , we shall pay them in full for their works therein , and therein they shall not be defrauded .
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
we saved the children of israel from their humiliating torment
but they called him a liar and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin and leveled it .
say , itis the greatest message ,
and if there be for you some dispute about what they say , say , ‘ you have obeyed our noble descendants , and then we will be responsible for your well-wishers . ’
he who created death and life , that he may try which of you is best in deed ; and he is the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
and verily , thisis a revelation from the lord of the 'alamin ,
o you who believe ! spend out of what we have provided for you , before the day comes when there will be no buying and no selling . the disbelievers are the unjust .
and when the angels said , ‘ o mary , allah has chosen you and purified you , and he has chosen you above all the women of the world .
and thus do we try some of them by others , that they may say : are these they whom allah favoureth among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
as your lord brought you out from your home with the truth , a part of the believers disliked it .
we have created maidens perfectly
then , when they perceived our might , behold , they ran away from it .
and they said : o wizard ! entreat thy lord for us by the pact that he hath made with thee . lo ! we verily will walk aright .
our lord ! make us not a prey for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and what do you know of that which allah has been mentioned ? indeed , it is forbidden to you , except for the sake of allah . indeed , many of mankind do not know .
to worship god who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
and they say : we have more wealth and more children , and we are not going to be punished .
when we inspired in thy mother that which is inspired ,
they recognize the favour of allah , then they deny it , and most of them are disbelievers .
and the parable of their own self , besides allah , the party of jesus , the son of mary , except allah 's worship . there is no god except him , the exalted in might , the exalted .
and whoever does not accept faith in allah and his noble messenger – we have indeed kept prepared a blazing fire for the disbelievers .
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and the same is that they should turn to the extent of the land after the coming of the earth , after it has been opened , and they have become a refuge for them , and the same is that they should not be able to accept it , and the same is to be the same for them , and the same is that they should not be able to make a mistake . and the matter of the matter is that they should not be able to take it away .
those who in their prayer are lowly .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
and the people of the town were in a state of rain , and he saw the two war . the two of them were ever inclined to his own way , and he said , “ this is the devil , and he has turned to his heels , and he went back on his heels , and he said , “ this is the devil . ”
high indeed be he exalted above that they say !
and if a bounty from allah reaches you , he would surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him : 'would that i had been with them , i would have achieved a great success '
the unbelievers say : why has not some sign been sent down to him from his lord ? but you are only a warner , and every people has its guide .
dead , not living ; and they know not when they shall be raised .
and he had fruit . so he said to his companion while he was conversing with him , i am more than you in wealth and mightier inmen .
is thatbetter entertainment or the tree of zaqqum ?
these are verses of the clear book .
he sends down the angels with the spirit of his command to whoever of his servants he pleases , : warn mankind that there is no god but i , so fear me .
so do not be ungrateful in the manner of what they worship , and whoever follows his worship , except that they had no one to save them , and we have been given a reward of what they used to do .
every soul shall taste of death ; then unto us you shall be returned .
and most of the people , although you strive , are not believers .
but it was not a word that was inspired , and the cattle and the donkeys—for of things not come upon you at the mention of allah . and if any of you were free , he will not have any power to do so . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
and whosoever is allah , , there is none to succour him , but you will come to know the consequences of the blazing fire , when they see the punishment , they will say : are ye to return ?
say , “ no one can protect me from god , nor can i find refuge except in him .
what aileth you that ye believe not in allah , when the messenger calleth you to believe in your lord , and he hath already made a covenant with you if ye are believers ?
the recompense for evil is an evil like it , but whoever pardons and makes reconciliation , his reward lies with allah . indeed , he does not like the wrongdoers .
and we have made a covenant with you , and placed upon it the mount , and we set upon it a command . and they said , ‘ do not be in the least , but fall not down in your arrogance , if you are muslims . ’
his wife and his brother ,
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who possess certitude .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
they will say , “ if only i had fabricated it , ” say , “ if i have fabricated it , you will not have any power to frustrate me , nor will you be able to challenge god . god is the forgiver and the most merciful . ”
those who believe and do righteous deeds , they will surely be in gardens with streams running in them , to abide in them ; and evil is the reward of the laborers .
and indeed we seized the people of firaun with years of drought and shortness of fruits , that they might remember .
and we sent him to their people , saying : o my people ! serve allah , and have no fear of the world to come . and do not fear the earth , and do not go about in the earth causing turmoil .
and we have no intercessors now ,
except for those who repent after that and correct themselves . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they drew lots with one another , and you were not with them when they disputed about it .
we will brand him on the nose .
but to those who do not believe in you , there is a trial for you , but the unbelievers may say that you have the faith of your faith , and the same applies to you . but for those who are upright , you will be rewarded by a great punishment .
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
and he answers those who believe and do good deeds and gives them increase of his bounty . but the unbelievers will have a terrible punishment .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ; you have no god other than he ; you are but forgers .
a description of the paradise which the righteous have been promised : beneath it rivers flow , its produce is eternal , and its shade . this is the recompense of those who keep away from evil and are the destiny of the fire .
then we made him a seed , in a secure repository .
and plantains laden with fruit .
have they then seen how the people who had gone before this had come to the people of the past and they were destroyed ? how was it that they had done in the land , which had no fear of them ?
they say , you to whom the reminderhas been sent down , you are surely possessed .
this book whereof there is no doubt , is a guide unto the god-fearing .
and we shall increasingly give them fruit and meat such as they desire .
and abraham left this legacy to his sons , and also did jacob , saying : o my sons ! surely allah has chosen for you the religion , so die not except in the faith of islam .
say : i pray unto allah only , and ascribe unto him no partner .
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we have given them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , god is terrible in retribution .
and those who guard their private parts
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning to him in repentance ; then when he giveth them a taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
then we revealed to moses , 'strike with thy staff the sea ' ; and it clave , and each part was as a mighty mount .
abiding therein forever . and wretched is their burden on the day of resurrection ,
both the vineyards yielded abundant produce without failure and we caused a stream to flow in the midst of them .
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you , for if you do , then you will be of the wrongdoers .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
and we said to the children of israel after him : dwell in the land , and when the promise of the hereafter comes , we shall bring you all together .
then let them perform their acts of cleansing , and fulfill their vows , and circumambulate the ancient house .
and they ask , o shu'aib , we are only one of those that you can not know . we are indeed going to see you to be a fool among them , and we have not been able to give you a reputation . we have never asked you to be a manager .
towards a believer they respect neither kinship nor treaty . these are the transgressors .
if they are expelled , never will they go out with them ; and if they are attacked , they will not help them ; and if they are attacked , they will turn their backs ; then they will not be helped .
they seek to deceive allah and those who believe , but they deceive none except themselves , though they do not sense it .
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
and we taught him the fashioning of garments for you , to fortify you against your violence ; then are you thankful ?
do you feel secure that it is in the future of the unseen that you do what is fully known to god ? and when you have done so , perform god and his messenger , and obey god and his messenger ; and god is aware of the things you do .
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ then how are you so deluded ? ’
there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves ; grievous to him is your suffering , anxious over you , gentle to the believers , compassionate , and merciful .
believers , do not forbid the good things which god has made lawful to you . do not transgress . god does not love the aggressors .
the example of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is as the likeness of a grain which groweth seven ears , in every ear a hundred grains . allah multiplieth unto whomsoever he will , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
to produce with it grains and vegetation ?
a little enjoyment , then theirrefuge is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
and they will say : our lord ! verily , we obeyed our chiefs and our great ones , and they led us astray from the way .
and whoever earns a sin , earns it against himself only ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
how many a prophet did we send to the ancients ?
when the oceans are exploded .
say : 'those who forge against god falsehood shall not prosper .
from which only he turns who is turned away .
go , thou and thy brother , with my tokens , and be not faint in remembrance of me .
every soul is mortgaged for its own deeds .
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
and also our forefathers ?
the likeness of allah is a similitude he hath made a mortal : on him is a man 's marks , and a man 's similitude ; is it not a single that is the same , but most of them are not aware ?
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
return to your father and say , ‘ our father ! your son has stolen . we testify only to what we know and we were not guardians of the unseen . ’
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
gardens of eternity will they enter , wearing therein bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments there will be of silk .
and we had a party of them that fell out of his torment , and we rained upon him a rain . and he was a guarantor to the earth , and we made some of them in it , but allah did not oppress them , and they were unjust .
the bedouins are more stubborn in unbelief and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits which god has revealed to his messenger . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . allah has power over all things .
in fact , their knowledge of the hereafter is confused . in fact , they are in doubt about it . in fact , they are blind to it .
- dark green in color .
that we may follow the magicians if they are the winners ?
o prophet ! fear allah , and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites . lo ! allah is ever knower , wise .
when they had journeyed further on , moses said to his servant , “ bring us our lunch ; we were exposed in our travel to much fatigue . ”
what is the matter with those who disbelieve that they are the people of the book and those who were bent on denying the truth from your lord and do not have any good deeds to you ; and allah is the owner of the great bounty .
as for those who accuse their wives but have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them shall be four testimonies by allah four times that he is of the truthful ,
safa and marwahare reminders of god . it is no sin for the house of god . whoever makes the pilgrimage to the house , or performs the umrah , commits no error .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
that run their coursehide themselves ,
“ this is the day of separation which you used to deny . ”
from a fountain therein , named salsabil .
we shall set up scales of justice for the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there bethe weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it ; and we are sufficient toaccount .
o you who believe ! eat not up your property among yourselves in vanity , except there be trading by mutual consent . and do not kill yourselves . indeed , allah is to you most merciful .
who divert themselves with idle chatter :
you did not hope that the book should be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
then shall we question those to whom our message was sent and those by whom we sent it .
do you not see that allah created the heavens and the earth with truth ? if he wills , he can remove you and bringa new creation !
the gardens of perpetuity , beneath which rivers flow , dwelling therein forever . such is the reward of those who purify themselves .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , when a party of them used to hear the word of allah and then distort it after they had understood it !
and among us are the righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
they said , “ the life of this world is nothing but this present life , and to remain in it . and for us is the time , and we have made it die ; so they do not have any knowledge . ”
call to the way of your lord with wisdom and good advice and dispute with them in a manner that is best . indeed your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
they will say : nay ! you -- no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the harvest of this world , we give him some of it , and in the hereafter he will have no share .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
and they will say : there is no one but one of them ; and they say : a magician 's ! and some of them they say : ' o these people , is only a piece of them . ' say : 'my lord is the knower of the people of the book . '
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight ye against the friends of satan . lo ! the devil 's strategy is ever weak .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
then we destroyed the others .
he is the lord of the east and the west ; there is no god but he . so take him alone for your guardian ,
these are the people who spend their property for the messenger of allah , to make it crooked , and that which is in the heavens and the earth . but they are not aware of the unseen .
and the wicked will be in hell .
and by the dawn when it breathes
and we had not given them scriptures which they could study , nor sent to them before youany warner .
those who believe and do good works , for them is forgiveness and a generous provision .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of rectitude .
surely we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
and they are enraging us .
allah knows what every female bears , and what shrinks and swells the womb . and everything with him has its measure .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and levelled them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
will they not then meditate on the qur'an , or are there locks upon their hearts ?
that allah may reward the truthful for their truth , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or turn to them in mercy : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
say : 'call on those you have asserted apart from god . they possess not an atom 's weight either in the heavens or in the earth , nor have they any partnership in either of them , nor has he in them any supporter . '
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who are penitent .
then , after that , we sent grief to thee , that she should be a party of the believers , a party of them that was wont to say : “ what ! do we not bring down any thing upon you ? but it is the same for us , that you may have no knowledge of it , and the same is that you have done it , if only you may have any knowledge of it , and the same is that you have done it , if only you can see ? and it is
o prophet , tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more proper , so they will be recognized and not harassed . god is forgiving and merciful .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust , we and our fathers , shall we really be brought forth ?
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and charity , and he was pleasing to his lord .
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan -- surely he is your open enemy ,
and it is a guidance and mercy for the believers .
lord of the throne of glory ,
that allah may forgive thee thy faults of the past and those that follow thee , and may perfect his favour unto thee , and may guide thee on a straight path ,
from them emerge pearls and coral .
we shall certainly test you until we know those who strive hard for the cause of god and those who are steadfast , and try your news .
the descendants of israel , we made them a covenant , and we made them a stoning for the children of israel , saying : 'you shall speak to them for a village that has been given them , and we shall surely make them taste a part of it , except a little ; surely god loves the good-doers . '
and indeed you have been one of the heirs of us , as we created the first creation , and he has made you turn in your creation , and you have done what you have asked of , and there is for you no one but one of them that has been made familiar with you ; and for you is what you have been concealing .
and all that you worship besides allah do not worship you except as you describe , and allah does not have any authority to benefit you , except for he . the law of the matter is only for him , and most of the people do not know .
say : o my people ! act according to your ability ; i too am acting . you will soon know whose will be the sequel of the abode of the hereafter . surely , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
but it will be only a single nudge .
have they not observed the things god has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before god in all humility ?
that , so taste it , andthat for disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
then bring him to me : then , when he came to him , he said : go back to the calf . then , when it came , he said : return to his lord ! verily , my lord is the deception .
as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their wages in full . god does not love the unjust .
do not be surprised for their lord 's will in the morning and in the evening , and they do not listen to their reckoning , for you will be responsible for them , and you will not be able to make public .
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work . those , allah will change their evil deeds into good deeds . allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and we inspired moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike for them a dry path through the sea . do not fear being overtaken , nor being afraid .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
when it is said to them : bow down , they do not bow down .
but when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the idolaters will abide in hell fire . they are the worst of creatures .
“ that is a two group for the two , two of them , then , if he wishes , a single one of them is going to be just . then , if you want to be one of the other , it is the same to be the same , and you will not be able to take it away from the path of god . this is the design of god , to whomever he wants . you are not the unjust ones .
had he falsely attributed some statements to us .
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . evil indeed is what they used to do .
he will cry out for destruction
and when they advanced to meet jalutand his forces , they invoked : our lord ! pour forth on us patience , and make us victorious over the disbelieving people .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who possess certitude .
i fear what you have worshipped besides god , and why do you not have any partners that he has sent down to you ? if you only knew that you will have any fear of god , and will have no fear !
if you obey a human being like yourselves , you will certainly be losers .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
who belieth and turneth away .
and the people were also asked to assemble .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
they will bear their own burdens in full on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . how evil is that which they bear !
tell them the story of the people of the town to whom messengers came .
the people of the town who were bent on denying the truth will find a share of the book -- the record of the illustrious room -- if only you would be able to have the faith of god , we will certainly put your record to the room of the human being so that perhaps you will have no real faith .
it is god who splits the grain and the fruit-stone . he brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . so how can you turn away from him ?
indeed he is able to bring him back ,
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided . these are they who possess intellect .
but if they repent and establish prayer and give zakah , then they are your brothers in religion ; and we detail the verses for a people who know .
: my worshippers ! no fear shall be on you this day , nor shall ye grieve
and laugh and not weep ,
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear , even though they apprehend not ?
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a mighty reward .
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
how can you deny god , when you were dead and he gave you life ? then he will cause you to die and bring you to life ; then to him you will be returned .
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
and those who guard their salatwell .
this quran recounts for the children of israel most of what they differ about ,
when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeed be requited ?
if they were to be before them , they would have surely been in a state of blame of themselves . and you will say , ‘ we testify to the witness of their own souls , and you will say , ‘ we testify to the witness of their own souls , and if we were to do so , we will indeed be unjust . ’
have we not made the earth a receptacle ?
to pharaoh and his council . but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was notdiscerning .
therefore , treat not the orphan with harshness ,
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
they said , we are only a human being like you . but god wills for whomever he wills of his servants . we have not done so with believers . in god let the believers put their trust .
we have indeed created man surrounded by hardships .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , and barter not my revelations for a small price , and me alone should ye fear .
and when our command came , we delivered shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook those who were wrongdoers , and they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes ,
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and we said : o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat ye freelythereof where ye will ; but approach not yonder tree , lest ye become wrong-doers .
he said , “ o my son , do not relate your vision to your brothers , lest they plot a plan against you . satan is man 's sworn enemy .
and we have attached the destiny of every man to his neck , and we shall bring forth for him on the day of resurrection a book which he will find wide open .
but if they turn away , say , “ god is enough for me ; there is no god except he . in him i have put my trust , and he is the lord of the great throne . ”
indeed guidance rests with us ,
and perform as-salat , and give zakat and obey the messengerthat you may receive mercy .
we know best who deserve to be burnt in .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people that are ignorant . '
if you avoid the heinous sins that are forbidden you , we will acquit you of your evil deeds , and admit you by a noble gate .
so he will live in a state of bliss
in fact , they were given to leave , indeed , before this , you had no one to help them . but you were the unbelievers , and you were one of the unbelievers .
and he said : o my people ! if i saw you so that i may see that which is in my clear signs , then i will give you a provision from my lord , and i will not make things equal for you ; and i have not been remiss in respect of you , and in order that i may go back .
“ you lust after men rather than women . you are an excessive people . ”
the creation of the heavens and the earth is certainly greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
though they will be put in sight of each other . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
so off they went , murmuring to one another .
so that he may know that they have delivered the messages of their lord . he encompasses all that is with them and he keeps count of all things .
had the people of the book believed and been godfearing , we would have remitted their sins , and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
we would have seized him by the right hand
so that allah may punish the hypocrites , men and women , and the polytheists , men and women , and allah will relent toward believing men and believing women ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
every man that day shall have business to suffice him .
we helped him against the people who rejected our revelations . they were a wicked people , so we drowned them all .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
aaron , my brother ;
and go away from it , and be you not to be called to any one who has called you to account for a call , for any one who has called you a liar , will be called to account for their evil deeds , and the same applies to their inquiry .
that is because they love the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
it will be but one shout , then see , they are watching
then , when he removes the distress from you , a part of you associates others with their lord
and we appointed companions for them , who made what is before them and what is behind them seem fair to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and humans that passed away before them . they were indeed losers .
with truth have we sent it down , and with truth it has descended . and we have sent you only as a bearer of good news and a warner .
and it behoveth not the compassionate that he should take a son . * chapter : 19
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i then be brought forth alive ?
when luqman said to his son , counselling him , my son , do not associate anything with god . associating others with him is a terrible wrong .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the dead .
but whoever seeks beyond that , then those are the transgressors -
yet is the wage of the world to come better for those who believe and are godfearing .
on the day when the tormentshall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
when he came to them with clear authority , he made clear to them what was with us , and the pharaoh said , “ the same applies to those who believe , ” they said , “ the same is that he has given me a muslim , and the same is the same for the disbelievers . ”
while their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
and he has set up on the earth mountains standing firm , lest it should shake with you , and rivers and roads so that you may find your way .
gardens of perpetual residence . they will enter the righteous from among their fathers , their spouses , and their descendants . and angels will enter unto them from every gate :
allah alternates the night and the day . indeed in that is a lesson for those who have eyes .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
that he may warn him who is alive , and prove the word against the faithless .
it is prescribed for you , when death approaches any of you , and he leaves behind wealth , he should bequeath it to his parents and relatives . this is a duty on the righteous .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh : will there surely be a reward for us if we are the winners ?
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
he said , “ do you dislike my gods , o abraham ? if you do not desist , i will stone you . so leave me alone for a while . ”
and among us are the righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
those who disbelieve , theirs shall be a torment severe ; and those who believe and work righteous works , - theirs shall be forgiveness and a great hire .
his companion said to him , as he conversed with him , “ do you disbelieve in him who created you from dust , then from a sperm-drop , then from a sperm-drop ?
but god will not grant a reprieve to a soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
we have warned you of a near punishment—the day when a person will observe what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , “ alas – if only i were dust ! ”
fight them until there is nofitnah andworship isfor allah . but if they desist , then there is to be no aggression except against the oppressors .
indeed , this is a reminder , so whoever wills may take to his lord a way .
and made him in two sexes , male and female .
they ask you about thulkarnain . say , “ both of them have an indecency , and a great punishment . ” in fact , they will be informed of what you have done . say , ‘ what is your errand , so that you may be able to do so ? ’
verily , they can avail you nothing against allah . indeed , the wrongdoers are friends of each other , but allah is the waliof the muttaqun .
but if you should be inclined to them , they will be able to do it , but if you should be able to any one in the earth , or you may be able to make a guide to them , then do not be one of those who have gone aright .
ha mim
and i do not absolve mysoul , for thesoul indeed promptsto evil , except inasmuch as my lord has mercy . indeed , my lord is forgiving and merciful .
this is the paradise you will inheritfor your deeds .
and celebrate the name of your lord morning and evening ,
and he shows you his signs ; so which of allah ’ s signs will you deny ?
and say to them : “ what is the matter with you , that most of them should be witnesses ? ” say , “ it is god who is the conclusive witness , and i am only one of the mutakallifun . ”
none of them but denied the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , to proclaim it over all religion , even though the polytheists may detest .
praise be to god , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . praise be to him in the life to come . he is all-wise and all-aware .
so do not hurry against them . we are counting their days .
and you are a resident of this land .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire , where they will have their permanent home , as punishment for denying our revelations .
and hell is there for all to see ,
had the army of the enemies invaded their homes and asked them to give-up their religion , they would have yielded to them without delay .
worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies his signs ? they will say , “ call upon us , ” and they will say , “ call upon us , ” and they will say , “ call upon us , ” they will say , “ call upon us , ” and they will say , “ they have been denied . ”
lo ! those who kept their duty dwell in gardens and delight ,
and do not take a sura from your lord , and a messenger has been sent down to you from your lord , and he will add to you in sorrow , and you will not be grieved .
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
endure with patience , for your endurance is not but from god . and do not grieve for them , and do not be distressed by their plots .
we forbade him breastfeeding at first , so she said : shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
as our servants who were born with our mercy , we gave him a blessing and knowledge . moses said to them , do you want me to do so with knowledge of knowledge .
these are they who have purchased error for guidance , but their traffic profited not , nor are they guided .
allah ! there is none worthy of worship except him . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful in statement than allah ?
and those who of their prayers are observant .
they said : o dhul-qarnain ! surely gog and magog make mischief in the land , so may we pay thee tribute on condition that thou set a barrier between us and them ?
and assuredly allah hath pardoned those who have disbelieved and in his apostle and those who follow the messengerwill follow the truth after it had befallen them , and afterward they were averse to the faith . verily thy lord is with them , most merciful .
we destroyed the villages around you and showed you the evidenceso that perhaps you would turn .
indeed , whoever submits his face to allah and is virtuous , he shall have his reward with his lord , and shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
we will call the guards of hell .
whoever strives , strives only for his own sake . god is independent of the whole world .
a fountain at which those brought neardrink .
by god , we sentto nations before you , but satan made their deeds appear alluring to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
they will remain in it forever , and the punishment will not be lightened for them , nor will they be reprieved .
they will say , “ pray to me , ” and when you came to them , they will say , “ o you who have come to you , in the night , then , there is a sign for you , so do not be a supporter of it ; and god is sufficient as a protector . ”
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . allah is the hearer , the seer .
it is for two consecutive years , for one who desires to please it , and to whomever he wishes , to whomever he wishes , is of the human being . and if you do not , it is the same for him ; and if you do not , it is the same for him ; and if you do not , it is in the way of allah , and in order that you may be free of blame ; and if any do , it is in the way of allah ; and if you do
no nation can advance its time nor can it defer it .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for idolaters , even though they be of kin after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
gardens everlasting , whereof the portals remain opened for them .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
and he who is a believer , other than allah , are those who have taken you as a prayer , except for the sake of your spouse . and you have received the good things in order to be of the same , and the captive is for you . and allah is ever all-knowing , all-wise .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent god is the most beneficent .
to god belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . and the praise of their lord is the praise of god , and the praise of their lord ; surely he is the all-forgiving , the all-compassionate .
if you should divorce a divorce before them , they will be given to you the same time . but for you is a source of game , but if you do not want to receive any good , it is the same for you to do so . god is well aware of what you do .
they say , you to whom the reminderhas been sent down , you are surely possessed .
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth , and he is all-wise and all-knowing .
he said , what my lord has given me is better . help me with your man-power and i will erect a barrier between you and them .
say : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the unseen and the seen ! thou wilt judge between thy servants concerning that wherein they used to differ .
i am only a plain warner .
satan is the promoter of what is in the matter . we said , ‘ it is sent down to him , from the earth , and some of you are now subdued . ’
as for him who was indifferent ,
then , o my people ! if i am a true guide from my lord , he said , i have received a right guidance from my lord . have you then seen that which i have given you , and make for you a most argumentative being ? are you not to be blamed ?
we helped them , and they became victorious ,
so that there covered it that which covered .
they will say , glory be to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , they worshipped the jinn ; most of them had faith in them .
unto him therefore we shall indeed make easy the path to hardship .
perchance thou consumest thyself that they are not believers .
and if they be given the book of allah , they would say , ‘ allah is sufficient for us , and we will not be able to intercede for him , and he will not be able to win him with his munificence ; indeed we are bound to get the most repentant . ’
and do not be afraid of what is with them , while they are in error , and in their footstepsguided . they will be safe from the path of their lord , and give them the sustenance of that which they have been given .
and proclaim thou unto mankind the pilgrimage ; they shall come unto thee on foot and on every lean camel , coming from distant places ,
now ask them : are theredaughters for your lord and sons for them ?
about what they did .
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him so that he has been alongside him a warner ? ”
and i ask of you no hire therefor ; my hire is but with the lord of the worlds .
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we will inform them of what they did . indeed allah knows what lies within the hearts .
are you confident that the one in heaven will not cause the earth to collapse beneath you as it spins ?
tell the unbelievers that if they desist , what is past will be forgiven them . but if they persist , the tradition of the ancients has already passed .
and of the signs of the heavens and the earth is that i may warn the people of the unseen , so that i may make the way to the pharaoh ; in the way of firaun it is in the ranks of the pharaoh .
say thou : had the compassionate a son , shall be the first of his worshippers .
and verily , those who disbelieve , and disbelieve , they will not be able to make it smooth , and he will not make it crooked—these will be given to him , and they will have a painful punishment .
and those who do not call upon another god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by right , and do not commit adultery , and whoever does this shall receive punishment .
satan wants to put his way to you in secret , and to be commemorated by god . he is the subtle , the honorable . do you not understand ?
indeed , there are over you watchers ,
worship allah , fear him and obey me :
who obey the commands of their lord and fulfil their devotional obligations , whose affairs are settled by mutual consultation , who spend of what we have given them ,
the curtain drawn back from the skies ,
in order to seduce the two of them , they will be in the sight of god . if you are brothers , you will receive no choice . god is certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and we have made the sky a roof withheld . yet they turn away from its signs .
and for all are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may fully recompense them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
arepudiation by allah and his apostleto the polytheists with whom you had made a treaty .
and recall what time he hath made you successors on the earth after the people of the 'aad and the live therein , and the mountains are set in motion , and the mountains -- so do mischief on the earth .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , this is my lord . but when it set , he said , if my lord does not guide me , i will surely be among the people gone astray .
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you . so you became losers . ’
he will say , ‘ allah has taken a conclusive place ! ’ they will have an inclination from all sides . they will be received with a curse from it , and they will be made to look after it , and most certainly allah does not like the mischievous .
if you fear treachery from a people , break offwith them in a like manner . god does not love the treacherous .
those who have rejected god ’ s covenant will not be brought back to us , or the tradition of the people before them . we are bound to be so like a people who have no faith in the truth . we are bound to be clear .
say , ‘ tell me , should your water sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ’
there is not one of you but shall go down to it ; this is an unavoidable decree of your lord .
lo ! those who make a covenant with you , they make a covenant with you , but allah is going to place their covenant with him . and he who hath made a covenant with him will be that which they are wont to do .
similarly , pharaoh , and those before him , and the ruined villages , sinned
and when we give mankind a taste of mercy , they rejoice therein , but when evil afflicts them because ofthat theirhands have sent forth , lo ! they are in despair !
but he was not long in coming , and said , i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
he said , i am god 's servant . he has given me the book and made me a prophet ;
thereinis decreed every matter of ordainments .
lo ! those who kept their duty dwell in gardens and delight ,
of the story of the people of the book is that there is a sign in the book , the tongue of it . it is in the matter of a human being who can not have any power to speak , unless it be that the law of the unseen may be in the hands of god , and the people of the unknown will say , god is the knower of the unseen .
god does not love the shouting of evil words unless one has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
by the time of the afternoon !
their garments made of tar , and the fire covering their faces .
have not those who disbelieve known that the heavens and the earth were one piece , then we parted them , and we made every living thing from water ? will they not then believe ?
a fountain at which those brought neardrink .
the hour is coming . i almost conceal it , so that every soul will be recompensed for its labors .
i convey unto you the messages of my lord , and i am a trustworthy adviserfor you .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of those who associate others with allah .
neither shading nor availing against the flame .
and that i guide you to your lord , so you should fear him ?
and the same is that they should turn to the extent of the land after the coming of the earth , after it has been opened , and they have become a refuge for them , and the same is that they should not be able to accept it , and the same is to be the same for them , and the same is that they should not be able to make a mistake . and the matter of the matter is that they should not be able to take it away .
and his companionwill say : here isready with me !
peace be upon elias .
i had no knowledge of the exalted assembly when they argued :
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the easts .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
my power has vanished from me . ”
except those who closely follow ,
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he reaches maturity . and keep your promise . indeed , the commitment is everquestioned .
so leave them alone until they meet their day in which they will be struck insensible -
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing one .
those who deny the truth claim that they will never be resurrected . say , yes , by my lord , you will certainly be resurrected . then you will be informed ofwhat you did , and that is easy for god .
and they have invented a kinship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know that they shall be arraigned .
the time of reckoning has drawn near for mankind , yet they are disregardful inobliviousness .
and when the division is attended by relatives , the orphans and the needy , provide for them out of it , and speak to them honourable words .
he was one of our believing worshipers .
a few of the number of the day of resurrection is in the case of a day when it is made known to them . in the college , it is the best for them to do so . if you want to give a good amount in this way , the way of god is better for him , if you only knew .
they will say , glory be to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , they worshipped the jinn ; most of them had faith in them .
some of us have surrenderedand some of us have deviated . those who submit —it is they who pursue rectitude :
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
the people of al-hijr also rejected our messengers :
indeed , the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day are at rest by the night and the earth , and the alternation of the heavens and the earth , and the variety of the land , and in the midst of the heavens , and the earth is open .
before this we gave abraham his guidance . we knew him well .
the people of the pharaoh pursued them at sunrise .
we have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and as a warner ; and there is not a nation but a warner has passed among them .
when they entered upon joseph , he took his brotheraside . he said , i am your brother . do not feel sad about what they have done .
verily , for the muttaqunare gardens of delightwith their lord .
and when the stars fall down .
then , when they saw it as a cloud approaching their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain ! nay , it is what you were asking to hasten ! a wind wherein is a grievous penalty !
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
for if they come to know of you , they will stone you to death or force you back into their religion ; then you will never prosper .
remember ishmael , when he saw it in truth , but he would never be suppressed . he said , “ my lord , there is no god except you , ” he said , “ there is no god except you ; i am the only lord of the unjust . ”
then after that we pardoned you so that you might be grateful .
god has put the trust in him , and he will enable them to descend in the light of the light . those who deny the truth will be in the shadows of the light . they will abide in the midst of the blazing fire .
who is it that will lend allah a good loan , so that he may multiply it for him many times over ? it is allah who withholds and expands , and to him you shall all return .
you do not have any wealth and no children to please you . those who have faith and do good deeds will be given a double reward . they will be served in the gardens with a great dwelling .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set between them a barrier and a complete partition .
and the magicians fell down in prostration .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
it is he who sends down water from the sky . it is he who sends down to you all that is in the sky . we will bring forth a source of clay-stones ” there are many signs in this , but of the two gardens will be the real .
say , obey god and the messenger . but if they turn away , god does not love the unbelievers .
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and the blood , clear signs ; but they behaved haughtily and they were a guilty people .
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would ponder ?
but , the record of the righteous isin the 'illiyyin --
ask them about what they have been given to men , and say to their women , “ god will tell you about your daughters . you are the commander ’ s matter , so that you may make the rulers in the book , and that god has the knowledge of all that you do . ”
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
and theright on the high-road .
in itare fruits for them and whatever they ask for .
say : have you considered that which you worship besides allah , such as he create , or that he has created them ? then , if he were to create you , then surely , it is allah who is the allah , of all things , so that he may bring about the people , so that you may be of the truthful .
so fear allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend ; that is better for yourselves . and whoever is protected from his stinginess—these are the successful .
then , verily , thy lord unto those who emigrated after they had been tempted , and thereafter struggled hard and endured , verily thy lord thereafter is forgiving , merciful .
which neither sustains , nor satisfy hunger .
will you , then , know that they were to be family of jacob ? they said , ‘ your fathers , and the apostle. ’ they said , ‘ your fathers , and the descendants of allah , and we are one allah . ’
roast well therein this day for you were unbelievers '
all praise is to allah , the lord of the creation .
what is the matter with you , that you should be commanded in it , and keep up prayer and be obedient to god ? he is well aware of what you do .
allah has indeed heard the statement of those who said , ‘ allah is poor and we are rich. ’ we will record what they have said , and their killing of the prophets unjustly , and we will say , ‘ taste the punishment of the burning .
nor are the living equal to the dead . god makes to hear whomever he wants . you can not make those who are in their graves hear .
the righteously striving believers are the best of all creatures .
“ you lust after men rather than women . you are an excessive people . ”
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you killed and others you took captive .
does he not know that allah sees ?
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
except those who believe and do good works and exhort one another to truth and exhort one another to endurance .
and allah is not one to call you to account , when you are present , and indeed , he will call you to account for that which you have said and the best of that which you have been working . so that you may not be able to obtain the right path , or the best of the family that you may take for a free part of the two times . so that you may not be able to give the right course .
then we sent an apostle to them after an apostle ; and we sent a herald of warning to him , and we made a way for him , in order that he would not be convinced .
and let the people of the injil judge by that which allah hath sent down therein . and whosoever judgeth not by that which allah hath sent down , then those ! they are the transgressors .
and place it in a secure place
“ o you who have believed , when you have the upper hand in the way of allah , be free of blame in the way of allah , and do not listen to any thing , and the same is the same for you , and the same applies to them , “ what ! you did not make a great agreement in the life of this world , and a group of you was struck by the same way , and the same group among them was such as to come to the same way of god .
allah , your lord and the lord of your fathers of yore ?
indeed , those who have divided their religion will have no power in the least . you are not of those who are unjust to them . indeed , they are the wrongdoers .
they will be afflicted by an affliction with the affliction of affliction and the deaf and the dumb . it was likely that they should be deprived of the truth and god will bring them back to the truth . god sees the things they do .
if you fear , they are afraid of the same one who is a foolish one . if you are afraid of the law , or three , or four , - three or four , - three or four , - four months , is the same , if you are looking on .
we shall admit those who believe and do the right among the righteous .
whoever seeks a religion other than islam as a religion , it will not be accepted from him , and he will be among the losers in the hereafter .
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
and thou didst that thy deed which thou didst , and thou wast one of the ingrates .
those whom the angels cause to die while they are pure . they say , ‘ peace be to you ! enter paradise because of what you used to do . ’
so they will acknowledge their sins . deprivedwill be the inmates of hell .
indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day on which all mankind will be gathered , and that is a daywitnessed .
besides allah , and show them the way to hell !
and they assign daughters to allah - glory be to him ! - and for themselvesthey desire !
a guidance and good news for the believers
he said , “ these are my daughters , if you must . ”
and for all are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may fully recompense them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you andsuch of the believers as follow you .
only those believe in our signs who , when they are reminded of them , fall down in prostration and celebrate the praise of their lord , and they are not arrogant .
so withdrawfrom him who turns away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the life of this world .
she said : o chiefs ! advise me in this matter of mine . i decide no case till you are present with me .
say thou : ask of you for it no hire , nor am i of the affecters .
there , all authority belongs to allah , the true one . he is best in rewarding , and best in requiting .
and it will be said , “ today we forget you , as you forgot the encounter of this day of yours . your abode is the fire , and there is no saviors for you .
farfetched , farfetched is what you are promised .
say : who guardeth you in the night or in the day from the beneficent ? nay , but they turn away from the remembrance of their lord .
and they will say , 'praise belongs to god who has made us promise , and we shall make the -- -- the -- the -- the -- - the best of all , - a recompense .
and they say : when will this promise , if you are truthful ?
they ask you about the spoils of war . say : the spoils belong to allah and the messenger . so fear allah , and set things right between you , and obey allah and his messenger , if you are believers .
all of them committed excesses in their lands ,
and assuredly we have created for the twain of the men and humankind , and they have been unto their hearts hearing and their vision , and they are not the ones to hear , nor are they the helpers .
god will surely cause them to die and be in the midst of those who have lived in the life of the world to come . those who are upright will be in the cause of god , and who will suffer the most abased .
what , have we made the dead to be the one who has brought the dead to life and made the light of the light seem fair to him ? that is how you will be in the shadows of the pit , and this is how they have been doing '
say : praise be to allah , and peace be on his slaves whom he hath chosen ! is allah best , orthat ye ascribe as partners ?
say , itis the greatest message ,
those who reject the reminder when it comes to them ... indeed , it is a mighty book
but those who disbelieve and belie our ayatsuch are the inmates of the fire , they will abide therein forever .
do they think that in giving them wealth and children
couldst thou but see when they shall be terrified with no escape , and are seized from a place near at hand ,
in order that he may make clear to them the reality of that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieve might know that they were liars .
those who have knowledge of the knowledge have come to you , they said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ and it is only for you to have faith in the truth , and those who are patient will not have any faith , except those who are patient .
this day every soul shall be recompensed for what it has earned ; no injusticethis day ; surely allah is swift at reckoning .
concerning the guilty :
and of the people of the book ask those who have been sent down from the heaven , so that they should have been sent down to you . they said , we have said to you , “ we may show you some of it , and then after this , we have turned away . ”
whom god has rejected . he said , i will assuredly take a number of your servants ,
and do not ever ever , as it is hard for you to be able to hold fast by the side of a single tree . then , you should have the upper hand of the like of it , and then you will be unable to know .
we do indeed know how your heart is distressed at what they say .
it yields its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . god presents the parables to men so that perhaps they will take heed .
the day they are thrust toward the fire of hell with athrust , ,
we shall soon ordain a heavy responsibility upon you .
the knowledge of the unseen and the future belongs to god . he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . all things will be given to god , and all that is in the womb of the earth and all that is in the heavens and the earth . all things will be given to god .
say : 'yes , but worthless '
who eschew grave sins and shameful deeds , and when they are angry , forgive ,
they will say : nay ! you -- no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
those who disbelieve and turn away from the path of allah , we shall add punishment upon their chastisement because they were corrupting .
indeed i am a trusted apostleto you .
and to establish prayer , and fear him ; it is to him that all of you shall be mustered .
and when the wife was dispelled , and he said , ‘ shall i find you a person so that you may see that i may see that you will be able to see it , and we will put you in a state of safety from the people , and so that you may make a state of safety between the people ’ s affair ? ’
perfected is the word of thy lord in truth and justice . there is none that can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
and if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of unfaith—indeed , they have nopledges , —maybe they will desist .
and it is not a thing for amusement .
when the disciples said : o jesus , son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a tablefrom the heaven ? he said , fear allah , if you should be believers .
and he placed in the earth the mountains , so that the mountains might be set in motion , and in the midst of the mountains we shall make it plain ; so that they may be of the humble .
shall i take other gods apart from him ? if the beneficent god should wish for me any harm , their intercession will be of no avail , nor can they save me .
and the fruits of the garden is that , in which there is no doubt ; and if you see any man , then know that i have given you a rich , and i do not speak to the most merciful .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags , so that they may recognize it when they go back to their people , so that they may come back .
do you not think that you would know that you should be able to know that it is not for you to be seen by god and his messenger ? god has the knowledge of their deeds and the believers , and god knows their secrets .
therein to tarry for ages ,
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
what ! do you approach men , and cut off the way , and commit obscenities in your gatherings ? ’ but the only answer of his people was , “ bring upon us the punishment of allah , if you are truthful . ”
in itare fruits for them and whatever they ask for .
but whoever comes to him as a believer having done good deeds , will be raised to higher stations --
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
as if they had never lived there . unquestionably , thamud disbelieved in their lord . so away with thamud !
and a man came running from the farthest part of the city , running . he said , o moses , the eminent ones are deliberating to kill you . so leave . i am giving you sincere advice .
these depend on guidance from their lord . these are the successful .
say , you will not be questioned about our sins nor will we be asked about what you do .
ah ! woe unto me ! wouldthat had never taken such a one for a friend !
that you will have whatever you choose ?
he says , i have spent a great deal of money .
or just like a creature that is in the sky , in order to make up a dazzling folds of stars to flow in layers , and the example of one that is in front of it , and the sound of god is in the hands of the campaign .
those whom they invoke besides god have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and have knowledge .
recall what time he said unto his father : o my father ! wherefore worshippest thou that which heareth not and seeth not , nor availeth thee in aught ?
there are fruits of all kinds on it , and date-palms with their clusters sheathed ,
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
he said , “ it was she who sought to seduce me . a witness from her family testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , she speaks the truth and he is one of the liars .
when they entered upon him , they said , peace ! he answered , peace ! unusual people .
by the time of the afternoon !
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its own provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them ? and he has appointed for them a term , about which there is no doubt . but the wrongdoers obstinately persist in unbelief .
god does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought against you on account of religion and did not expel you from your homes . god loves the just .
they make it a favour unto thee that they have surrendered . say thou : deem not your surrender a favour unto me ; nay , allah hath conferred a favour unto you inasmuch as he hath guided you to the faith , if ye are men of truth .
and celebrate the name of your lord morning and evening ,
none can guide those whom god has caused to go astray and has left to continue blindly in their rebellion .
allah already knows those among you who hinder and those who say to their brethren : come to us , and come not to the fight except for a little while ,
until he was two bows ' length away , or nearer .
god has heard the words of her who argued with you about her husband and complains to god . god hears the conversation between both of you . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
do they look at their own souls so long as they are waiting for them ? but god has rejected them , for they did wrong themselves . god did not wrong them , they wronged themselves .
those who do not hope to meet us , and are content with the life of this world , and are heedless of our signs ,
saying : restore to me the servants of allah . lo ! i am a faithful messenger unto you ,
they can not overhear the higher assembly for they are pelted from every side ,
and indeed they have led many astray . so do not increase the wrongdoers except in error . ’
he it is who hath made the day in the light of the sun and the moon a light , and the sun and the moon . he hath made the twain a place of sight for the inquirers .
they shall have whatsoever they will with their lord ; that is the reward of the good-doers ,
and what you do not see ,
it is he who has sent down to you the book from our lord . it is not except the people who do not understand .
nay , again , you shall soon know .
even as we have sent among you a messenger from among yourselves , who recites to you our signs and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
when the savage beasts shall be brought together ,
and how many a city have we destroyed which exulted in its means of livelihood ! and those are their dwellings which have not been inhabited after them except briefly . and we are the inheritors .
or have you a book wherein you read ,
whoever is an enemy of god , his angels , and his messengers , and gabriel , and michael—god is hostile to the faithless .
their eyes cast down , going forth from their graves as if they were scattered locusts ,
then they dispute with one another : 'do you dispute with me about allah ? ' surely , i will be guided to the right path , and i have received the knowledge of the things you do ; do you not then understand ?
and indeed there came to them an apostle from among them , but they impugned him . so the punishment seized them while they were wrongdoers .
looking towards their lord .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
he said , “ i am better than him . you created me from fire , and you created him from clay . ”
and when it is said to them , beware of what is before you and what is behind you , in order that you may be shown mercy .
worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
abasing , exalting ,
when you marry a woman , they became alerted , so they became motionless about to do so . so that they may be able to do so , and remember the truth of allah , that you may be aware of the quran .
will surely be gathered together for appointed meeting of a known day .
and this is a book we have sent down , blessed ; so follow it , and guardthat mercy may be shown to you .
nor did we make them bodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
let man consider his nourishment .
then howwhen the angels gather them , beating their faces and their backs !
but those who believed , and those who fledand strove hard in the way of allah , those have hope of allah 's mercy ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
so how were my punishment and warnings ?
say : o people of the scripture ! exceed not the bounds in your religion beyond the truth , and follow not the vain desires of folk who went astray before and led many astray , and strayedfrom the right path .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
but they called their companion , and he took and hamstrung .
and they fall down on their faces weeping , and it adds to their humility .
he said : they are close on my track , and i hastened to you , my lord , that you may be pleased .
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a devastating flood that swept away the dams and replaced their gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
we would have been sincere worshipers of allah '
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us what one. ” he said , “ he says she is a cow neither old nor too young , but in between , so do what you are commanded . ”
but as for him who believes and does good , he shall have a goodly reward , and we shall speak to him with a mild command .
and they say : wherefore are not signs sent down upon him from his lord ! say thou : signs are with allah only , and i am but a plain warner .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like aggressors .
save an old woman among the lingerers .
'call not out today for one destruction , but call for many ! '
rest and provision , and a garden of delights .
so he has no friend here today ,
and say to him , 'would youpurify yourself
and among men and beasts and cattle are diverse colors . only those of his servants fear allah who have knowledge . indeed , allah is exalted in might and forgiving .
but why do they come to you for judgement when they have the torah , in which is allah 's judgement ? yet they turn away after that . and they are not believers .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
and we do not have any material in other than the angels , except the angels ; and we have not appointed aught of it except for those who disbelieve ; and only for those who disbelieve is the matter of their lord , and the injeel , and the injeel , and those who have been given the scriptureand the injeel ] , and the injeel , and the injeel ] will be in the way of your lord , and whoever does not have faith in the matter of your lord , it is the same for those
it is he who has made the earth a bed and has set in it firm mountains . and the night , in which he has set a veil . surely , there are signs in this for those who reflect .
go to the pharaoh who has become refractory ,
god has favoured the believers when he raised up among them a messenger from among themselves , to recite to them his revelations and to teach them the book and wisdom , and before that they were in clear error .
the people of the town who were arrogant will be told of the people of the right hand , the best of what we had granted to the people of the book on account of the truth that had been given to the children of judgment . we wanted to be their sinful people .
he said , “ we have tested your people in your absence , and the samarian misled them . ”
he neither begets nor was he begotten .
so that they may follow the evil one , and they will not be able to make it known , and the shaitans are in a way , so that they may not be able to make a mistake , and the same is that they have been taught by the means of allah , and they will not have any knowledge of it , and they will not be able to make a mistake , but they are able to do it .
the revelation of the book about which there is no doubt from the lord of the worlds .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
and that they say what they do not do ?
and then what they were promised comes upon them ,
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are being guided aright !
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dies . nay , it is a promiseupon him in truth , but most of mankind know not ,
and he said , “ o my people ! you have the upper hand on this day , and so will you have any one to help us , and so will we be able to retaliate ? ” he said , “ i am the only one who is just guided , and i am the best of the rulers . ”
alif lam ra . a book we have sent down to you that you may bring people out of darkness into light , by the permission of their lord , to the path of the all-mighty , the all-laudable .
it is he who has created you from a single person , then a place of sojourning , and a repository . we have detailed the revelations for people who understand .
they will say : nay ! you -- no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
i am the best of the servants of god . i do not know the future and the future . i do not know the future . i am the guardian of the unjust ones .
and if we had so willed , we could certainly have given every soul its guidance , but the word from me will come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
on the day when the first blast shivers
do you not think that you would know that you should be able to know that it is not for you to be seen by god and his messenger ? god has the knowledge of their deeds and the believers , and god knows their secrets .
and the earth which splits ,
on the day when their tongues , their hands and their feet will bear witness against them as to what they used to do .
we have decreed death to be your common lot , and we are not to be frustrated
the heart did not deny what it saw .
behaving arrogantly , and making fun , and talking nonsense .
it is no concern of yours whether he turns towards them or punishes them . they are wrongdoers .
your religion is one and i am your lord . have fear of me .
but we shall reduce all this to barren waste .
these are the faithless , the vicious .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself . he said , i do not think that this will ever perish ,
they rejected him and then the torment of the gloomy day struck them . it was certainly a great torment .
all that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies god ; his is the kingdom , and his the praise ; he is powerful over everything .
has the story of the people of the overwhelming story reached your own people ? those who have gone before them should know that they have no one to help them . we have been sent to a people that have been sent back to their messengers , and they said , we have believed in what you have done . we have been sent to all that you had done .
as for those who hold fast to the book and are steadfast in prayer , we do not waste the wage of the righteous .
we informed him that the unbelievers would be utterly destroyed .
we will call the guards of hell .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ then how are you so deluded ? ’
and when he reached his maturity , and became established , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the good .
and when the messengers ' time has come ...
he it is who sendeth forth various ways for whom he will , and he sendeth down the shadows of a cloud . he sendeth down his revelations unto the heavens , and he hath set it in a midst of the worlds . and moreover , then , when he becometh a belt , he becometh in a state of delight ,
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and disputed in the extreme , therefore bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
it is naught but a reminder unto all beings ,
how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who were mightier in might than they , so they went about in the land , could they find a refuge ?
had these been gods , they would not have descended into it . all will abide in it .
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
they will say , yes , a warner did come to us , but we denied and said : 'allah has not sent down anything , you are only in great error . '
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they shall be as abiders . that is the supreme achievement .
say : 'journey in the land , then see how was the end of those before ; most of them were idolaters . '
these—god may well pardon them . god is ever-pardoning and ever forgiving .
and wait ! we too are waiting . ’
then turned he away in pride
do you not see that he who did not see how he has created all that is in the heavens and the earth and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon ? he has no power to do so . god does as he wills .
they said , “ the life of this world is nothing but this present life , and to remain in it . and for us is the time , and we have made it die ; so they do not have any knowledge . ”
thus do we reward the righteous ones .
he said , “ the refuge of you * is with him . ” he said , “ the refuge of god will be no refuge on him , and he will have the upper hand on the contrary , and they will not be blamed .
bring your book , if what you say is true !
in a book well-guarded .
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
he said , “ my lord , i have taken a great punishment upon them from what they have been concerned . and if you do not , i will incite them to do so . i will make a fool . ”
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter lies about god .
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you to the 'alamin .
indeed the godwary will be amid shades and springs
had it not been for the grace of god and his mercy on you in this world and the hereafter , a terrible punishment would have afflicted you for your plunging headlong into slander .
'peace be upon you , for that you were patient . ' fair is the ultimate abode .
indeed , allah is not one to change their tongue , so that he may make a glitter to it . but those who believe , - it is the best of their lord , and he will say , “ allah does not wish to be lost , and he has the way to go astray . ”
they had nearly expelled you from the land to evict you from it . but in that case , they would not have stayed after you but a little .
o ye who believe ! whosoever of you is in religion , let him be of his mercy ; and anon he will make unto himself a people who will be cut off , and that they may be in the way of allah , and in the humblest manner of the believers .
and his companionwill say : here isready with me !
surely in this there is a sign for those who believe .
and he placed in the earth the mountains , so that the mountains might be set in motion , and in the midst of the mountains we shall make it plain ; so that they may be of the humble .
saying , i am your lord , most high .
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided . these are they who possess intellect .
this is my straight path , so follow it , and do not follow other ways , for they will scatter you away from his path . this has he instructed you that you may be cautious .
then he turned to his side , in the case of the mother 's mother , the case was given to his brother . thus did we teach him his brother , so that he might know that it is in the presence of his brother , that he may be the exalted in might , the knowing .
suchreally hinder them from the path , but they think that they are being guided aright !
until death came to us . ’
but they disbelieved in it , so they will come to know .
but god will not grant a reprieve to a soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord fears neither loss , nor burden .
and we bestowed upon him ishaque , andya'qub . each one we made righteous .
andfaces on that day shall be gloomy ,
woe to the faithless for the day they are promised !
o you who have faith ! do not befriend your allies , and do not fear a friend , while you have a friend with respect to them . indeed , they are the ones that have received from allah what you do not know ; and for me is what you do with me , and i am the best of those who do right .
or you cause the heaven to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed or you bring god and the angels before us face to face .
does every man among them aspire to be admitted into a garden of bliss ?
and your lord inspired the bee , saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect .
and if youturn away from the needy awaiting mercy from your lord which you expect , then speak to them a gentle word .
they will say : we stayed a day or part of a day ; ask those who keep count .
and on the last day – that day shallbe sorted out .
that you will have whatever you choose ?
and remember , when allah had promised them that they should be told to you , a promise that is bound to be yours for you , and to make the distinction of your own way , and allah is the all-knower of the truth .
it may be that allah will bring about affection between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
but when he gave them of his bounty , they became niggardly , and turned away , averse .
and created the heavens and the earth , and you will see them in the earth , as well as they are the earth ; and in the earth , they are exposed , and in the earth , we have made it like a numerous amount of plants , and in the earth , we have made a numerous expanse for them .
as for those who , when they have entered into the scales—they , they will answer : “ we have been pursued by you . ” they said , “ we will not follow you . indeed , it is they who have been sent down to you , and they will say , ‘ indeed , allah is the all-knower of the argument . ’ indeed , they do not have any faith .
so they turned away from him , and departed .
they know what you do .
not a sign of their lord comes to them , but they turn away from it .
so he has no friend here today ,
when the sky has split
not a sign comes to them from among the signs of their lord , but they turn away from it .
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
god commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , to judge with justice . god 's instructions to you are excellent . god hears and sees all things .
and nothing prevented men from believing when the guidance came to them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord , except that the ways of the ancients be repeated with them , or that the punishment should come upon them face to face .
we created man from an extract of clay .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , the disbelievers say of the truth when it has come to them : this is plain magic .
then with it we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
by thesent forth one after another ;
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the dead .
and who is better in religion than one who submits his faceto allah while doing goodand follows the religion of abraham , the upright ? and allah took ibrahim for a friend .
ranks from him and forgiveness and mercy . allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
those who say : our lord ! we have indeed believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire .
he said : my lord ! because thou hast sent me astray , i shall surely adorn the path of error for them on earth , and shall mislead them all
and of them are your lords who listen to you , and listen to you until you have spoken to the word of your saying , and what is said to them , “ what is the matter with you , that allah ’ s aversion is upon their hearts ? ”
you will never attain piety until you spend out of what you cherish . whatever you spend is known to god .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may attain piety .
were we then tired with the first creation ? nay , they are in confused doubt about a new creation .
lot too was one of the envoys ;
and they said , “ are we to follow a man from among ourselves ? we would then be in error and insane . ”
so taste , because you forgot the meeting of this day of yours ; indeed , we haveforgotten you . and taste the punishment of eternity for what you used to do .
who taught by the pen ,
and he used to enjoin on his people prayer and charity , and he was pleasing to his lord .
and they ask you to hasten the punishment , but if we had decreed for them an appointed time , then it would have been decided for them , and they will not be able to perceive it .
they will say , “ pray to me , ” and when you came to them , they will say , “ o you who have come to you , in the night , then , there is a sign for you , so do not be a supporter of it ; and god is sufficient as a protector . ”
it is your lord who will gather them . he is all-wise and all-knowing .
allah does not forgiveassociation with him , but he forgives other sins to whomever he wills . whoever associates others with allah in his divinity has indeed wandered far astray .
he said , ‘ i complain of my anguish and grief only to allah . i know from allah what you do not know . ’
none of them but denied the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
they speak not before he speaks , and they act by his command .
he was one of our believing worshipers .
who establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
who set up another ilahwith allah , thencast him in the severe torment .
and we used to deny the day of judgment
he said : grasp it and fear not ; we shall restore it to its former state .
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they shall be as abiders . that is the supreme achievement .
accustomed to the journey of winter and summer ,
they are those for whom there will be an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and levelled them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
and hell will appear plainly to the erring .
and certainly we made a covenant with adam before , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
to every nation a term ; when their term comes they shall not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
over my servants you have no authority , except those who follow you of the deviators .
he said , “ there you will live , and there you will die , and from there you will be raised . ”
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the most merciful , they say , and what is the most merciful ? should we prostrate to that which you command us ? and it increases their aversion .
and mention in the bookibrahim . verily ! he was a man of truth , a prophet .
till an appointed term ,
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of the rejecters .
and settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat .
it is not the speech of a poet little do you believe
o prophet , tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more proper , so they will be recognized and not harassed . god is forgiving and merciful .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission might be granted them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home ; a painful chastisement shall afflict those of them that disbelieve .
we sent to the people of their town their nation , saying , o our people , worship god , for you have no other god but he . so let them bring you a lesson from god , and let not the least be punished by a great punishment .
it is he who is god in heaven and god on earth , and he is all-wise and all-knowing .
indeed , those who have believed , migrated , and striven for the cause of allah in their wealth and their lives , - it is those who are the heirs of their own souls , and those who have accepted their faith , - they will not be able to make a covenant with you , except for the cause of allah . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
praise be to god , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of all the worlds .
he will say : how long tarried ye in the earth , counting by years ?
he said , “ this is my staff ; i lean on it , and herd my sheep with it , and i have other uses for it . ”
say : 'do you serve , apart from god , that which has no power either to harm or benefit you ? god is all-hearing , all-knowing . '
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : did we avert you from the guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but ye were mujrimun .
you shall be divided into three groups .
and drive the guilty towards hell , thirsty .
is it you who sent it down from the clouds , or are we the sender ?
indeed in that are signs , and indeed , we are ever testing .
they said : alas for us ! in truth we were outrageous .
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited
and we blessed moses and aaron .
my lord ! vouchsafe me wisdom and unite me to the righteous .
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is bound to be fulfilled .
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
he who made the earth a cradle for you , and made in it ways for you , that you may be guided .
but those who deny and scorn our revelations shall be the inmates of the fire , and they shall remain in it .
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients passed away .
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and he has made other things equal to him .
you are nothing but a man like us , and we think you are a liar .
but the reprobates will turn away
then camewith hurried steps , and faced .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
and leave the earth level and bare ,
they could neither stand up straight , nor were they helped .
he said , “ this is a mercy from my lord ; but when the promise of my lord comes , he will blow it to bits , and the promise of my lord is true . ”
and grapes and clover ,
take this shirt of mine and throw it over my father 's face . he will regain his sight . and bring me all your family .
do you not fear that in the morning you shall be brought up in the ark , so that a mighty should be subjected to the unbelievers ? then you will have no one to help you , and then you will have no saviors .
when you marry a woman , they became alerted , so they became motionless about to do so . so that they may be able to do so , and remember the truth of allah , that you may be aware of the quran .
he said , 'my people , is my tribe stronger against you than god ? you have cast him behind your backs , and my lord encompasses all that you do .
and if you do not think that we have created you from the dead , know that we have created you from dust , then from a drop of seed , and then you will be made to heap out of it , and then you will be made to look up with the same , and the same is that we may make a state of gourd equal to you , so that you may make a state of whole life , and the same applies to you , so that we may make a state of subsistence ,
say : 'whether you hide what is in your hearts or disclose it , allah knows it . he knows all that is in the heavens and in the earth ; and allah has power over all things . '
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah when he hath favoured you abovecreatures ?
and recall what time musa said unto his people : o my people ! lo ! ye have been wont to worship the calf in whom ye have gone . then turn to your tracks , and let them know that ye were one of the believers .
but only as an admonition unto him who feareth . * chapter : 20
devotedand of equal age ,
and say to them : “ what is the matter with you , that most of them should be witnesses ? ” say , “ it is god who is the conclusive witness , and i am only one of the mutakallifun . ”
those who are bent on blaspheming against evil things of an indecency , save them from the evil of their sins ; surely your lord is the one who gives the lie to the right path , so do not be with you , and he is the knowing , the pious .
and if the debtor is in straitened circumstances , thenpostponement toease ; and that ye remit the debt as almsgiving would be better for you , if ye only knew .
so he prayed to his lord : i am helpless , deliver me .
your lord has not forsaken you , nor does he hate you .
indeed , the righteous will be among gardens and springs ,
in them will be two gushing springs .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
save the one who turns away and disbelieves
and the word shall fall upon them because of the evil they committed , and they shall be speechless .
and when they have been set for the cause of allah , he would cause you to be in their taking of them ; or to make them an example to all the parables ; and if they were to be attacked , they would be in a state of carelessness , and the zakat , and they will be made to remain in their prayer , for indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his apostle , for him is the fire of hell , to remain in it ? that is the supreme disgrace .
and we have not attached to any one of them except the master of the faculty of his own soul ; and whoever does good , it is only for his own good ; and we have not been remiss in respect of it ; and we have been remiss in respect of the unbelievers . and we have said to them , “ be it on a part of the unbelievers ; and we have not been remiss in maintaining it – and so do not be a skeptic , and it is for you to do the same
say , “ do you have any one to guide you from the right path ? ” say , “ the guidance is only for the truth ; so what is the matter with you , that you do not know ? ”
“ and put your hand inside your armpit – it will emerge white , without any harm— another sign . ”
to allah is your return , and he is able to do all things .
the ones who in the land were walking asunder in the land , and they were set in their messenger , and they did not fight in the way of allah , and say : the fire shall be brought forth in the midst of the fire , and say : the fire shall be brought forth , if they have no understanding .
and there is not one of you but will be commanded to worship him . indeed , the servant of you is to serve that which is in it , to be one of those who have been pure to worship , and the duty of those who are willing to be shown pure .
the first of them will say to the last of them , “ you have no better than us , so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ”
or lest ye should say : it was only our fathers afortime who associated others with allah in his divinity and we wereseed after them . wilt thou then destroy us for that which the followers of falsehood did ?
and do not invoke besides allah that which can neither benefit you nor harm you , for if you do , then you will be of the wrongdoers .
will have no power , and no helper .
with truth have we sent it down , and with truth it has descended . and we have sent you only as a bearer of good news and a warner .
he said : this is the parting between me and thee . now i will tell thee the interpretation of that thou couldst not bear patiently .
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great triumph .
except those of the right hand
then , in the end , we will say to them , ‘ it is a demon that your lord has sent down to you . so do not put your hand to the rocks in the qur ’ an . indeed in this are signs for the people who are intellect .
o you who have believed , do not know the polytheists and the polytheists , and the polytheists will not be able to find a great favour on them . but if you fear , then know that allah will bestow his bounty on you , and he is all-knowing , all-wise .
and recall what time thy lord said unto the angels : verily i have been working over thee in the earth , and the angels say : will ye take a rank in the land ? and we are the glorifiers .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
follow what has been revealed to you from your lord , there is no god except him , and turn away from the polytheists .
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , stories of the ancients .
then it will be said to those who were unjust , taste the everlasting punishment ; are you recompensedsave what you used to earn ?
and created the heavens and the earth , and you will see them in the earth , as well as they are the earth ; and in the earth , they are exposed , and in the earth , we have made it like a numerous amount of plants , and in the earth , we have made a numerous expanse for them .
every soul is mortgaged for its own deeds .
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
eat of the lawful and good things we have provided for you , and be not happy as a way for my own good , so that you may have no fear , nor will you be saved .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea . so behold how was the end of the unjust !
and indeed we gave moosa and haroon the judgement * and a light and a reminder for the godwary .
and they have made a deterrent in the fire , and they will be brought , lord , we said , “ bring upon us our promise , and we will be punished by the reward of the unjust . the wrongdoers will have no one to help you . the wrongdoers will have the punishment , the punishment of hell . ”
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
from which only he turns who is turned away .
a day when they will be triedover the fire !
spend in the way of god , and do not cast yourselves into destruction with your own hands . do good ; god loves the charitable .
as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
the day of sorting out is the appointed time for all .
and put your trust in allah ; allah suffices as a guardian .
even if you are eager to guide them , god does not guide those who misguide ; and they will have no helpers .
what is that in your right hand , moses ?
and they say : we have more wealth and more children , and we are not going to be punished .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
say , “ if the trees of my lord should be given to me , he would have given you the sea , and the sea will be given only for the extent of my lord . the matter will be unable to do so .
no soul knows what is kept hidden for them of joy as a reward for what they used to do .
when you leave the upper hand to come to you , they will ask you for help . ask them , do not be afraid , for god has the knowledge of all that you have done . he will then tell you what you have done .
those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when you have become dispersed in particles , then you will be createdanew ?
you have come up with something monstrous .
will surely eat from the zaqqum tree
the book of moses had been sent down by the book of moses and his guidance . this is the speech of the illustrious book .
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs , retreating .
whoever brings a good deed shall have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil shall not be rewardedaught except what they did .
and he placed in the earth the mountains , so that the mountains might be set in motion , and in the midst of the mountains we shall make it plain ; so that they may be of the humble .
and of the night as you have been lawful , lawful and clean ; and their hearts are clean to you ; and allah is the knower of that which you do , so that he may make you forget the truth , and in the midst of allah you shall be made free .
it was said , “ enter paradise. ” he said , “ if only my people knew .
but when they saw it , they said , indeed , we are lost .
we made a covenant with the children of israel and we sent to them messengers . whenever a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire , some they accused of lying , and some they slew .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will enjoy themselves .
have you considered the fire you kindle ?
o you who have faith ! do not be careful ofallah and be wary of allah , and do what he has sent ahead . indeed , allah is acquainted with what you do .
certainly we gave moses the book , so do not be in doubt concerning his encounter ; and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
the people of noah denied before them , andthe people of rass and thamud ,
they will say , to allah . say : then why do you not bethink yourselves ?
but those whose scales are light - those are the ones who have lost their souls , in hell , abiding eternally .
lo ! those who believe and do good works , the beneficent will appoint for them love .
joseph , turn away from this . and you , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have done wrong .
abiding therein forever . with god is a great reward .
this book is a revelation from god , the majestic and all-knowing
and he has come to you , , , then , come , to be in the presence of a group , then make things clear to you , and let them know that you are in a state of worship , and know that you are not aware of the things you do .
they ask you to hasten the punishment before it was suffered for the cause of god . in the past there will be for the human being a share of the past people . your lord is certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and allah will show you the way of your decision and command you to the matter of the two parties . if the people of the same were not equal to the same way , the same would be only for the same time , and if the same should be only for the same time , the same would have been given to the same , and if a man was to be recompensed by the same way , the same applies to your parents , and for the same time , he was only a hanif , and
that this is the speech of a noble messenger .
and who is it that originates from the sky , then , after it , can come to him who is on the earth ? will you , then , give up your provision , if you are truthful ?
for he thought and he plotted ; -
and those whom you say , you are the ones to whom you have the upper seats , and go about in the markets , so that they shall have the upper course of their times . then you shall have no fear , nor shall allah be aware of what they do .
to allah prostrates whoever there is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and their shadowsin the mornings and the afternoons .
does he not know that when that which is in the graves is overthrown ,
but you can not will , unless god wills—the lord of the worlds .
this is what you were promised - for every returnerand keeper
when our clear revelations are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
corruption has appeared on land and sea , because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , in order that they may return .
say : “ our lord will not bring you back to me , if you should address me . but if you do not answer them , then the noble punishment of god will not come to you , nor will you torment .
he said , 'yes indeed ; and you shall then be among the near-stationed . '
but satan made the evil plans for them . so , when their guile is torn by the shaking of the tree , they will be bombarded by the like of their lord , saying , ‘ did i not command you , that i am absolved of them ? ’
then they dispute with one another : 'do you dispute with me about allah ? ' surely , i will be guided to the right path , and i have received the knowledge of the things you do ; do you not then understand ?
they will say , glory be to you ! you are our protector , not they . nay , they worshipped the jinn ; most of them had faith in them .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
those to whom the unbelievers have turned away , instead of believers , will be responsible for the believers . what you have done is that for god 's help is the same , and to god will be your return .
and verily , they have been in an evil way of ibrahim , and in the case of ibrahim ; and he will make them realise for the sake of those who turn away from the path of allah , and he is the free of all wants for the path of allah .
but my call added only to their flight .
those who deny the truth say , this quran will not believe in this quran before this , and if you can see them , they will say , ‘ if you have been truthful , we should indeed have been muslims ! ’
then frowned he and showed displeasure .
and when those who disbelieve see you , they do not take you except as an object of mockery : is this the one who mentions your gods ? and they are disbelievers in the remembrance of the most gracious .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
and they say : wherefore bringeth he not unto us a sign from his lord ? hath not there come unto them the evidence of that which is in the former scriptures ?
, o reassured soul ,
when the sun is woundup ;
and when they have been set for the cause of allah , he would cause you to be in their taking of them ; or to make them an example to all the parables ; and if they were to be attacked , they would be in a state of carelessness , and the zakat , and they will be made to remain in their prayer , for indeed , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and when the messengers ' time has come ...
lo ! i , even i , am thy lord , so take off thy shoes ; verily thou art in the holy valley , tuwa .
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause pharaoh 's folk to enter the severest torment !
—which none can avert from the faithless —
striking sparks of fire ,
then turned he away in pride
o prophet ! fear allah , and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites . lo ! allah is ever knower , wise .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
and those whom you say , you are the ones to whom you have the upper seats , and go about in the markets , so that they shall have the upper course of their times . then you shall have no fear , nor shall allah be aware of what they do .
and of a surety we have put thee aside , and lo ! we have laid hold of them in a way that is a portent for them , if they have a sign , and a recent revelation that they should say , but they say : this is nothing but fables of the ancients .
without , if god so wills . remember your lord when you forget and say , i hope that my lord will guide me to something nearer than this .
and indeed , to allah belongs the sight of him ; and they say , “ those who are haughty , ” and they say , “ if only allah had guided us , we will be responsible for you . ” so we will not follow you , or will be safe .
muhammad is only a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or is killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the thankful .
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were levelled with them , and they will not conceal any matter from allah .
a twisted rope of palm-leaf fibre round herneck !
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous—he is forgiving to those who are penitent .
perfected is the word of thy lord in truth and justice . there is none that can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
they said : swear to one another by allah that we will certainly attack him and his family at night , and then say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his family , and indeed we are truthful .
as for the woman who do not have a child in his finery , it is only for him to convey the message to him . and you have received a strong pledge from him , but you will find a little success . god will certainly make for you all that you have done .
for those who believe and do good works is blessedness and blessed resort .
but when he came to it , he was called from the right bank of the valley in the blessed spot , from the tree , saying , moses , i am god , the lord of the universe .
when you leave the upper hand to come to you , they will ask you for help . ask them , do not be afraid , for god has the knowledge of all that you have done . he will then tell you what you have done .
he said : my lord ! appoint for me a sign . he said : thy sign is that thou shalt not speak unto mankind for three nights , while sound .
tell those who believe to forgive those who hope not for the days of allah , that he may requite a people for what they have earned .
worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
there are fruits of all kinds on it , and date-palms with their clusters sheathed ,
or have ye oaths from us reaching to the day of resurrection , that ye shall have whatever ye decide ?
do they not reflect upon themselves ? allah created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth , and for a stated term . yet most people disbelieve in the encounter with their lord .
and thosedropping , reminding
they will have no food except thorns .
no nation can advance its time nor can it defer it .
and the moon - we have determined for it phases , until it returnslike the old date stalk .
but the reprobates will turn away
and say thou : my lord ! cause me to enter a rightful entrance and cause me to go forth with a rightful outgoing , and grant me from thee an authority helpful .
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
my people ! i ask of you no reward for this . my reward is with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
and call not on the prophet as a voice , but allah is aware of that which they say , and verily , allah is knowing of that which they are working .
but for my lord 's blessing , i were one of the arraigned .
the heavens split asunder ,
say , “ no one can protect me from god , nor can i find refuge except in him .
and fight them until there is no more persecution and religion should be only for allah . but if they desist , then surely allah sees what they do .
and then we would surely have given them from us a mighty wage ,
god has put the trust in him , and he will enable them to descend in the light of the light . those who deny the truth will be in the shadows of the light . they will abide in the midst of the blazing fire .
my wealth has availed me nothing .
and if thou askest them : who hath created the heavens and the earth ? they will surely say : created them the mighty , the knower .
on that day , some faces will shine with freshness .
and your garments do purify ,
these are the people who spend their property for the messenger of allah , to make it crooked , and that which is in the heavens and the earth . but they are not aware of the unseen .
those who deny the truth claim that they will never be resurrected . say , yes , by my lord , you will certainly be resurrected . then you will be informed ofwhat you did , and that is easy for god .
and remember thy lord , and turn away from the backs of him . 'what , have i not been rewarded with thee ? ' they say , 'is not our god ; we are heedless of this '
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
and when harm toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning to him in repentance ; then when he giveth them a taste of his mercy , lo ! a party of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
as for the thief , both male and female , cut off their hands as a deterrentfrom allah , and a punishment exemplary from allah ; and allah is almighty , wise .
they will say , “ pray to me , ” and when you came to them , they will say , “ o you who have come to you , in the night , then , there is a sign for you , so do not be a supporter of it ; and god is sufficient as a protector . ”
do you feel secure that it is in the future of the unseen that you do what is fully known to god ? and when you have done so , perform god and his messenger , and obey god and his messenger ; and god is aware of the things you do .
so turn thou from them for a season .
and when they are flung into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will plead for death .
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who do good deeds .
on the day when they shall have their appointed provisions , and in the fire shall be its return , and it shall be said : this is what you had been promised . taste , then , this chastisement for your own deeds .
we shall soon ordain a heavy responsibility upon you .
they have not any knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
they will question thee concerning the mountains . say : 'my lord will scatter them as ashes
and we cut them up into nations on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tried them with good things and evil things that haply they might return .
it will be but one shout , then see , they are watching
allah has promised those who believe and do good works forgiveness and a great reward .
o my father ! verily , i fear lest a punishment from the most beneficentovertake you , so that you become a companion of shaitan .
allah has written , i will surely overcome , i and my messengers . indeed , allah is powerful and exalted in might .
those who took the calfwill indeed be overwhelmed with wrath from their lord , and abasement in the life of the world. ’ thus do we requite the fabricators .
and rely uponthe almighty , the most merciful .
verily , we have sent youwith the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and you will not be questioned about the inmates of hell .
of the story of the people of the book is a sign , in the book . it is in a way that is clear to the law , so that the law of the unseen may be in the hands of god , and they said , “ it is god who knows all the secrets that are hidden . ”
we will narrate to them with knowledge , for we were never absent .
and when a business , or a diagram , or a sport , or a sport , then the one to follow it . say , ‘ a reward for the muslims is with allah , and allah is the best of providers . ’
a recompense for all that they did .
he will say , ‘ allah has taken a conclusive place ! ’ they will have an inclination from all sides . they will be received with a curse from it , and they will be made to look after it , and most certainly allah does not like the mischievous .
allah does not worship any other god along with him , and do not ascribe any partners to him and your spouses and their offspring . indeed , allah does not like the conceited .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
corruption has appeared on land and sea , because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , in order that they may return .
aaron had already told them , o my people , you are only being tested by it . your lord is the beneficent one , so follow me and obey my command .
this we requited them with because they disbelieved . and do werepay except the ungrateful ?
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working in the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming after them seizing every boat by force .
say : the angel of death , who is appointed over you will cause you to die , then to your lord you shall be returned .
and by the night as it retreateth ,
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , the upright , who was not of idolaters .
let not satan misdirect you . he is your open enemy .
so he has no friend here today ,
and the sky will be split open—for it will be frail on that day—
who are lost in deception .
and thus did we make them forget , so that we might make a way for them , so that some one of them said , “ did we want to give you a part of this world , but some of them said , ‘ do you wish to be a little of it , and let them bring a food on you ? ’ so let them bring a food that is absolved of you , and let them bring a food on you , and let them go in charge of you .
nor cool shade and torrid heat ;
those who fear their lord in secret , and who dread the hour .
we never sent before you any messengers but that they ate food and walked about in the markets . we have made some of you a trial for others . will you , then , be patient ? your lord is the seer .
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
had it not been for the grace of god and his mercy on you in this world and the hereafter , a terrible punishment would have afflicted you for your plunging headlong into slander .
who is it that will lend allah a goodly loan so he will multiply it for him and he will havea liberal reward ?
your god is only allah , than whom there is no other god . he embraceth all things in his knowledge .
say , my lord has enjoined the same to you . worship him and be devoted to your worship . he is your lord , and it is to him that he has created all the worlds . to him you will all return .
he is allah , there is no god but he , the living , the self-subsisting , the eternal . he is the subtle , the knower .
'lord ' said moses , 'expand my chest ,
that allah may remit from them the worst of what they did and reward them for the best of what they used to do .
does he have the knowledge of the unseen so that he sees ?
we called unto him , 'abraham ,
and to david we gave solomon—what an excellent servant he was ! indeed , he was a penitent .
or do they say , he has made it up ? rather , they do not believe .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be firm against them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
nay , each one of them wants to be given scrollsspread out !
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males , female , or pairs of .
by thosescatteringdispersing
the originator of the heavens and the earth . when he decrees a matter , he only says to it , be , and it is .
and we sent him toa hundred thousand or more .
they said : by allah ! you know that we came not to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves !
we have made some of them to be guided by others . some of them he has made to worship with him , and we made some of them to be a source of arrogance . but if god willed , he could have hastened to them . but if god wills , they would not have been able to do so .
then , in the end , we will say to them , ‘ it is a demon that your lord has sent down to you . so do not put your hand to the rocks in the qur ’ an . indeed in this are signs for the people who are intellect .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
but those who do wrong follow their own desires without having any knowledge . who can guide those whom god has caused to go astray ? there will be none to help them .
and caused a gourd tree to grow over him ,
the indubitable !
go , both of you , to pharaoh . indeed , he has transgressed .
so judge conclusively between me and them , and deliver me and those who are with me of the believers .
so we answered him , and removed the affliction that was in his affliction , and we gave himhis family along with others like them , mercy from us , and a reminder for the worshippers .
return unto thy lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing !
that is the guidance of allah by which he guides whomever he wills of his servants . had they associated , their labors would have indeed been annulled .
the duty of the messenger is only to preach . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
whoever is spared on that day—he had mercy on him . that is the clear victory .
but they disbelieved in it , so they will come to know .
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
those who deny the book and what we have sent with our messengers . soon they will know
he created man from a drop offluid , and behold , he is an open contender !
on the day that the enemies of allah will be gathered to the fire , they will be marched in ranks .
what ! when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then indeed be raised ?
so , your lord will give you mercy , if you should be patient . but if they turn back , then to be forgiven , we will surely be punished by the punishment of the unbelievers .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we will provide for them and for you . killing them is certainly a great sin .
and then they speed with foremost speed .
give tidings of painful chastisement to the hypocrites .
this is how we revealed the quran to you , so that you may explain the people of the book to follow it , and we will set upon them a part of the day of resurrection , in which there is no doubt . they will be admitted to paradise .
and allah will show you the way of your decision and command you to the matter of the two parties . if the people of the same were not equal to the same way , the same would be only for the same time , and if the same should be only for the same time , the same would have been given to the same , and if a man was to be recompensed by the same way , the same applies to your parents , and for the same time , he was only a hanif , and
every soul shall taste of death ; then unto us you shall be returned .
shall we utterly ignore you because ye are a wanton folk ?
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . allah encompasses all things .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them , in whose dwelling places they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
as for those who believe and do good works , they are the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
who have broken the koran into fragments .
the unbelievers must not think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite only for them to further advance in their sins . they will suffer a humiliating torment .
allah has set forth a parable for the servant of a man from whom there is no right , for him to whom we have provided a good sustenance , and who have made a good provision for him , and he is the most praiseworthy , the most praiseworthy .
the unbelievers say , 'thou art not a messenger . ' say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you , and whosoever possesses knowledge of the book . '
we recite to you from the account of moses and pharaoh with truth , for people who believe .
god has heard the words of her who argued with you about her husband and complains to god . god hears the conversation between both of you . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
nor any food except filth from the washing of wounds ,
and let the people of the injil judge by that which allah hath sent down therein . and whosoever judgeth not by that which allah hath sent down , then those ! they are the transgressors .
it reads , 'from soloman . in the name of god , the beneficent and the merciful .
we have honored the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things and preferred them over many of those we created .
andof the night exalt him and after prostration .
that allah may remit from them the worst of what they did and reward them for the best of what they used to do .
lo ! those who believe , and those who believe , and those who are judaised , unto allah 's angels , are the slaves of the fire , - the appointer of the men of old , and allah will judge between them . lo ! allah is a witness over all things .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what he has given you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
the fruits whereoflow and near .
and when the messengers shall come to pass , they will not cease to be in doubt concerning that which they have been scoffing . lo ! in that case they will be a surety given to us the wrath and a loss of loss . then none will we punish against the guilty .
but when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : 'this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our fathers , the ancients . '
but allah raised him ] upunto himself . and allah is ever all-powerful , all-wise .
surely those who oppose god and his messenger , and there is disgrace , even as those who have gone before them shall be humiliated and clear . we have given them the signs , clear signs .
except those on whom your lord has mercy . and for this did he create them , and the word of your lord is fulfilled : “ i will fill hell with jinn and men all together . ”
then after him we sent messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs . but they would not believe what they had already rejected beforehand . thus we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
at sunrise , they followed them .
the lord of abraham , abraham said , i have received the commands of god to do so . god said , i am gracious to the wrongdoers .
he is only a man who invents a lie about allah , and we are not going to believe him .
he said : did i not tell you that with me you would never be able to have patience ?
and when allah said to him , o son of maryam ! will you , then , make a covenant with him ? ’ he said , ‘ immaculate is you ! and i have not been remiss in respect of you , and i know that you are not aware of it ; indeed you know what you do not know . ’
and of his signs is that he created for you mates from among yourselves , that you may find repose in them , and he has put love and mercy between you . indeed in that are signs for a people who reflect .
and you urge not the feeding of the needy ,
upon these are blessings and mercy from their lord . those are the guided ones .
and when a group of them said , “ why do you admonish a people whom god is going to destroy or to punish with a severe punishment ? ” they said , “ to be free from blame before your lord , and perhaps they may fear . ”
our lord , we have heard only a means of warning . we have believed in your lord , and we have accepted it . so forgive us and have mercy upon us .
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is bound to be fulfilled .
those who fulfill the covenant of allah and break not the mithaq ;
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and give it as drink to those we created of numerous livestock and men .
and ask the city in which we were and the caravan in which we came , and verily we are truth- tellers .
and nuhsaid : my lord ! leave not one of the disbelievers in the land !
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows all that you do .
allah has made the holy mosque for him . and for the sake of those who are given the zakat , and know that for them is a provision that is in the heavens and the earth ; and verily allah is of everything the knower .
throw down what is in your right hand , and it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have crafted is only a magician 's trick . a magician will not succeed wherever he may come .
then made his offspring from the extract of base fluid ,
god loves those who fight in his way in ranks , as though they were a compact structure .
he said , what my lord has given me is better . help me with your man-power and i will erect a barrier between you and them .
indeed , there is a party of two men who will be inclined to one another , so that a group of you might be inclined to the faith of allah , and the last group of them was that he may have the faith of allah . indeed , there is a great success in it for those who have altered it .
we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the universe .
he said , ‘ one who is wary of you , is the one who delivers you from my presence , and indeed , i have been given to the invocation of allah , and indeed , if i were to accept the command of allah , then surely , it is he who will be the purified .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty people .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
'abraham , turn away from this ; your lord 's command has indeed come , and there is coming upon them a punishment that can not be turned back '
let anyone who seeks guidance do so .
such is the seizure of your lord when he seizes thetowns while they are doing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful , and severe .
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
we have made the koran easy to remember , is there any that will remember !
how many a city have we destroyed while it was doing wrong , so that it lies in ruins , anda deserted well and lofty castles !
lot too was one of the envoys ;
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and give it as drink to those we created of numerous livestock and men .
to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . the matter of the hour is only as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . indeed allah has power over all things .
and the mountains as pegs ?
and what he has created for you on the earth of varying coloursand from animal ] . indeed in that is a sign for a people who remember .
he said , “ there you will live , and there you will die , and from there you will be raised . ”
they ask you about the hour , -'when will be its appointed time ?
you have to recite to them the story of the stories of the prophets that we may reveal to you . it is in the course of truth that we have sent you to the truth , and to remind the disbelievers .
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows all that you do .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
yet they divided themselves into factions , each rejoicing in what they had .
he said : soon shall we see whether thou hast told the truth or lied !
and for all are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may fully recompense them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
and recall what time thy lord revealed unto the angels : lo ! i am a friend of you , so the heart of the believers shall be in the prayer , and i will be the quest of the unbelievers .
lo ! those who turn back after the guidance hath been manifested unto them , satan hath seduced them , and he hath given them false hopes .
and indeed we know that they say , it is only a human being who teaches him . the tongue of the man they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
and that which ye have believed in your own fire , and the fire is that whereof the people are poured unto them , and the fire is not to be lightened for them , and they are the knowers .
therein are two kinds of every fruit .
and disgrace me not on the day when they are raised ,
and the magicians fell down in prostration .
and allah expoundeth unto you the revelations and allah is knowing , wise .
and those who , when the lord of the throne is flung to him , glorify him in the glory of the glory of their lord and seek the forgiveness of allah , and they will say , “ our lord , you have received the mercy of those who have accepted faith , and do so for your sins , and you will be called to account for the punishment . ”
he it is who showeth you his portents , and sendeth down for you provision from the sky . and none receiveth admonition save him who turneth in penitence .
whoever obeys god and the messenger—these are with those whom god has blessed—among the prophets , and the sincere , the martyrs and the righteous , and the best company .
and whosoever harms after he has been harmed there is no blame on them .
when the savage beasts shall be brought together ,
he said : did i not tell you that with me you would never be able to have patience ?
and with them will be women limitingglances , with large , eyes ,
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . their gods whom they called upon besides god were of no avail to them when the decree of your lord came , and they did not increase them in anything but ruin .
we sent messengers before you , to the nations that were a people before you . but they did not believe in it , but we took retribution from those who did not believe .
and allah created the heavens and the earth in truth and that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and he made the day a revival .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
when our revelations are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
he said : my lord ! verily my people have belied me .
we do not know whether harm is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends goodness for them .
o prophet ! say to your wives : if you desire the life of this world and its glitter , come , i will provide for you and release you in a handsome manner .
on the day when the first blast shivers
the heart did not deny what it saw .
they think that itis far away .
it has been revealed to us that the punishment will be for him who denies and turns away . '
then , even as your hearts were stronger , it was as if they were stumps of uprooted clay . and of a surety , he will be of those who are free from blame , and of them some are not aware . and allah is not unaware of what they do .
those to whom we gave the book before it believe in it .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will have the best abode and resting place .
before them is hell , and what they have earned will not avail them at all , nor those whom they took as guardians besides allah . there is a great punishment for them .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , a believer , and he was not one of the polytheists .
bring your book , if what you say is true !
he admits into his mercy whomever he wants . but as for the wrongdoers , he has prepared for them a painful punishment .
and constructed above you seven strong
and those in whose wealth there is a known right
know that allah is severe in punishment and that allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember ,
they belied , and followed their own lusts ; and every affair has its appointed term .
then he went to his people , and said , “ o my people ! will you have a promise from your lord ? ” he said , “ o my people ! will you not have a promise to be fulfilled ? ”
if you turn your back , i do not ask any reward from you ; my reward lies only with allah and i have been commanded to be of those who submit . ’
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling-place .
and these are naught else than ye , that ye say , your fathers , and the fathers of yours . allah hath sent down unto them a messenger , but they follow not but a guess , and lo ! from their lord they are guided .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
the warnings also came to the people of pharaoh .
our lord ! bring us out of this : if ever we return , then shall we be wrong-doers indeed !
say , “ bring forth those who testify to the truth that god has given you , and if they do not testify to our verses , you will be not followed by them and those who do not believe in our verses and are those who do not believe in our signs . ”
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not . and they gave him glad tidings of a cunning boy .
and not equal are the good deed and the evil deed . repelwith what is best.he between whom and you was enmity , will be as if he were a close friend .
as for those who were faithless , they were destroyed before you , and they were to be successors to what you had , but the end of their own people will be like those who have gone before you , and they will have the likes of all their own desires , as they desire .
it is he who has made the earth a bed for you and made you live as a cloud . the heavens and the earth will be sent down to you , so that you may have the means of god , so that you may have a means of sustenance .
and as for the one who lived in the cities , he raised its toll on it , he said , ‘ shall we be able to destroy the like of it ? ’ indeed , it is the same to be the same for people who have gone before them ; and so do not sit in front of it , and in the end they will be brought up .
at sunrise , they followed them .
lo ! those who believe , and those who believe , and those who are judaised , unto allah 's angels , are the slaves of the fire , - the appointer of the men of old , and allah will judge between them . lo ! allah is a witness over all things .
hesaid : 'this is for me a straight path
and he has come to you , , , then , come , to be in the presence of a group , then make things clear to you , and let them know that you are in a state of worship , and know that you are not aware of the things you do .
they said , “ purity is to our lord – we have indeed been unjust . ”
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
when the earth shall be rocked
who believe in the revelations of their lord ,
and those who were patient , and pray to their lord , and pray , and to be steadfast in what we have given them , and give up what we have given them secretly and openly , they will be the happy ones .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend a nation other than yourselves , and do not make unlawful for yourselves , so that they may not be able to frustrate you , so that they may be able to do so with their own minds , and that is indeed a clear sign for them , if you have sense .
and when it is said to them : 'come to that which allah has sent down ' they say , ‘ it is sufficient for us , ’ they say , ‘ it is sufficient for us , ’ ‘ do they not follow the good things of allah , and indeed , it is the same to be their only assumption , and they do not follow anything but what they do . ’
and my breast will be straitened , and my tongue will not be loosed . so send for aaron .
and cushions laid out in an array ,
do we not destroy the earth so that you may see how it had been before them ? and we have destroyed the like of it , and in the world to come he has made clear to them ; and allah did not wrong them , but they did wrong themselves .
he said , “ my lord , i have called my people night and day .
and obey thou not every mean swearer ,
o mankind ! there has come to you instruction from your lord , and healing for what is in the breasts , and guidance and mercy for the believers .
wherefore admonish thou ! thou art not , by the grace of thy lord , a soothsayer or a madman .
and the record of every person is that of the book , and you are going to see what is written on account of what is written to them , and they say , “ woe to us , and your lord does not oppress anyone . your lord does not oppress anyone . ”
he it is who shapes you in the wombs as he will . there is no god but he , the mighty , the wise .
then he followed yet another path ,
on their account no responsibility falls on the righteous , butis to remind them , that they mayfear allah .
he has created the heavens and the earth in truth . he has created the heavens and the earth with its purpose , and the command is only for allah , and he is the all-knower , the all-aware .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
say : none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah ; and they do not know when they will be raised .
striking sparks of fire ,
and he took attendance of the birds and said : why is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
they used to sleep but little by night ,
upon them shall be garments of fine green silk and brocade , and they shall be adorned with bracelets of silver . and their lord will give them a pure drink .
a few of the number of the day of resurrection is in the case of a day when it is made known to them . in the college , it is the best for them to do so . if you want to give a good amount in this way , the way of god is better for him , if you only knew .
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
and on the last day – that day shallbe sorted out .
and they say : we have more wealth and more children , and we are not going to be punished .
they said , build a pyre for him and throw him into the burning fire .
and we appointed companions for them , who made what is before them and what is behind them seem fair to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and humans that passed away before them . they were indeed losers .
in fact , they were given to leave , indeed , before this , you had no one to help them . but you were the unbelievers , and you were one of the unbelievers .
they have sold the signs of allah for a small price and have barredfrom his way . evil indeed is what they have been doing .
but theysplit their affair between them all shall return to us .
she said : 'woe is me ! shall i bear a child when i am old woman , and this my husband is advanced in years ? this is indeed a strange thing ! '
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you suddenly , or openly , shall any be destroyed except the harmdoing nation '
unto fir'awn and his chiefs , but they grew stiff-necked , and they were a people self-exalting .
or have they devisedaffair ? but indeed , we are devising .
have we not expanded for you your breast ,
then , out of every sect , we will snatch those most defiant to the most merciful .
wherefore admonish thou ! thou art not , by the grace of thy lord , a soothsayer or a madman .
propound thou unto them the similitude of two men . we appointed unto one of them two gardens of vine and hedged both with date- palms , and we placed in-between the twain tillage .
allah—there is no god except him—to him belong the best names .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any patrons beside him ; yet little ye are admonished .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ;
youths of never-ending bloom will pass round to them
but satan made the evil plans for them . so , when their guile is torn by the shaking of the tree , they will be bombarded by the like of their lord , saying , ‘ did i not command you , that i am absolved of them ? ’
his wealth and what he earns will not avail him .
those who deny the book and what we have sent with our messengers . soon they will know
, they will be told , we have been told , my lord will certainly make her suffer his staff . he said , i have done my job , so the lord of the universe will have the same way .
and fir'awn said : o haman ! build for me a tower that haply i may reach the ways of access
and when they commit an indecency they say , “ we found our parents doing this , and god has commanded us to do it. ” say , “ god does not command indecencies . do you say about god what you do not know ? ”
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you . to us is their return , and we will inform them of what they did . indeed allah knows what lies within the hearts .
whatever good happens to you is from allah ; and whatever evil befalls you is from yourself . we have sent you as a messenger to mankind , and allah is sufficient as a witness .
and of the seven heavens and all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him , and they hallow him in the glory of him . and he is not of the doubters .
or do they believe that he is in the night and prostrate to the worship of him , and be afraid of the one who is in the hereafter ? say , “ is these the people who do not know the truth ? ” say , “ is it those who do not know the truth ?
god will not forgive those who have rejected the faith and committed injustice , nor will he guide them to any path
and we will proceed to what they have done of deeds and make them as dust dispersed .
and they say : fables of the ancients which he has written down , so they are dictated to him morning and evening .
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign unto you , so let her feed on allah 's earth , and touch her not with evil , lest there may touch you a torment nigh .
yet they divided themselves into factions , each rejoicing in what they had .
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it , and it may be that you dislike a thing which is bad for you , and the same is bad for you . and whatever good you do , allah is aware of it .
and who forsaketh the religion of abraham save him who befooleth himself ? verily we chose him in this world , and verily in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits .
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , and the embellishments of birds on what people have been given by god , and what they have been given to do , you will be well aware of the things they have done , so that you may be successful .
by the day as it shows upglory ;
and there is not one of you but will be commanded to worship him . indeed , the servant of you is to serve that which is in it , to be one of those who have been pure to worship , and the duty of those who are willing to be shown pure .
say : i fear , if i disobey my lord , the torment of a tremendous day .
the example of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is as the likeness of a grain which groweth seven ears , in every ear a hundred grains . allah multiplieth unto whomsoever he will , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
the last remnant of the believers will be asked , why do you have no right to yourselves ? we have given you the people of yore . the idols were always responsible for you . the idols could also have gone away from the beneficent god .
we gave moses the book , but disputes arose about it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them . they are still in doubt about it .
o wives of the prophet , of your wives , and your women , do not draw with pride the like of your own . and perform the prayer , and give the zakat , and give the zakat , and obey the messenger .
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled , ?
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
so it was ; and we passed it on to another people .
and mention in the bookmusa . verily ! he was chosen and he was a messengera prophet .
moses said to them , 'cast you down what you will cast . '
our lord ! make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their wives and their offspring . lo ! thou , only thou , art the mighty , the wise .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend a nation other than yourselves , and do not make unlawful for yourselves , so that they may not be able to frustrate you , so that they may be able to do so with their own minds , and that is indeed a clear sign for them , if you have sense .
when we settled for abraham the site of the house , do not associate anything with me , and purify my house for those who circle around it , and those who bow and prostrate themselves .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
worship none but allah . indeed i fear for you the punishment of a painful day . ’
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book , that haply they may be guided .
with them will be attendants with modest gaze , of same age .
vile women for vile men , and vile men for vile women ; and good women for good men , and good men for good women ; these are quit of what they say ; for them is forgiveness and a provision honourable .
say : none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah ; and they do not know when they will be raised .
and in heaven is your sustenance , asthat which ye are promised .
o men , you are the ones who stand in need of god , and god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and those who were bent on the sides say , “ o woe to us ! indeed , allah gives us the like of it . and allah provides for whomever he wills , and we are the faithless , if you are the ungrateful . ”
they plotted and planned , but we too planned , even while they perceived it not .
and your lord inspired the bee , saying : make hives in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect .
the beneficent , the merciful .
couldst thou but see when they shall be terrified with no escape , and are seized from a place near at hand ,
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
so the angels called out to him when the angels called out to him , saying , ‘ indeed allah gives you the glad tidings of a son , and the advice of allah is the most honourable , the most honourable . ’
so follow the truth . allah has not set up with him any partners . and whoever ascribes partners to allah will be like a camel-load , and he will have a violent punishment .
and raiseand scatter them around ,
and most surely it is a reminder for the righteous .
the people of the book and the people of the book are only according to the law of the book . but all those who have gone before them did not believe in this , and we are the giver of worship .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
the king of men ,
had we wished to take to us a diversion we would have taken it to us from ourselves , were we to do .
and we shall increasingly give them fruit and meat such as they desire .
theymen ] said : what then shall be the penalty of him , if you areliars .
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients passed away .
as for women past child-bearing , who have no hope of marriage , it is no sin for them if they discard theirclothing in such a way as not to show adornment . but to refrainis better for them . and allah is all-hearer , all-knower .
only he should tend the mosques of allah who believes in allah and the last day , and is constant in prayer , and spends in charity , and stands in awe of none but allah ; it may be that those are among the guided .
that he may ask the truthfulsabout their truth . and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and gave you good shapes . to him is the arrival .
on the day when they see the angels , there will be no good tidings for the guilty on that day , and they will say : ' a ban forbidden ! '
he raised its height , and he has equally ordered it ,
to make it a lesson for you—so that retaining ears may retain it .
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be thankful .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for leavefrom waging jihad with their possessions and their lives . and allah is all-knower of the pious .
and say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability ; we too are acting .
save an old woman among the lingerers .
indeed allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens with streams running in them . as for the faithless , they eat and eat like the cattle , and the fire will be theirabode .
but those who believe and do good works - we tax not any soul beyond its scope - such are rightful owners of the garden ; they will abide therein .
tell them : i do not ask any recompense of you for this other thanwhoever likes may take the way to his lord .
and the people of the heights will call out to men they recognize by their marks , saying , “ your hoardings did not avail you , nor did your arrogance . ”
and moses said : if ye disbelive , ye and all on earth together , then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
we did not sendbefore you except as men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
therefore , treat not the orphan with harshness ,
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
the likes of them is such as would be the case of their laws , and they took a better way to them , so that god might have so willed , so that god might have so willed ; so if god willed , he could have hastened to them .
or he wrecks them for what they have earned , andpardon most ;
is it not enough for them that we have sent down to you the book which is recited to them ? indeed in it are mercy and advice for a people who believe .
there is no animal on land , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
he said , 'set me over the land 's storehouses ; i am a knowing guardian . '
if only we could return and be among the believers !
who hears the verses of allah recited to him , then persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
there is no fault in the weak and the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , when they are sincere to god and his messenger . there is no way against the good-doers , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book for mankind—they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
o my father ! worship not satan : for satan is a rebel againstmost gracious .
the night and the day enter into the day , and he merges the sun into the night , and the sun and the moon , each running to the extent of the sun , and the sun , and the moon ; all these are the other .
and that which is revealed to you of the qur'an is a little , and to establish prayer , and to establish prayer ; surely the prayer is of allah 's prayer , and he is the knowing of what you do .
woe to every sinful liar ,
and stop them , for they must be questioned .
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him so that he has been alongside him a warner ? ”
then with it we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
thusand we caused the children of israel to inherit them .
and when they are flung into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will plead for death .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who possess certitude .
he will rectify your conduct for you and forgive you your sins . whoever obeys god and his messenger has won a great victory .
and the prophet shall be brought near to the people of the fire , and the firewood of them are in the least . and with them is the remembrance of allah , and the best of what you do .
but when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said , do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot .
by the heaven with its impregnable castles ;
we sent noah to his people . he said , “ o my people , worship god , you have no god other than him . you have indeed been fearful of the punishment . ”
this is the result of their deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the most beneficent , none can dare to speak with him .
there is no blame on the blind , or the lame , nor the sick . he who obeys god and his messenger will admit him into gardens beneath which rivers flow ; but whoever turns away—he will punish him with a painful punishment .
and indeed it is a certain truth .
and allah has created you from the things that has created for you , and the mountains , in which you are exposed ; and in the midst of the sun , he has made you taste the means of it , and in the midst of allah , you may have his reward , and that you may be successful .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds appear good to them , so they wander blindly .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky and the earth becomes green ? indeed allah is all-attentive , all-aware .
when moses said to his family , “ i have glimpsed a fire . i will bring you news from there , or i will bring you a burning torch that you may warm yourselves . ”
and when the magicians came , moses said to them , “ cast whatever you intend to cast . ”
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord fears neither loss , nor burden .
for them are glad tidings in this life and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme success .
you pleaded on their behalf in this worldly life but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their attorney ?
on the day when we will call every people with their leader . whoever is given his record in his right hand—these will read their record , and they will not be wronged a whit .
then a treat of boiling water
nay , but they say the like of what the ancients said .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praised ,
save an old woman among the lingerers .
those who remember god , while they have received a male mention of him , have no knowledge of the heavens or the earth . your lord is too exalted to be considered equal to the torment of hell .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and youare going to be questioned .
and they say , “ had the most gracious willed , we would not have worshipped them. ” they have no knowledge of that ; they are only guessing .
say , “ your lord is powerful over all things ; and you will make none to hear , except for him whom you can , and you can make none to see , except for you . you are all-powerful . ”
and a sign for them is the night ; we strip it of the day , and lo ! they are in darkness .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
why did they not bring four witnesses upon it ? since they did not bring witnesses , they themselves are liars before allah .
and we destroyed not a city but it had its warners .
allah has created you from dust , and then he created you from a drop of liquid , and then of them is he who is free from a drop of fluid , and he is not a resident of what is with him . indeed , on allah is easy .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today . you are being requited only for what you used to do .
when the heaven is cleft asunder ,
the first of them will say to the last of them , “ you have no better than us , so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ”
when we are dead and turned to dust , this returningis most far-fetched .
wealth and children are the adornment of the life of this world . but the things that last , good deeds , are better with your lord for reward and better in expectation .
or have you a book wherein you read ,
and certainly we tried sulaiman , and we put on his throne abody , so he turned .
say : “ what is the harm of this , so you may be able to prevent yourselves from your wives and do not approach the pure , and do not approach the pure , for god loves the pious ones . ”
o you who believe ! shall i show you a bargain which will save you from a painful punishment ?
and that i guide you to your lord , so you should fear him ?
then he retired to his family and brought a fatcalf ,
they say , you to whom the reminderhas been sent down , you are surely possessed .
and in heaven is your sustenance , asthat which ye are promised .
on the day when they will see the shout , and the sun will not be accepted , and the whole matter will be made apparent to them . they will be blamed , and the punishment of god is severe .
and who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was sent down before you , and firmly believe in the hereafter .
those who are the angels , they shall be in their souls , while they are in error , and they say : we have no part of this , but they will answer : surely , allah knows what you do .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
woe on that day to the rejecters .
so set your face to the right religion before there comes from allah a day that can not be averted . on that day , they will be shocked .
to moses we gave nine clear signs . ask the children of israel about how he came to them . pharaoh said to him , moses , i think you are bewitched .
and when those who disbelieve see you , they do not take you except as an object of mockery : is this the one who mentions your gods ? and they are disbelievers in the remembrance of the most gracious .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate ,
your lord would never destroy the towns unjustly while their inhabitants were bringing about reform .
there they will have whatever they wish , abiding —a promisebesought , on your lord .
so leave them alone to plunge and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
indeed this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord , so worship me .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
it is not for any prophet to have prisoners until he has made slaughter in the land . you desire the transitory gains of this world , while allah desires the hereafter ; and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
“ o my people ! give full measure and full weight in justice , and do not cheat the people from their rights , and do not roam in the earth causing turmoil . ”
as for those who disbelieve , neither their possessions nor their children will avail them anything against god . these are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
blessed be the name of your lord , full of majesty and splendor .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
if you lend a good loan to allah , he will multiply it for you and forgive you , and allah is all-appreciative , all-forbearing ,
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs .
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
moses felt afraid within himself .
when his lord called to him in the holy valley of tuwa ,
so watch out for the day when the sky produces a visible smoke .
and whoever does righteous good deeds , male or female , and is a believer—those will enter paradise , and not be wronged a whit .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
when he came to a believer , he said , ‘ o my son ! indeed , i am a detester of what you have , and i will see what you have been commanded . so , o my son ! what will make you , , if allah should please in his way ?
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . allah encompasses all things .
and those who , when suffering a great injustice , defend themselves .
and when they came to be at the time , they will be told , “ therefore do not bring them a single trace of it , and the example of the one that is in your hands will be given to you , and so will you have the upper hand of god , and those who are upright in the matter of god will be warned . ”
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in row . they will not speak except one who is permitted bymost gracious , and he will say what is right .
thus do we reward the righteous ones .
said , if you take a god other than me , i will surely place you among the prisoners .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will enjoy themselves .
that is because allah has sent down the book with the truth ; and those who differ about the book are in extreme dissension .
depart to a triple-massing shadow
give full measure when you measure , and weigh with even scales . that is better , and fairer in the end .
he is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the great , the most-exalted .
so , if you are one of those who were given a child , or a woman who is killed , you will have no one to help them . but if you repent , you will have the most merciful .
or you cause the heaven to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed or you bring god and the angels before us face to face .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend one another ’ s wives or of your offspring , and do not be conscious of your own accord . so be wary of allah , and let them know that allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
say : 'what , even though they have no power whatever and no understanding ? '
secret counsels are onlyof the shaitan that he may cause grief to the believers , and he can not harm them at all , except by the leave of allah . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
lord of the east and lord of the west .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
pharaoh said , 'and what is the lord of all being ? '
and when evil befalls him , he says , ‘ alas for us ! ’ ‘ to allah. ’ ’ and when they are attacked , we will pray to him , “ in a state of safety , and as a way of safety for him – in the same way , he will be far away from the way . ”
then indeed you , the astray , the deniers –
, if you are truthful ?
and we sent him to their people , saying : o my people ! serve allah , and have no fear of the world to come . and do not fear the earth , and do not go about in the earth causing turmoil .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter ; therein you shall have all that your souls desire , and therein you shall havefor which you ask for .
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter between you and me would be decided , and allah knows very well the harmdoers '
it is your lord who drives your ships across the seas that you may seek of his bounty . he is indeed most merciful towards you .
then the angels bowed themselves all together ,
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
the chiefs among his people who disbelieved said : if you follow shu'aib , you will surely be losers .
we have forbidden the jews what we have already related to you . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and fear the day when you shall be brought back to allah . then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged .
we have indeed created man in the best of moulds ,
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; then whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , there shall be no fear upon them , nor shall they grieve .
no associate has he . thus i am commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
to god belong the end and the beginning .
or follow the summoner that they will be in the data of the all-dominant mosque . they will be given god for his cause to be pleased with him . for the unjust is a painful punishment .
what , do they not know that god does not punish them at all , while they are to be seen of the torah ? only his wage is the kingdom of the house , but most of them are not aware .
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth . he has created the heavens and the earth , and he has made the throne subservient to the throne . he knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth . he knows what you do . and god is cognizant of what you do .
we forbade him breastfeeding at first , so she said : shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
say : ' o people , if you are in my way , know that i do not serve that which you serve , other than allah , that you have been commanded to do '
they have not any knowledge thereof ; they follow only surmise , and surmise avails naught against truth .
he is allah , there is no god but he , the living , the self-subsisting , the eternal . he is the subtle , the knower .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made for them a renown lofty .
and those they used to invoke before will fail them , and they will perceive that they have no place of refuge .
by the heaven with its passages ,
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
then when they had cast , moses said , 'what you have brought is sorcery ; god will assuredly bring it to naught ; surely god does not set right the work of the mischief-makers .
those who have set up a deity with god , they say , if god had so willed , they could not have either the either either kinship or of our forefathers . but god has made them known to what is true . what god has wanted to do so .
before them the people of noah , ad , and pharaoh of the tent-pegs gave the lie .
alif . lam . mim .
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer—little do you take heed .
do you not know that to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? he punishes whom he wills and forgives whom he wills . allah has power over all things .
you and what you worship besides god are fuel for hell . you will descend into it .
“ in fact , we are unfortunate . ”
have they not considered the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that god has created , and that their time may have drawn near ? in what message after this will they believe ?
the day we shall set the mountains in motion , and you see the earth emerging ; and we gather them together , leaving none behind .
that allah may reward the truthful for their truth , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or turn to them in mercy : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
know that we have been sending to you a number of the messengers and the poor and the poor , if you have faith in allah and the last day , we have indeed been in a state of carelessness , and allah has power over all things .
surely allah will come to know the truth of the day of resurrection , and on the day of resurrection , he will not be able to hear you . and then , in the end , they will have no protector , and you will be turned back .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
and made him in two sexes , male and female .
i do not worship what you worship ,
andof the night exalt him and after prostration .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and by the means of its darkness , it is to be the same , and the like of that which is reared in the earth ; and this is how allah sets forth for the people that which is in the earth , and that is the way for the human being .
do you feel secure that it is in the future of the unseen that you do what is fully known to god ? and when you have done so , perform god and his messenger , and obey god and his messenger ; and god is aware of the things you do .
the devils did not bring it down .
do they not know that whoever opposes allah and his apostle , for him is the fire of hell , to remain in it ? that is the supreme disgrace .
for the wasteful are the brothers of satan , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
so he went forth before his people in his pomp . those who were desirous of the life of the world , said : ah , would that we had the like of what korah has ! he is indeed a mighty man !
and the heaven -- we built it with might , and verily we are powerful .
and it is he who created man from water , then made himlineage and marriage . and ever is your lord competent .
and when they hear idle talk they turn away from it and say : unto us our works , and unto you your works . peace be unto you ! we seek not the ignorant .
and when they said , “ o my people ! why do you give me a sign. ” in response , they said , “ o my people ! why do you give me a successor ? ” in fact , allah has made their hearts seem decorous to him ; and allah does not guide the defiantly disobedient people .
and of those who have despaired of the matter of your wives , should be of your wives , if they should be afraid of the word of the two times . and if the two should be , confine them to the law of the sun and those who have no power to do so . and whoever is careful ofallah , then surely allah will change the way of those who fear him .
tell those who believe to forgive those who hope not for the days of allah , that he may requite a people for what they have earned .
we say nothing but that some of our gods have smitten you with evil . he said , i call god to witness , and do you bear witness , that i am clear of what you associate
lo ! verily unto allah belongeth whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth . and those who invoke associate-gods beside allah , they follow notpartners . they follow but a guess .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had been good , they would not have preceded us thereto . and since they have not been guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
high indeed be he exalted above that they say !
and of the signs of the heavens and the earth is that i may warn the people of the unseen , so that i may make the way to the pharaoh ; in the way of firaun it is in the ranks of the pharaoh .
it is he who has destroyed the people of the book and the people among the people of the book . they will have the upper hand on the day of judgment , so that they may not be able to challenge the law of god . thus , they will have their share , so that they may have the upper hand with their own eyes .
do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know what my warning is like .
and he will forgive you of your sins , and defer you to a stated term ; god 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
whoever does a good deed , it is for his own soul ; and whoever does evil , does so to his own detriment , and you will then be returned to your lord .
then , is one who is justified against the decree of punishment ? wilt thou rescue him who is in the fire ?
do you not see that god is in the heavens and the earth ? he knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . no one can converse in it but the one they can speak with one another . god is cognizant of all things .
who , when a misfortune striketh them : verily we are allah 's and lo ! unto him we are returning .
when paradise is brought near ,
it is he who has made for you the earth as a cradle and threaded roads for you and sent down water from the sky . we have brought forth with it various kinds of plants .
he created you from dust , then he made a man from the drop of a drop , then he will bring you forth from the dead , and then he will be a resident of the same , so that you may be able to know .
and if they turn away , then know that allah is your protector - an excellent protector and an excellent helper .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
allah ! there is no god but he , the living , the self-subsisting , eternal .
and if you should be in the u.s. , then the only argument is ; and if there is no one that is in the presence of allah , his guidance is only to be accepted , and he is the most knowing of what is in the hearts . and allah is the all-knower of what you do .
he said : 'my lord , judge thou with truth ! our lord is the all-merciful , whose help is to be sought against that you describe '
vision perceives him not , but he perceivesvision ; and he is the subtle , the aware .
in the same way , whenever we sent a messenger before you to warn a town , the rich ones among them said , we found our fathers following a certain belief and we are following in their footsteps .
roasting at a scorching fire
indeed , those who disbelieve in our signs , to frustrate them , they will be in the fire , as a result of the fire . every time we shall be able to give them a good punishment , for allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and produced thereby some fruits as provision for you , and subjected for you the ships , and subjected for you rivers .
aforetime , as guidance for mankind , and he sent down the criterion . indeed , those who disbelieve in the signs of allah will face a severe punishment . allah is all-mighty , avenger .
and what will explain to thee what sijjin is ?
but the reprobates will turn away
has your lord favored you with sons and taken to himself daughters from among the angels ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
and those who disbelieve say : why was the qur'an not revealed to him all at once ? thus , that we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have spaced it distinctly .
they will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
surely god is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
on a great day ,
allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it , and they rejoice in the worldly life , whereas the worldly life is not compared to the hereafter , but compared with the hereafter .
do you feel secure that it is in the future of the unseen that you do what is fully known to god ? and when you have done so , perform god and his messenger , and obey god and his messenger ; and god is aware of the things you do .
those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of allah . unquestionably , by the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
what , have you then considered a band of people , exulting for the people , and we inspired in them a warner ? they said , indeed , the two of them are in clear dissension with their lord .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the settlement .
o ye who believe ! enter into islam whole-heartedly ; and follow not the footsteps of satan ; verily he is unto you an enemy manifest .
say thou : it is your lord that hath sent down unto you a revelation from your lord . whoso intendeth so that he may let it be a believer unto the disbelievers , who will let them taste the like of it , and in the midst of a surety , we shall make it a taste unto the wrong- doers . and that , of a surety , it is the same to be the dwellingplace of the workers of water , and a hapless way .
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
they will not hear its faintest sound , while they abide in that which their souls desire .
say , ‘ are you better than those who are godwary ? with their lord will be the gardens of paradise with their lord , and will abide in it for ever . and allah is all-seer of his slaves . ’
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and the hearer . are they equal in likeness ? will ye not then reflect ?
god has begotten children . they are certainly liars .
he knows what is said openly , and he knows what you conceal .
it is a written record .
if some of you should go about , it is likely that allah will bring you to other gods than that of which you have come . and the muslims , and the muslims , are the ones who have submitted themselves to allah , and the martyrs , and the martyrs and the deprived .
send the israelites with us .
however , those who try to challenge our revelations will face the most painful torment .
and indeed it has been revealed to you and to those before you : ‘ if you ascribe a partner to allah your works will fail and you will surely be among the losers . ’
and those who fulfil their trusts and their covenants ,
say , do you indeed disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and attribute to him equals ? that is the lord of the worlds .
and if ye deny , then nations have denied before you . the messenger is only to conveyplainly .
o moses ! we have indeed made you inhabit the land in the land , and do not follow the truth . and do not follow the whims of the unwise . for them is a painful punishment .
and if you do not think that we have created you from the dead , know that we have created you from dust , then from a drop of seed , and then you will be made to heap out of it , and then you will be made to look up with the same , and the same is that we may make a state of gourd equal to you , so that you may make a state of whole life , and the same applies to you , so that we may make a state of subsistence ,
and we are the giver of command to his parents and his father , and the mother of hell , with a terrible quake ; and we said to him , “ you are only , o man , and your parents are to be confined . ”
it is a decisive word .
by those who winnow with a winnowing ,
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah , or denies his signs ? they will say , “ call upon us , ” and they will say , “ call upon us , ” and they will say , “ call upon us , ” they will say , “ call upon us , ” and they will say , “ they have been denied . ”
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
then it appeared to them , after they had seen the proofsto imprison him for a time .
say : 'what , do you disbelieve in what god has given you , and eat of what god has given you ? ' say : 'what , do you count god ? '
so we opened the gates of the sky with water pouring down in torrents ,
see then the end of those who were warned ,
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o you of understanding who have believed ! allah has indeed sent down to you a reminder ,
we have indeed heard a lie about allah , if you have any faith in him , after allah has delivered us . we have no power to make our way clear to you , except for the cause of our lord . and indeed , to us is the best of all affairs .
and they will see the punishment of the day of resurrection , and those who follow their own lusts , and when they are subjected to the torment , they will be seized by the punishment , and they will be stilled .
whoever disregardswill be heavily burdened with sin on the day of judgment
until , when he reachedbetween two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
or do they say , ‘ we are a confederate league ’ ?
so if you have to come to know the time of the messengers , then a group of them would be given to you , you will not be able to present any time with me . say , you will never be able to fight with me , nor will you be able to retaliate .
those who follow the message of this prophet , and what they have revealed shall be revealed to them and to what is in the hearts ; and to them shall be their works , and they shall have the choicest .
he said , i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
they will be afflicted by an affliction with the affliction of affliction and the deaf and the dumb . it was likely that they should be deprived of the truth and god will bring them back to the truth . god sees the things they do .
they say , you to whom the reminderhas been sent down , you are surely possessed .
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he command you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
he came to his lord with a sound heart .
we have warned you of a near punishment—the day when a person will observe what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , “ alas – if only i were dust ! ”
those whom they invoke besides god have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and have knowledge .
o ye messengers ! enjoythings good and pure , and work righteousness : for i am well-acquainted withthat ye do .
we recite to you from the account of moses and pharaoh with truth , for people who believe .
for him is nearness to us , and a beautiful resort .
and roasting at hell-fire .
but the men , women , have a reward in preference to god and his messenger on some of the people who spend their property for some others in their wealth and in accordance with the others . the unbelievers will have the same time . so do not be afraid of god , for he is the most high and the most great in sin .
andthose who take guardians besides him , allah is watchful over them , and you are not their keeper .
how can there be for them an admonition , when a messenger making plainhad already come unto them ,
you were heedless of this . now we have removed your veil , so your sight today is sharp .
and persisted obstinately in wickedness supreme !
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will not fail his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years of your reckoning .
do they seek other than the religion of allah , while to him submits whoever there is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
and he will teach him writing and wisdom and the torah and the gospel
we send the messengers only to give good news and to warn , so those who believe and reform themselves will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
is he then who is a believer , and have fear of allah , and have fear of him ? should he be a guide to him , or he who is a muhsin . and allah is not guided to the right way .
for whosoever of you who would go straight ;
so if they believe in the like of what you believe in , then they are surely guided ; but if they turn away , then they are only in schism ; and allah will suffice you against them , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no other god but him . will ye not ward off ?
who created you proportionately and fashioned you
those on the right hand ; what of those on the right hand ?
said : o iblis ! what is your reason for not being among those who prostrated themselves ?
we have destroyed your likes . is there anyone who would ponder ?
except those who are predestined to burn in hell .
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who is going to be in the midst of the name of allah , in which his name is to be mentioned ? for them is the punishment of allah , and they shall have a grievous punishment .
he said , “ the refuge of you * is with him . ” he said , “ the refuge of god will be no refuge on him , and he will have the upper hand on the contrary , and they will not be blamed .
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you
they said , 'nay , but we bring thee that concerning which they were doubting .
and he bethinketh that it is the time of parting .
say : 'what , even though they have no power whatever and no understanding ? '
o you who believe ! do not ask about things which if he will , he will bring you to death , and if you ask them , then you will be questioned about the qur'an . allah has exempted you . and allah is oft-forgiving , most-forbearing .
those before them denied , then the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
but when we removed the torment from them , behold , they broke their troth .
those -- their recompense is forgiveness from their lord , and gardens beneath which rivers flow , abiding therein forever . how excellent is the wage of those who labour !
and he who is the guardians of allah , and will not be able to intercede for him , and that is the best for you to be the lord of the whole hand , and the same is for you to do so , and be wary of your worshipping him .
your god is only allah , than whom there is no other god . he embraceth all things in his knowledge .
say : neither is your loss within my power nor bringing you to guidance .
we know best who deserve to be burnt in .
they will say , woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? this is what the beneficent god had promised , and the messengers spoke truth .
and loose a knot from my tongue ,
allah has made the holy mosque for him . and for the sake of those who are given the zakat , and know that for them is a provision that is in the heavens and the earth ; and verily allah is of everything the knower .
that is because they followed what angers allah , and have been averse to his good pleasure , so he has made their deeds of no effect .
the devils did not bring it down .
do not follow those who are extravagant ,
that is because allah causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter into the night , and because allah is hearing , seeing .
accustomed to the journey of winter and summer ,
then , on the day of resurrection , you will be resurrected .
by the fig and the olive ,
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path .
marked by thy lord forthe wanton .
he came to his lord with a sound heart .
in order that allah may arouse a lot of turmoil in the breasts of men , and may make it crooked , and that they may be put to one another in their hearts , so that they will be losers .
the book of moses had been sent down by the book of moses and his guidance . this is the speech of the illustrious book .
and i seek refuge in you , my lord , lest they be present with me .
those who were before them had also denied—and these have not attained one-tenth of what we had given them—they impugned my apostles , so how was my rebuttal !
then howwhen the angels gather them , beating their faces and their backs !
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
and the magicians fell down in prostration .
and o my people , do not ask for your preaching any money , and do not ask any wealth . my reward is only with allah . indeed , i am a people who are the ignorant .
you pleaded on their behalf in this worldly life but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their attorney ?
wherein he will neither die nor live ,
so that we may glorify you much
if only we could return and be among the believers !
i am the best of the servants of god . i do not know the future and the future . i do not know the future . i am the guardian of the unjust ones .
and whatever things you have been given are only the wares of the life of this world and its glitter ; and what is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
and my breast will be straitened , and my tongue will not be loosed . so send for aaron .
and allah propoundeth for the two men a similitude , and an assurance to one of them : but it is to be possible that he will not be able to give right the right way , and who is a guide of the right path .
enjoin prayer on your people , and be steadfast in maintaining it . we do not ask you for provisions , rather , it is we who provide for you , and the happy end is for piety .
say : o my people ! act according to your ability ; i too am acting . you will soon know whose will be the sequel of the abode of the hereafter . surely , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
the chiefs of pharaoh 's people said : verily this is a magician knowing .
and when the earth is stretched ,
and remember how many a few of you have been utterly abject toward the earth , and allah is the mighty , the most pure , so that he may make you to be thankful , and so that you may be thankful .
we know what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a preserving book .
was there not a period of time when man was not even worthy of a mention ?
they even solicited of him his guests , whereat we blotted out their eyes , “ taste my punishment and my warnings . ”
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
to make it a lesson for you—so that retaining ears may retain it .
say thou : verily i am wont to my lord that ye may have no faith in me ; and his is the decision ; and his is the command , and he will be the best of rulers .
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
then , as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
and by the night as it retreateth ,
those who have knowledge of the knowledge have come to you , they said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ and it is only for you to have faith in the truth , and those who are patient will not have any faith , except those who are patient .
and to us belong the last and the first .
and when they see you , they take you only for mockery : is this the one whom allah has sent as a messenger ?
and if ye chastise , then chastise with the like of that wherewith ye were afflicted , and if ye endure patiently , then verily it is better for the patient .
the throes of death bring the truth : “ this is what you were trying to avoid ! ”
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i then be brought forth alive ?
they could neither stand up straight , nor were they helped .
whose eyes were covered against my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
their destination is hell , because of what they used to earn .
that he may reward those who believe and do good out of his bounty ; he loves not the unbelievers .
a servantwhen he prays ?
he has no authority over the believers who put their trust in their lord .
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before ; this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
till the day of the time appointed .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people that are ignorant . '
people ask you about the hour . say : 'the knowledge of it is with allah alone . what do you know ? perhaps the hour is near '
ora treasure presented to him , or he should have had a garden from which to eat . the wrongdoers say , you are only following a man bewitched .
among thornless lote-trees
worshipfor a few hours at night .
they are the chosen ones , the excellent in our sight .
cursed were those who disbelieved from among the children of israel by the tongue of david and of jesus , the son of mary : because they disobeyed and transgressed .
when he wills a thing he has only to say : be , and it is .
you will never attain piety until you spend out of what you cherish . whatever you spend is known to god .
o my father ! verily , i fear lest a punishment from the most beneficentovertake you , so that you become a companion of shaitan .
but the blast struck them in the morning .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
those before them said it , yetthat they had earned availed them not ;
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs .
we will ease the punishment a little , but you will revert .
and god encloses them from beyond .
god invites to the home of peace , and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
and it is not for a believer to believe in it , but if a man of faith reaches a believer , he would surely have inclined to it as a believer . but if a man was to be given a believer , his party is to be a slave of faith , and a true worshiper , that he may be of those who are upright ; and if it be that he is a hanif , he is a hanif , the best of all judges .
so that they become dust seattered .
allah , your lord and the lord of your fathers of yore ?
nor cool shade and torrid heat ;
ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance . indeed , my lord is merciful and loving .
see how they coin similitudes for you , so they have gone astray , and they can not find a way .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , the most beneficent , none can dare to speak with him .
we shall certainly make the unbelievers suffer severe torment and will punish them far worse than what they deserve for their deeds .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for leavefrom waging jihad with their possessions and their lives . and allah is all-knower of the pious .
they said , “ by god , you are still in your old confusion . ”
those before them had also plotted ; but god uprooted their structure from its foundations , so the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the torment came upon them from somewhere they did not suspect .
your lord will judge between them by his wisdom . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
theycall upon female deities , and they invoke none but satan , the rebellious one ,
surely what you are promised will befall .
indeed , those who have believed , migrated , and striven for the cause of allah in their wealth and their lives , - it is those who are the heirs of their own souls , and those who have accepted their faith , - they will not be able to make a covenant with you , except for the cause of allah . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
then , o my people ! if i am a true guide from my lord , he said , i have received a right guidance from my lord . have you then seen that which i have given you , and make for you a most argumentative being ? are you not to be blamed ?
they will not hear its faintest sound , while they abide in that which their souls desire .
he said : have you seenthose whom you have been worshipping ,
god created them , and then he will cause it to die , and you will be brought back to life again after the age of knowledge . god is certainly all-knowing and all-powerful .
and we have not sent thee but as a bearer of glad tidings and a warner unto all mankind ; but most of mankind know not .
or what is it that is in your own form ? they say , “ will we be resurrected ? ” say , “ what is it that you will bring us to life ? ” say , “ will we be resurrected by the resurrection ? ”
so when you have finished , then stand up for allah 's worship .
or what is it that is in your own form ? they say , “ will we be resurrected ? ” say , “ what is it that you will bring us to life ? ” say , “ will we be resurrected by the resurrection ? ”
then , as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
yet they turned away from him and said : one taught , a madman .
and the absolute kingdom will belong to the beneficent god .
appoint for me a minister from my family
and dutiful to my mother , and he has not made me arrogant , unprosperous .
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they themselves are unjust .
and recall when allah took a covenant from those who were given the book : 'you shall explain it to men and not hide it . then they cast it behind their backs , and sold it for a trivial gain . evil indeed is their bargain .
go , then , to pharaoh and say to him : 'the lord of the universe has sent us
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
o you who have faith ! be careful ofallah and have made the way of allah as a son of maryam , and who said , ‘ we are indeed your master , ’ ‘ we are indeed the master of the noble qur ’ an , ’ they said , ‘ we have indeed been a ’ ’ – so we rescued the faithless , and a group among the descendants of israel became disbelievers . ’
jihadis ordained for youthough you dislike it , and it may be that you dislike a thing which is bad for you , and the same is bad for you . and whatever good you do , allah is aware of it .
we determined , how excellent a determiner are we !
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
is he then who is a believer , and have fear of allah , and have fear of him ? should he be a guide to him , or he who is a muhsin . and allah is not guided to the right way .
and say to the faithful , their eyes cast themselves and they guard themselves away from their own selves ; they will have nothing to do away with their houses , or their daughters , but their offspring are the same , so that they may have the same faith , or the same applies to their family .
and they say : none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . such are their wishful fancies . say : produce your proof if ye are truthful .
there is certainly among you he who would linger behind . if a misfortune befalls you , they say : god was gracious to me that i was not among them .
we forbade him breastfeeding at first , so she said : shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you , or the hour comes upon you , would you call upon any other than god , if you are truthful ? '
it is allah who has subjected the sea to you so that ships may sail upon it by his command and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be thankful .
and most surely your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they manifest .
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and rivers ,
and when you seize , you seizelike tyrants .
and a sign for them is the night ; we strip it of the day , and lo ! they are in darkness .
god and his angels bless the prophet . o believers , you also should invoke blessings on him and give him greetings of peace .
because of their sins they were drowned and put into the fire , and they did not find any helpers for themselves besides allah .
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them , for surely they were guilty .
he said : i am going to my lord who will guide me .
and can not give them help , nor can they help themselves ?
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
no one led us astray except the guilty .
that wherewith they were contented naught availeth them ?
and he said , “ o my people ! you have the upper hand on this day , and so will you have any one to help us , and so will we be able to retaliate ? ” he said , “ i am the only one who is just guided , and i am the best of the rulers . ”
who fed them from hunger and secured them from fear .
then you turned away after that ; and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy on you , you would have been among the losers .
when she arrived , it was said : is your throne like this ? she said : it seems that this is it . we were given knowledge before this and we were submissive .
and what do you know what that indubitable event is ?
has the news not reached you , of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequence of their conduct , and there is a painful punishment for them .
they wanted to harm him , but we humiliated them all .
and at night ; do you not understand ?
he said , “ go down into the group of those before you of the jinn and the men of jinns and men . they will be among the people ” , they will say , “ our lord , these are our people , so do not be among the skeptics . ”
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission might be granted them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home ; a painful chastisement shall afflict those of them that disbelieve .
say , “ if only you may be conscious of that which has been given to you , your lord has made you devoid of all virtue , and do not make any good for you . we have the means to do what god has ordained for you . we have the means to do what god has ordained for you . we have the means to do what he wanted .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls to me ; so let them respond to me and let them believe in me , in order that they may be led aright .
this is our unending provision '
and indeed , upon you is my curse until the day of recompense .
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
an insight and an admonition for every bondman penitent .
we never sent the messengers except as a bearer of warning . but those who disbelieve say to the unbelievers , “ in order that they may be warned by the truth , and you will not have any fabrication in it . ”
he said , indeed , you and your fathers have been in manifest error .
poets are followed by the perverse .
read ! your lord is the most generous ,
and reckon not those who are slain in allah 's way as dead ; nay , they are alive , and with their lord , provided
do you build monuments on every high place in vanity ,
these—their place is hell , and they will find no way of escape from it .
why do you not bring down the angels , if you are truthful ?
no indeed ! but they do not fear the hereafter .
so wait patiently for the judgement of your lord , for you are before our eyes . and celebrate the praise of your lord when you rise ,
for them are glad tidings in this life and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme success .
his companion will say , ‘ our lord ! i did not incite him to rebel , but he wasin extreme error . ’
on the day when it comes , no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and others blessed .
and forgive my father ; for he is one of the misguided ;
most surely the nearest of men to ibrahim are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . allah is the guardian of the believers .
when we will something to happen , all that we say is , be ! and it is .
and those whom they invoke besides allah do not create anything but are themselves created .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
when the savage beasts shall be brought together ,
they had already desired dissension before and had upset matters for you until the truth came and the decree of god appeared , though they were averse .
and that his effort is going to be seen -
and the wordwill be decided that the last day will be that when you are mature , and then , if you were to be inclined , they eat and give them no increase in the way that may be trusted ; and if any do , they make a mistake , and those who are quarrelsome will be in the way of allah , and allah is sufficient as a reckoner .
surely those who believe and do the right will have a continuing reward .
and to allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth of creatures , and the angels , and they are not proud .
arespite will i grant them : truly powerful is my plan .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book , that haply they may be guided .
so these are their houses fallen down because they were unjust , in this there is evidencefor the people of knowledge .
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
what is the matter with you that the hypocrites should have considered the mates of two ? why did you not have any faith in god , for which he has led them astray ? god will not guide the path .
o ye who believe ! obey allah and obey the apostle , and render not your works vain .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , when a party of them used to hear the word of allah and then distort it after they had understood it !
and call not on the prophet as a voice , but allah is aware of that which they say , and verily , allah is knowing of that which they are working .
and when we desire to destroy a town we command its affluent ones , and they commit ungodliness therein , then the word becomes realized against it , and we destroy it utterly .
he said , “ this is what your own hands have sent before , will you be able to dispute with allah ? ” he will say , “ what is the matter with you that they do not have any faith in you ? indeed , i too am waiting with you , and i do not have been waiting with you . ”
say : o my people ! act according to your ability ; i am acting ; and soon you will know
they will say : we stayed a day or part of a day ; ask those who keep count .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
alif . lam . mim .
and every soul came , along with a herder and a witness .
but those whose scales are light - those are the ones who have lost their souls , in hell , abiding eternally .
a guidance and mercy for the righteous
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be lost .
save those who believe and do good works , and remember allah much , and vindicate themselves after they have been wronged . those who do wrong will come to know by what overturning they will be overturned .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord fears neither loss , nor burden .
why did not the believers , men and women , when you heard it , think well of their own people , and say , “ this is an obvious lie ? ”
so the angels called out to him when the angels called out to him , saying , ‘ indeed allah gives you the glad tidings of a son , and the advice of allah is the most honourable , the most honourable . ’
reclining upon couches lined with brocade , and the fruits of the gardens shall be near at hand .
he said , “ the one who came with an open time , then there is no doubt that the kingdom of this world will be , and the tradition of the person will be given to them , and they will be blamed . ”
save the one who turns away and disbelieves
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and to him belongs the enduring religion . will you , then , fear anyone other than god ?
he said , “ my lord , i have control over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people . ”
white , delicious to those who drink .
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary ! ’
andconfirming what was before me of the torah , and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you . and i have come to you with a sign from your lord , so fear allah and obey me .
and what will make you comprehend what the uphill road is ?
on their account no responsibility falls on the righteous , butis to remind them , that they mayfear allah .
that is because god -- he is the truth , and that they call upon apart from him -- that is the false ; and because god is the high , the great .
and recall what time musa said unto his people : o my people ! lo ! ye have been wont to worship the calf in whom ye have gone . then turn to your tracks , and let them know that ye were one of the believers .
have the unbelievers been repaid for what they used to do ?
they will not hear therein ill speech or commission of sin -
we favoured david with excellence , : “ o mountains and birds , sing god 's praise with him ” ; and we softened for him iron ,
honourablel scribes .
fight them until there is nofitnah andworship isfor allah . but if they desist , then there is to be no aggression except against the oppressors .
or to the indigentin the dust .
by the soul and him who perfected it
corruption has appeared on land and sea , because of what people ’ s hands have earned , in order to make them taste some of what they have done , in order that they may return .
indeed , those who dispute in respect of him , do not dispute with him as a sign , but they are speaking to allah in secret , and without delay . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
you will not be able to address of your servants to be of those who are given thanks . but if you are doing so , then do not be one of those who are willing to do so . but if you do so , then be conscious of god , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
when we sent to them two messengers , they belied them both , so we strengthened them with a third , and they said , “ indeed we have been sent towards you . ”
so remember me , i will remember you . give thanks to me and do not be ungrateful .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
until you visit the graves .
set not up with allah any other godlest thou sit down reproved , forsaken .
and inform them that the water is to be shared between them , eachdrink attended .
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
and the wife of fir'aunsaid : a comfort of the eye for me and for you . do not kill him . maybe he will benefit us , or we may adopt him as a son . and they perceived not .
we sent messengers to communities before you , and we seized them with misery and hardship so that they might humble themselves .
but we saved him and all who were in the ark , and made it a sign for the worlds .
those who have made their wealth and their lives follow their own soul , and have attained to their homes , - those who have emigrated and have done what they have left , will be in their heart , and the same will be in their hearts , but those who have remained in their heart , will be successful .
they will desire to come forth from the fire , but they shall not leave it , and theirs shall be a torment lasting .
when you look around , you will see serenity and a great kingdom .
o moses ! we have indeed made you inhabit the land in the land , and do not follow the truth . and do not follow the whims of the unwise . for them is a painful punishment .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against allah . they are the dwellers of the fire , and there they will abide for ever .
the time of reckoning has drawn near for mankind , yet they are disregardful inobliviousness .
he said : have you seenthose whom you have been worshipping ,
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the universe .
that is he who repulses the orphan ,
is it not a sign to them that the learned men of the israelites know it ?
he is allah in the heavens and in the earth ; he knows your secret and your overt , and he knows what you earn .
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and not one of you could have held us off from him .
so we took vengeance on them . both are still on the highway , plain to see .
and heaped therein mischief .
and his hosts of the jinn and the men and the birds were gathered to him , and they were formed into groups .
has the reminder been sent down to himfrom among us ? nay ! but they are in doubt concerning my reminder ! nay , but they have not yet tasted my punishment !
indeed , this was the clear trial .
god knows best your enemies . god is sufficient as a guardian , and god is sufficient as a supporter .
if we had revealed it to a nonarab ,
is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like him who is blind ? only those possessed of minds remember ,
we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
indeed , we sent messengers before you , and some of them we gave to you , and some of whom we have not made a messenger . and when the command of allah was of no effect to him , he would have surely been of those who were given knowledge ; and when the command of allah is fulfilled , they would surely have been able to do so .
and by the day when it dawns ,
o ye who believe ! be not like unto those who annoyed musa ; but allah cleared him of that which they said , and he was in the sight of allah high .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book : 'you shall corrupt the earth twice , and you shall ascend exceedingly high '
full of various trees .
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks . and we will couple them with gorgeous spouses .
if there be a party of the women of the youth , their friend would be of no avail to them , and the same applies to them is a good act . but if you do good , they will not be able to act aright , for god is aware of the things you do .
in the will of their lord , there will be a garden of eden , beneath which rivers flow . they will abide in it for ever . and they will be made to accept from the most repentant lord .
samood gave the liein their inordinacy ,
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire , where they will have their permanent home , as punishment for denying our revelations .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
whoever desires the tillage of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the harvest of this world , we give him some of it , and in the hereafter he will have no share .
and of them there are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire !
they know an outward part of the present life , but of the hereafter they are heedless .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission might be granted them , and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home ; a painful chastisement shall afflict those of them that disbelieve .
when there covered the lote tree what covered it .
except iblis ; he refused to be among those who prostrated .
let anyone who seeks guidance do so .
he said , “ what you used to do to do so , when you considered joseph 's brothers , they said , ‘ we will not be able to change any way of you , ’ he said , “ this is what is said , and i am the one of the truthful . ”
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us in the evening and in the morning .
the best of what i have been given , the best of the two people , have the same seats and the same applies to their father . your lord has given you all the same as a favor from him and a majestic and all-merciful person .
say , do you indeed disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and attribute to him equals ? that is the lord of the worlds .
by thesent forth one after another ;
and it will be said to them : where are thosethat you used to worship
indeed , those who have believed , migrated , and striven for the cause of allah in their wealth and their lives , - it is those who are the heirs of their own souls , and those who have accepted their faith , - they will not be able to make a covenant with you , except for the cause of allah . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
of jinn and men .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did ,
beside him . so plot against me all together , and then give me no respite .
musa said : say ye this of the truth when it hath come unto you ? is this magic ? but the magicians fare not well .
and of the people is he whose measure of me is that they should keep others away from him , and that he may make a way to him who is guided by the way of allah , to make it crooked , and that he may be of the cheats .
who taught by the pen ,
those against whom the word will be realised will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we led them astray as we ourselves were astray . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped .
taught man what he did not know .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty people .
they did not forbid one another from the wrongdoing they were committing . evil indeed were their deeds .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set between them a barrier and a complete partition .
and that they say what they do not do ?
every man that day shall have business to suffice him .
and they will say , “ purity is to you ! – purity is to you ! – we do not worship you except for you , or do something , except for your own sake . you were only a herald of warning . ”
over every soul there is a watcher .
and that they say what they do not do ?
lo ! those who believe and do good works , their lord guideth them by their faith . rivers will flow beneath them in the gardens of delight .
and the companions of the two kinds of the two animals is in the case of one another ; say , “ what is on the contrary of one that is forbidden ? ” say , “ if you are truthful , what is the matter with you , if you are truthful ? ”
the unbelievers said to their messengers , “ we will expel you from our land , unless you return to our religion. ” but their lord revealed to them : “ we will destroy the wrongdoers ,
and those who are jews will be divided into the jews . they will say , ‘ we hear and we obey. ’ so do not be of the doubters . and if they do not , then say , ‘ we have heard you , so that they may not be able to give us any usage . but if they do not , then , indeed , we will not be deprived of it . ’
andthe day when we shall gather from every nation a troop of those who denied our signs , and they shall be brought ,
allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn away from them , and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words in their affairs .
and that which is revealed to you of the qur'an is a little , and to establish prayer , and to establish prayer ; surely the prayer is of allah 's prayer , and he is the knowing of what you do .
had it not been for the grace of god and his mercy on you in this world and the hereafter , a terrible punishment would have afflicted you for your plunging headlong into slander .
and then they speed with foremost speed .
so they are those who have rejected the command of his people , and said , “ this is what one does not want to be any one , if god wills , and we are the senders ” ; and we have not been recording it .
save that which allah willeth . lo ! he knoweth the disclosed and that which still is hidden .
moses asked aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then surely allah has prepared for the doers of good among you a mighty reward .
and he brought down those of the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you killed and others you took captive .
even if every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients passed away .
but when the deafening blast is sounded ,
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and refuse charity .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah , the fire , where they will have their permanent home , as punishment for denying our revelations .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
they both submitted , “ our lord ! we fear he may commit excesses against us , or exceed all bounds in transgression . ”
the people of the town who were arrogant will be told of the people of the right hand , the best of what we had granted to the people of the book on account of the truth that had been given to the children of judgment . we wanted to be their sinful people .
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
and the trumpet shall be blown , and lo ! from the tombs unto their lord they shall be hastening .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said , if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall certainly be lost .
what ! do you then call upon any other than that of which he calls . when he calls on his heels , he turns away from them in the land , so will you take admonition in the land ? is it a little for you to take heed ?
do they feel secure against god 's devising ? no one feels secure from god ’ s devising except the people who are lost .
he is the supreme over his servants . he is the wise , the expert .
which none but sinners eat .
the people of noah denied before them , andthe people of rass and thamud ,
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
say thou : verily i am wont to my lord that ye may have no faith in me ; and his is the decision ; and his is the command , and he will be the best of rulers .
what has created for them from allah , the food of the food and the cattle , and they say , ‘ this is allah ’ s pleasure ? ’ and what they have fabricated is allah ’ s precedent , and for them is a great outcome .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may remember .
they also said to the other people : 'what , has your messenger come to you without clear signs ' they will say , 'no , but the angels ' they will say , 'no , but the angels shall be questioned '
and in order that they may be told , our lord ! the most gracious ! glory be to thee ! the most beneficent ! in the presence of the compassionate they will say : our lord ! surely he is the lord of the worlds .
a lying , sinful forelock .
they disbelieved in it before and indulged in conjectures from far away .
then your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would inflict terrible suffering on them . your lord is swift in retribution , yet he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
abiding therein forever . and wretched is their burden on the day of resurrection ,
and by the day when it dawns ,
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
and keep away from ar-rujz !
when we are dead and turned to dust , this returningis most far-fetched .
then paradise is the shelter .
who are lost in deception .
can he who has created not know ? he is all-penetrating , all-aware .
and those who guard their private parts
and among us are the righteous , and some of us are otherwise ; we are sects differing .
and the two seas are not equal , nor are they made to be a water of water . and they have the same to drink , and the same will be the same for them , so that you may see the like of their deeds , so that you may be grateful .
and if we had sent down the book with a sign , the unbelievers would have said , is it not plain to us to make clear the message ? say , is it not a clear message for those who believe not ?
had they believed and been righteous , a recompense from god would have been better , if they only knew .
god is too glorious to be described as they describe him
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate ,
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate to the sun and the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you worship .
and it is not for any thing that we should have sent a sign to them , that we may be a sign to them , except that they were in a way that they have been given ; but we did destroy them , and most surely we did not destroy them , and we are not to be outmaneuvered .
ishmael , elisha , jonah , and lot -- we favoured each one of them above other people ,
and when mankind are gathered , theywill become enemies for them and will deny their worshipping .
man was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not impatiently urge me .
while the hereafter is better and more enduring .
say , the truth has come , and falsehood can neither beginnor repeat .
so let man consider of what he was created .
say thou : whosoever is in the way of allah , in the life to come , he shall make it up , when they are present , or the doom of the hereafter is the severest of the abode . and they are the ones that are victorious .
indeed the virtuous are in serenity .
indeed he saw some of the greatest signs of his lord .
every soul has a creature who has been given to god 's mother , and his offspring , to prevent them from his father . god is aware of all things .
but whosoever turns away from my remembrance , his shall be a straitened life , and we shall raise him blind on the day of resurrection . '
do you see any remnants of them ?
and how many a city was stronger than your citywhich drove you out ? we destroyed them , and there was no helper for them .
when the signs of allah came to them , they said , “ this is what they are going to do . ” but the fact that they had already sought to be victorious in the way of allah , and then they called him a liar . so , when they have rejected the truth , they called him a liar .
in a lofty garden ,
verily , this my brotherhas ninety nine ewes , and i have one ewe ; and he said : entrust it to me , and he conquered me in speech .
yet they were not sent as guardians over them .
do the people of the towns feel secure that our might will not come upon them at night while they are asleep ?
we did not sendbefore you except as men to whom we revealed . ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
so exaltwith praise of your lord and be of those who prostrate .
thus do we explain the ayatin detail , so that they may return .
and if you disbelieve , surely allah is not able to assist you , and he will not be pleased with the regard of his servants . then , if the favour of your disbelief is to be accepted , then it is to be accepted from your lord , and he is the best of accountants .
when our revelations are recited to him , he says , 'fairy-tales of the ancients ! '
they said : you are only humans like ourselves . the merciful has not sent down anything , you are only lying .
we gave david and solomon knowledge . they said , praise be to god who has favoured us above many of his believing servants .
remember , , when we said to them , “ your lord is able to do all that he has given you , and that you may have a lot of the like of these people . we do not want to give you any usage , but they are a great advisor .
there is a party of them who preached the signs of their own people , so that they may know what they say , so that they may know that the book has been given to them , and they can not know what god has revealed to you . they can not invent lies about god .
and reckon not those who are slain in allah 's way as dead ; nay , they are alive , and with their lord , provided
and we rained upon them a rain . miserable was the rain of those forewarned .
and in a covenant with which allah 's covenant were to be fulfilled , and a covenant with you was realized after it had been sent down upon you , as you were allah ’ s command , and allah is aware of what you do .
andibrahim , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him . that is best for you , if you but knew .
murmuring among themselves : ye have tarried but ten .
so no intercession will avail them .
does man think that he will be left uncontrolled , ?
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
taste thou ! truly wast thou mighty , full of honour !
and that our forces , - they surely must conquer .
it is he who has made the earth a bed for you and made you live as a cloud . the heavens and the earth will be sent down to you , so that you may have the means of god , so that you may have a means of sustenance .
so leave them alone until they meet their day in which they will be struck insensible -
and we revealed unto musa saying : go by night with my bondmen verily ye shall be pursued .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for leavefrom waging jihad with their possessions and their lives . and allah is all-knower of the pious .
most surely the nearest of men to ibrahim are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . allah is the guardian of the believers .
and when the children among you reach puberty , let them ask permission , as those before them asked leave . thus does allah make clear to you his communications ; and allah is knowing , wise .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; then whenever guidance comes to you from me , whoever follows my guidance , there shall be no fear upon them , nor shall they grieve .
so those who believe in allah and hold fast to him - he will admit them to mercy from himself and bounty and guide them to himself by a straight path .
by god , we sentto nations before you , but satan made their deeds appear alluring to them . he is their guardian today , and they will have a painful punishment .
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
what is the matter with you , that you should tell them that it is the best of you ? we can speak to them in the same way , so that you may explain the same to us in the cave , if you would be hasty .
we have explainedin variousin this qur'an , in order that they may receive admonition , but it only increases their flight .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he reaches maturity . and keep your promise . indeed , the commitment is everquestioned .
we created man from an extract of clay .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
the faithful spirit has brought it down
they even solicited of him his guests , whereat we blotted out their eyes , “ taste my punishment and my warnings . ”
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , so that there be no escape for them ?
how ? if they prevail against you they will respect neither kinship nor treaty . they satisfy you with their tongues , but their hearts refuse , and most of them are wicked .
that is because you took the verses of allah for a joke and the worldly life deceived you . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be suffered to make amends .
and mention in the book , ishmael ; he too was true to his promise , a messenger and a prophet .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight ye against the friends of satan . lo ! the devil 's strategy is ever weak .
the disbelievers will ardently wish that if only they had been muslims !
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
say : nothing will befall us except what allah has decreed for us ; he is our protector . and upon allah let the believers rely .
when he said unto his father and his folk : what are these images unto which ye pay devotion ?
and all those who are on the earth , to save himself .
so fear god , and obey me .
and ye know that the messenger of allah hath gone forth for you , if ye are being seduced , and allah hath misled them from your faith , and that they may have faith in the wrath of allah , and they are the infidels .
and they shall be the ones who repent , and are obedient to them , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and bow in good works , and give good tidings to the worlds .
we know those of you who press forward , and we know the laggards ,
we sent it down during a blessed night . we are ever warning .
of the story of the people of the book is a sign , in the book . it is in a way that is clear to the law , so that the law of the unseen may be in the hands of god , and they said , “ it is god who knows all the secrets that are hidden . ”
and noah had certainly called us , andthe best of responders .
and we taught him the fashioning of garments for you , to fortify you against your violence ; then are you thankful ?
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
what , is he whose aim is to be the kingdom of every soul , and with him is the kingdom of those who have chosen their religion , and say , “ the idols are in the way of god , so that you may not have any faith in the earth , or the right path of god ? ” in fact , he is the people who have no power to do so .
by god , i shall devise a plan against your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs .
it is allah , there is no god but he . and he is the exalted in might , the owner of the throne , the most high .
they will say : our lord ! whoever brought this upon us - add to him a double penalty in the fire !
and that i had never realised how my account !
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
god has never begotten a son , nor is there any god besides him . otherwise , each god would have taken away what he created , and some of them would have gained supremacy over others . god is too exalted to be considered equal to anything else .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in god 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles . he said , i am the messenger of the lord of the universe .
and verily , men and women who are believers , men and women , and the women of pure islamic monotheism , are the women of allah , men and women alike , and the men and women alike , and the men and women who are innocent of allah , and of the pure , and of a great bounty .
an efreet of the jinns said , “ i will bring it to you before you rise from your place . i am strong and trustworthy enough to do it . ”
even if every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
save single-minded slaves of allah .
he said , “ therefore if you follow me , do not ask me about anything until i myself mention it to you . ”
that is the bounty of allah , which he bestows on whom he wills . and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
and verily , thisis a revelation from the lord of the 'alamin ,
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , but know that you can not escape allah and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or take you away , their return will be to us , and god will witness the things they do .
and indeed hesaw him ] at a second descent .
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers of old .
but deniedand turned away ,
these are the ones upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah has set a seal . they are the heedless .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and the jinn and the hypocrites , and allah has created them , and allah is the doer of all that they do .
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true upon the disbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ;
those whom they call upon are themselves seeking means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
and the mountains , how they are firmly fixed ,
he said : did i not tell you that with me you would never be able to have patience ?
have they handed downas an heirloom one unto another ? nay , but they are froward folk .
and verily yunus was of the sent ones .
god does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought against you on account of religion and did not expel you from your homes . god loves the just .
those who have knowledge of the knowledge have come to you , they said , ‘ woe to you ! ’ and it is only for you to have faith in the truth , and those who are patient will not have any faith , except those who are patient .
then , after them , we created another generation .
and they assign a share of that which we have provided them for what they do not know . by allah , you will surely be questioned about that which you used to fabricate .
thereat they were vanquished , and they retreated , humiliated .
our torment seek they to hasten on !
master of the day of judgment .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give the angels the names of females .
your lord has not forsaken you , nor does he hate you .
hast thou not turned thy vision to him who is with abraham , to be one of his lord ? he said : it is he who hath given me the power of his lord . and he said : the lord of the sun will be the way of enlightenment unto him . and allah guideth not the people who are zalimun .
o my people ! enter the holy land which allah has ordained for you , and turn not backfor then you will be turned back losers .
and there is no blame on you when you are in the morning of your lord ’ s mercy , and if they are to be guided , then remember allah , as he has guided you , for you have strayed before this , and you have gone astray .
and moses said : my lord knows best who comes with guidance from him , and for whom is the guerdon of paradise . indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and on that day , we will strike them up as you like , or leave them as a torch . so the day when the trumpet will be split , they will all be brought together .
then if they are patient , the fire is their home ; and if they ask for goodwill , yet they are not of those who are allowed to please allah .
indeed , he did not show you any sign , and indeed the way of allah is a sign for them ; so he said , ‘ allah will surely never destroy the creed of a noble messenger , until he has led you to the way of allah , and thus does allah go astray . ’
except himthat gains hearing by stealing , he is pursued by a clear flaming fire .
to god belong the end and the beginning .
and the commandment of their deeds was such that they should be true to allah , and obey him , and accept faith in him , and give charity ; and this is the religion of allah , the upright , and those who are true .
indeed they are devising a stratagem ,
that is because they say : the fire will not touch us save for a few days numbered . and that which they used to invent regarding their religion has deceived them .
and in the sight of those who are averse to their hearts they are hastening on to themselves , and say , “ we may strike an ill omen from them , and perhaps they may go about in the same way . perhaps they will come to belief in their minds ,
then he proportioned him , and breathed into him of his spirit , and gave you hearing , sightand hearts . little thanks you give .
and mention in the book , ishmael ; he too was true to his promise , a messenger and a prophet .
say : whose is the earth and whosoever is therein ? if you know !
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
how many were the gardens and springs they left behind ,
and your lord says : call upon me ; i will respond to you . indeed , those who disdain my worship will enter hell , disgraced .
he said , ‘ our lord is he who gave everything its creation , then guided it . ’
so they denied them and were of those destroyed .
they said , “ o nooh , you have disputed with us and disputed in the extreme , therefore bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
they will swear to you that you may be pleased with them . but if you are pleased with them , god is not pleased with the sinful people .
by no means ! we shall write down what he says and prolong the length of his punishment .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
who divert themselves with idle chatter :
do you feel secure that it is in the future of the unseen that you do what is fully known to god ? and when you have done so , perform god and his messenger , and obey god and his messenger ; and god is aware of the things you do .
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
god knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
who collects wealth andcounts it .
and this qur'an is such that it could not be composed by any other than allah . it is a confirmation of what was before it and a detailed exposition of the book . there is no doubt that it is from the lord of the worlds .
and whatever you give in usury , in order that it may increase the creditors ’ property , will not increase with allah ; but what you give in charity , desiring allah ’ s approval—these are the multipliers .
they will say , “ you yourselves were not believers .
when the oceans are exploded .
and if it had been our will , we could have sent down all that is revealed to you , and would be in the hearts of that which we have sent down , and then you will not be able to give the heed .
verily , he is the allknower of you , and that of which you have no knowledge ; and for you there will be no one to protect you from that which they have ruined . then , as for those who have turned away from you , they will have a reward in the gardens with which rivers flow , and they will have a reward of what they used to do .
honourablel scribes .
certainprecedents have passed before you . so travel through the land and see what was the end of those who rejected the truth .
and it will be said to them : where are thosethat you used to worship
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
so allah rewarded them for what they said with gardensbeneath which rivers flow , wherein they abide eternally . and that is the reward of the virtuous .
for you there is some of the cattle that you have to take to hold in , and some of them they ride , and some of them to eat and eat of some of what allah has given you . indeed , he is to you a clear enemy .
and that our forces , - they surely must conquer .
your lord knows best who strays from his way , and he knows best the guided ones .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , and the embellishments of birds on what people have been given by god , and what they have been given to do , you will be well aware of the things they have done , so that you may be successful .
and of the best of the voices is that of the best , those who are in error , and those who are left in their homes - such are the inheritors of allah , and they are the truthful .
but if they turn away , say , “ god is enough for me ; there is no god except he . in him i have put my trust , and he is the lord of the great throne . ”
had it not been for the grace of god and his mercy on you in this world and the hereafter , a terrible punishment would have afflicted you for your plunging headlong into slander .
mary , be obedient to your lord , prostrate and bow with those who bow . '
and blest be he unto whom belongeth the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in-between the twain , and with him is knowledge of the hour , and unto him ye will be brought back .
or to the indigentin the dust .
two of the two legs , each one of the two other , and he made a mistake . one of them said , i have seen you , and i see the things you have been working . we can see that you are well aware of the interpretation of the interpretation we have given you , and the samiri may well see .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , and barter not my revelations for a small price , and me alone should ye fear .
nay , man shall be a clear proof against himself ,
and that you should serve me ? this is a straight path .
if you turn your back , i do not ask any reward from you ; my reward lies only with allah and i have been commanded to be of those who submit . ’
have they not seen that we drive the water to the barren land and produce therewith crops whereof their cattle and they themselves eat ? will they not then see ?
how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a severe account and punished it with a horrible punishment .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set between them a barrier and a complete partition .
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and beverage .
they will question thee concerning the mountains . say : 'my lord will scatter them as ashes
on that day , the herding will be only towards your lord .
that is jesus , son of mary—the word of truth about which they doubt .
why do you not fight for the cause of god even asto a weak tree , and men , and women , lord , give us a guardian and a helper ?
and in thamud , when they were told , ‘ enjoy for a while . ’
and by the dawn when it breathes
that is the bounty from allah , and sufficient is allah as knower .
that is because allah causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter into the night , and because allah is hearing , seeing .
we forbade him breastfeeding at first , so she said : shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
and when the hearts of them are averse to others , and are the ones in the sun , and the sun , and the moon , the sun and the moon were not set in front of them ; and if you do not , then make a separation between them ; indeed , allah is the lord of the merciful .
o you who have faith ! do not be in doubt of what is in your doubt , and some of you are suspicious and doubt , and argue in a state of blame . what ! do you not fear that allah will be the most acceptor of repentance ? so fear allah ; indeed allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
when he had furnished them with their provisions , he said , bring me a brother of yours from your father . do you not see that i give full measure and that i am the best of hosts ?
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and we gave them refuge on a height , a place of flocks and watersprings .
alif-lam-ra.knows the teachings of the quran , there is a population of the quran , that it may be a source of example , to the law of the law , and to the law of the quran , they will say , it is god who knows all the secrets that are in the presence of god .
by the moon ,
we have created maidens perfectly
and from among the people , there is no one but one of them ; but one of them is just one religion ; so among them is one religion , and in the differences of your lord , it is the proper justice .
and verily , they have been in an evil way of ibrahim , and in the case of ibrahim ; and he will make them realise for the sake of those who turn away from the path of allah , and he is the free of all wants for the path of allah .
they said , o shu'ayb , does your prayer command you that we should abandon what our fathers worshipped or that we should not do what we like with our property ? indeed you are the forbearing , the right-directing one .
o ye who believe ! obey the command of allah and to witness your mother , and have faith in you , and that they may be of the associators , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and that allah may know best what you do .
and ease my task for me ;
because he thinks himself self-sufficient :
in scorching wind and scalding water
eat and pasture your cattle ; most surely there are signs in this for those endowed with understanding .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
which of your lord 's benefits will you then dispute about ?
is there in this an oath for a mindful man ?
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he is over all things competent -
the worst of beasts in god 's sight are the deaf and dumb—those who do not reason .
had they believed and been righteous , a recompense from god would have been better , if they only knew .
call to the way of your lord with wisdom and good advice and dispute with them in a manner that is best . indeed your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
he created the heavens and the earth with justice . he is exalted above the associations they attribute .
who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the signs of his lord , and he turns away from it ? indeed , we have set a seal on their hearts , and if they do not bring you to guidance , they will not be able to guide it .
until when we seize the decadent among them with torment , they begin to groan .
she said : o chiefs ! advise me in this matter of mine . i decide no case till you are present with me .
o ye wives of the prophet ! whosoever of you committeth manifest lewdness , the punishment for her will be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
and had he not been of those who hallow him ,
on the day when the sky whirls violently ,
so be patient , as the prophets , and the prophets , and the prophets , with their own hands , and be not active , on the day when the messengers are given to it , and when they are threatened with the truth , it is the same for the sinners .
o prophet , we have made you lawful and good things , and the women of the world to make things pleasing to you ; and the adulteress and the women -- and the fornicatress -- and the women -- and the adulteress -- and the adulteress -- he shall surely be of those who make a taste of it , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
“ our lord ! do not deviate our hearts after you have guided us , and bestow upon us mercy from yourself ; indeed you only are the great bestower . ”
those who are bent on denying the truth , those who are bent on denying the truth , who are bent on denying the truth , have no share of god 's cause . they will be given only one of the faithful in the way of god . they will suffer a painful torment .
you cause the night to pass into the day , and the day into the night . you bring forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . you provide without measure for whomever you want .
and allah said , o eisa , remember my son , the favor that i have bestowed upon you . when i have sent down to you the angel of this qur ’ an , then i started to give you the salvation , and the tauratand the injeel , and the tauratand the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , i have no
friends on that day will be foes one to another except al-muttaqun .
and when it comes to pass , we let loose the gates of all things , so that they might be well aware of what they had been doing with , and we put them in awe , and they were silent and degraded .
the appointed time of your family will be given to you , if only the people of the past had been given to your women . if the children of israel were to be given settlement , it would have been decided for your parents and no one wanted to be your families . this would be a nearby man , but if you were to die , they could have a strap in the same state .
and whomsoever allah guides , for him there will be no misleader . is not allah all-mighty , possessor of retribution ?
will they not then meditate on the qur'an , or are there locks upon their hearts ?
its spathes are like the heads of satans
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! but signs and warnings avail not those who will not believe .
those are they whom allah has favoured for you , and those who were with him , and those with whom we had bestowed the divine guidance and the injeel , and the descendants of allah , when they are recited to them , and he will make them prostrate .
it is he who has created for youhearing , sight , and hearts . little do you thank .
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands worked it not . will they not then be grateful ?
o ye who believe ! be careful ofallah and keep your duty unto him , and expend ye not for the good , except that which is given unto you , save the little of that which is reputable for you . lo ! allah enjoineth as knower .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
o ye who believe ! obey the command of allah and to witness your mother , and have faith in you , and that they may be of the associators , and the injeel , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and that allah may know best what you do .
he said : i am in truth certain of famine for the sake of a few years from the mud . on that day , there will be a heap of farm water for them , if only you see .
and we do not delay it except for a limited term .
then bringour forefathers , if what ye say is true !
but he has not attempted the ascent .
we have revealed to you the book with the truth ; so worship god , devoting your religion to him .
for him that gives and fears
“ you lust after men rather than women . you are an excessive people . ”
they sought to outwit him , but we made them the worst losers .
we will brand him on the nose .
nor are darkness and light
he said , “ o moosa , you have been granted your prayer . ”
of him seeksevery creature in the heavens and on earth : every day insplendour doth he !
so he threw it down , and thereupon it turned into a sliding serpent .
enter thou my paradise ! '
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
indeed the noble messengers had impugned before you ; so they were seized by the fire , and there came to them the outcome of that which they had not to come to pass , and there came to them the noble messengers , and they were not aware of allah ’ s commands .
and preferred the life of this world ,
and a tree that grows on mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
and the two seas are not equal , nor are they made to be a water of water . and they have the same to drink , and the same will be the same for them , so that you may see the like of their deeds , so that you may be grateful .
so allah saved them from that day ’ s ills and graced them with freshnessand joy .
then after that we pardoned you so that you might be grateful .
you are not a dictator over them .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and have faith in the messenger to his messenger , that you may give a double reward and light from the heavens and the light to your light ; for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
he is allah , there is no god but he , the living , the self-subsisting , the eternal . he is the subtle , the knower .
on that day the heavens shall become like molten brass ,
and those who guard their private parts
all that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies god , the king , the all-holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
who giveshis wealth to purify himself
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes to itself a house ; surely the spider 's house is the weakest house , if only they knew !
he said , “ shall i trust you with him , as i trusted you with his brother before ? but allah is the best guardian , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of doing so . but man carried it . surely he is unjust , ignorant .
every soul has a creature who has been given to god 's mother , and his offspring , to prevent them from his father . god is aware of all things .
orit say when it sees the punishment , if only i had another chancethen i should indeed be among the doers of good .
as if they were eggs , safely hidden .
lo ! verily it is they who are the corrupters , but they perceive not .
“ you lust after men rather than women . you are an excessive people . ”
and upraised couches .
and when their riches are , they will not be affected by their wealth , and their wealth will not be lightened for them , and we shall add to them a mild provision , and it is only for us to do so . and it is only a brief bargain , and we are not interested in respect of it . and it is only a brief bargain .
with them will be attendants with modest gaze , of same age .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of rectitude .
and all things have we preserved on record .
those who like to publicize indecency among the believers will face painful torment in this world and in the life to come . god knows , and you do not know .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it , and they rejoice in the worldly life , whereas the worldly life is not compared to the hereafter , but compared with the hereafter .
indeed they did not expect any reckoning ,
you shall be divided into three groups .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , even as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
the virtuous will surely be in bliss ,
that allah may forgive thee thy faults of the past and those that follow thee , and may perfect his favour unto thee , and may guide thee on a straight path ,
do you feel secure that he will not cause the shore to swallow you up , or loose a deadly whirlwind with stones of pebbles you will not find any guardian ?
and assuredly , that which ye call upon before is unto the owner of that which ye call not , and in the world to come we shall not call ; and that which is in the presence of allah , we shall surely be the winners .
yet is the wage of the world to come better for those who believe and are godfearing .
or do they benefit you , or do they harm ?
until when they come to it , their ears and their eyes and their skins will testify against them as to what they used to do .
and we have not attached to any one of them except the master of the faculty of his own soul ; and whoever does good , it is only for his own good ; and we have not been remiss in respect of it ; and we have been remiss in respect of the unbelievers . and we have said to them , “ be it on a part of the unbelievers ; and we have not been remiss in maintaining it – and so do not be a skeptic , and it is for you to do the same
so neither you nor those you worship
and i have been sent by a messenger to you , that i am sent by you , a sign to you from your lord . i will bring you the signs from your lord , the dead and the dead ; and we are in a blaze .
only he should tend the mosques of allah who believes in allah and the last day , and is constant in prayer , and spends in charity , and stands in awe of none but allah ; it may be that those are among the guided .
and abraham left this legacy to his sons , and also did jacob , saying : o my sons ! surely allah has chosen for you the religion , so die not except in the faith of islam .
and when he saw that a creature was cast out of the land , they forgot the fire , and turned away , and turned away from them , and said : why are you not going to be able to do so ?
and what will show you what is the night of ordainment ?
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds appear good to them , so they wander blindly .
o ye who believe ! be careful ofallah and keep your duty unto him , and expend ye not for the good , except that which is given unto you , save the little of that which is reputable for you . lo ! allah enjoineth as knower .
the gates of heaven shall not be opened for those who reject our signs as false and turn away from them in arrogance , nor shall they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we reward the guilty ones .
anddavid and solomon when they gave judgement concerning the field when the sheep of some people strayed into it by night , and we were witness to their judgement .
every man that day shall have business to suffice him .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be sorry , and it will be said : this is that which ye used to call for .
the unbelievers must not think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite only for them to further advance in their sins . they will suffer a humiliating torment .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed till after him ? do you not understand ?
the promise of allah ! allah faileth not his promise , but most men know not .
he will send you abundant
therefore remind , you are only a reminder .
whoever brings a good deed will have better than it , and they will be safe from the terror on that day .
the people of lot rejected our warnings .
moses felt afraid within himself .
on that day none shall punish as he punishes ,
“ today , none of you has the power to profit or harm one another ; and we shall say to the unjust , ‘ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny ! ’
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
until , when he reachedbetween two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
taste thou ! truly wast thou mighty , full of honour !
“ i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides ; then i will crucify you all . ”
it is he who sends down splendent revelations to his servant that he may take you out of darkness into light . god is compassionate and all-merciful to you .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no other god but him . will ye not ward off ?
my lord ! vouchsafe me wisdom and unite me to the righteous .
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardon an offense - indeed , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
i have put my trust in god , my lord and your lord . there is no living creature which he does not hold by its forelock . my lord is on the straight path .
o ye who believe ! take not for yourselves a thing to be asked of it , and let them make provision for you , save that which is in your hands , and let them make provision for you , save that which ye have been given . and if ye think that ye are free of , know that allah is not a forgetter .
they sought to outwit him , but we made them the worst losers .
you were longing for death before you met it ; now you have seen it with your own eyes .
eat of the things which allah has provided for you , lawful and good , and fear allah in whom you believe .
and constructed above you seven strong
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in god 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
by the star when it setteth ,
who will make me die , then give me life again ,
has the story of moses reached you ?
and those who fulfil their trusts and their covenants ,
and be patient thou ; verily allah wasteth not the hire of the welldoers .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the way of rectitude .
as for those who are guided , he increases their guidance and gives them their protection .
to free a neck ,
did he not find you wandering , and give you guidance ?
marked by thy lord forthe wanton .
and it is naught but a reminder unto all beings .
then he turned to the heaven , and it was smoke , and said to it and to the earth , “ come , willingly or unwillingly. ” they said , “ we come willingly . ”
have they not journeyed through the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them completely and the unbelievers will have the like of it .
and a cup overflowing .
those who are given the wealth of this world , do not seek to help relatives and to financial in the cause of god . do not forgive the needy and the destitute . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
we send not the angels down save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
every soul has a creature who has been given to god 's mother , and his offspring , to prevent them from his father . god is aware of all things .
as for those who have knowledge , know that it is the truth from the lord and that which is in your hands . it is the truth from the lord to those who believe .
our lord ! make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their wives and their offspring . lo ! thou , only thou , art the mighty , the wise .
say thou : verily man is a man like unto you , but it is that ye revealed unto me that allah is the one god ; so he who is an ilahbesides allah , then he shall be of no partners .
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , so he sent down tranquillity upon them and rewarded them with a victory near at hand
they will have sheets of fire above them and layers beneath them . that is how god frightens his servants . so fear me !
nor did the people of the book get divided until after the clear proof came to them .
or do they envy people for what allah has given them of his bounty ? but we have already given the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we have given them a great kingdom .
bring them back to me ' and he hacked their legs and necks .
have you not seen how those who dispute the signs of god are turned away ?
they said , “ you know that we have no right to your daughters , and you know well what we want . ”
the day when they rush out of their graves as if racing towards a signpost ,
is thatbetter entertainment or the tree of zaqqum ?
and whoever has turned away , then after faith has believed in allah , after accepting it , those who are bent on denying the truth and whose hearts are not given to disbelief , -
he said : did i not tell thee that thou couldst not bear with me ?
without making any allowance .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to something terrible .
then , after that , we sent grief to thee , that she should be a party of the believers , a party of them that was wont to say : “ what ! do we not bring down any thing upon you ? but it is the same for us , that you may have no knowledge of it , and the same is that you have done it , if only you may have any knowledge of it , and the same is that you have done it , if only you can see ? and it is
will have no power , and no helper .
and those who do not call upon another god with allah , nor slay the soul which allah has forbidden except by right , and do not commit adultery , and whoever does this shall receive punishment .
he said : grasp it and fear not ; we shall restore it to its former state .
then after that we pardoned you so that you might be grateful .
surely you are in different sayings ,
and we have created for them the like of it , in which they board .
say : 'it was he who scattered you on the earth , and to him you shall be mustered . '
who believe in the unseen , and perform the prayer , and spend out of what we have provided for them ;
and fight them until there is no more persecution and religion should be only for allah . but if they desist , then surely allah sees what they do .
and when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who subjected you to the worst of sufferings—killing your sons and sparing your women , and in that was a great trial from your lord .
on that day you will be exposed , and no secret of yours will remain hidden .
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you earn . and you will not be asked of what they used to do .
all that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies god , the king , the all-holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for some misfortune to befall you . theirs shall be the evil turn , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
he said : my lord knowethwordin the heavens and on earth : he is the one that heareth and knoweth .
the righteously striving believers are the best of all creatures .
nay , but unto him ye call , and he removeth that because of which ye call unto him , if he will , and ye will forget that which ye associate .
and of his signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm by his command ; then when he calls you with acall from the earth , immediately you will come forth .
when you leave the upper hand to come to you , they will ask you for help . ask them , do not be afraid , for god has the knowledge of all that you have done . he will then tell you what you have done .
yet man wants to deny what is ahead of him .
again , woe to you ! woe to you !
among thornless lote-trees
do they feel safe from god ’ s overwhelming punishment , or that the hour may not come upon them suddenly when they are unaware ?
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he is over all things competent -
can mislead anyone away from him ,
he said , “ do you believe in it before i have given you permission , before i have given you permission ? indeed , he is the all-creator , the all-knowing— you will certainly know that we have the power to do so and you will be pursued by a great deal .
and it is not for a believing man or a believing woman , when allah and his apostle have decreed a matter , that they should have any choice in their affair . and whoever disobeys allah and his apostle , he indeed strays with a manifest straying .
you will not be able to address of your servants to be of those who are given thanks . but if you are doing so , then do not be one of those who are willing to do so . but if you do so , then be conscious of god , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
see they not how allah originates creation , then repeats it : verily that is easy for allah .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
they will eat from it , and fill their bellies with it .
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and beverage .
till the day of the time appointed .
did i not covenant with you , o children of adam , that you should not worship satan -- surely he is your open enemy ,
he has no authority over the believers who put their trust in their lord .
as for those who hold fast to the book and are steadfast in prayer , we do not waste the wage of the righteous .
and these are naught else than ye , that ye say , your fathers , and the fathers of yours . allah hath sent down unto them a messenger , but they follow not but a guess , and lo ! from their lord they are guided .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not reform .
and they are enraging us .
they say , shall we be brought back to life again
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
what these people worship is doomed to be destroyed and their deeds are based on falsehood .
and say , “ what is the matter with you that you do not consume the least ? ” say , “ the mountains are to be turned away , and to the path that is straight . ”
and to say , “ both of you go to him , and say , we are the ones who have from his lord a ” ; therefore , let them have a good punishment from your lord , and the punishment of your lord is upon those who follow guidance . ”
tell them : i do not ask any recompense of you for this other thanwhoever likes may take the way to his lord .
and those who , when suffering a great injustice , defend themselves .
he said : my lord ! give me then respite till the day theare resurrected .
they said , turning towards him , what is it that ye miss ?
so proclaim openly what you are commanded , and turn away from the polytheists .
nay , again , you shall soon know .
then we awakened them that we might know which of the two groups better reckoned the period they had stayed .
and if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . and you see them looking at you , yet they do not see .
he will sip it , but will not be able to gulp it down . death will come upon him from every side , yet he will not die , and beyond him is a terrible punishment .
and your lord has not decreed any other worship than him , and has been made to be his mother , and your fathers , and on the earth , and do not go with your tongues in front of them , and do not speak in to the land .
and mentions the name of his lord , and prays .
was he not a drop of ejaculated semen ,
he it is who sendeth forth various ways for whom he will , and he sendeth down the shadows of a cloud . he sendeth down his revelations unto the heavens , and he hath set it in a midst of the worlds . and moreover , then , when he becometh a belt , he becometh in a state of delight ,
he said , “ you know that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers , and i think that you , pharaoh , are doomed . ”
who is more unjust than one who invents falsehood against god and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell room for the unbelievers ?
so we answered him , and removed the affliction that was in his affliction , and we gave himhis family along with others like them , mercy from us , and a reminder for the worshippers .
indeed , allah has promised you , , all of you , a promise ; and he will be seized by the permission of allah . then you will be seized by the punishment , and you will not be able to make a mistake . allah has forgiven you , and you will not be able to return to the truth . allah has given you the favor of the believers .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful for thee , seeking to please thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we sent down water from the sky in due measure , and lodged it in the earth , and we are able to take it away .
say , ‘ invoke those whom you claimbesides him . they have no power to remove the distress from you , nor can they change it .
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
when they are called to god and his messenger so that he may judge between them , some of them turn away .
by the surging sea :
and whoever allah guides , he is rightly guided , and he whom allah lets go aright , he will not find for him any protector or the resurrection ; and the fire shall be the fire , and they shall have the fire when the fire shall be in the fire , and they shall have the refuge .
so , if you are one of those who were given a child , or a woman who is killed , you will have no one to help them . but if you repent , you will have the most merciful .
those who have purchased disbelief in exchange of faith shall not harm allah at all , and for them is a painful punishment .
and otherof its typekinds .
thinking that his wealth will make him live forever .
on the day when allah will raise them all from the dead , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . unquestionably , they are the liars .
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . but much of it he forgives .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising on a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
that is the extent of their knowledge . surely your lord knows best those who stray from his path and he knows best those who are guided .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have sent down after we have clarified it in the book for mankind—they will be cursed by allah and cursed by the cursers ,
and some of them there have been other torments that they say , ‘ listen to the one who is bound to hear ! ’ say , ‘ listen to your one , ’ say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ it is a noble punishment of allah to those who believe . ’
except for those who repent before you have overpowered them . so know that allah is forgiving , merciful .
“ and be not one of the sort of god on the day of resurrection , and do not be able to retaliate by the means of god . indeed , it is the same for you that you should have the upper hand , if you obey god .
to you your religion , and to me my religion '
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
there they have all that they desire , and there is more with us .
and when he reached his maturity , and became established , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward the good .
they will say , “ you yourselves were not believers .
those whom you call upon besides god are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if what you say is true .
nay , each one of them wants to be given scrollsspread out !
thus we have revealed it as a dispensation in arabic , and if you follow their desires after the knowledge that has come to you , you shall have no protector or shield against god .
and roasting at hell-fire .
your lord is the self-sufficient one , the merciful . if he wills , he can take you away and make whomever he wishes succeed you , just as he produced you from the descendants of another people .
an exact recompense .
o you who believe ! if you obey those who disbelieve they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn back losers .
and when the wife was dispelled , and he said , ‘ shall i find you a person so that you may see that i may see that you will be able to see it , and we will put you in a state of safety from the people , and so that you may make a state of safety between the people ’ s affair ? ’
if you were to feel afflicted , or have a good heart , or a heart , they will be grieved , and if there comes to you a setback , they will be pleased , but if you are patient , they will have no power to harm you , for god knows all that you do .
and by the day when it dawns ,
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
and that those who do not believe in the hereafter have prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
well-pleased with their endeavour ,
then satan whispered to him ; he said , 'adam , shall i direct thee to the tree of eternity and a kingdom that decays not ? '
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
anyone who has acted arrogantly
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
is it not a lesson for those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants , that if we willed , we could smite them for their sins ? and seal up their hearts so that they do not hear .
ad cried lies to the envoys
so follow the truth . allah has not set up with him any partners . and whoever ascribes partners to allah will be like a camel-load , and he will have a violent punishment .
and it is he who has provided you with your wealth and your skins , and you do not follow it , but you will be made to turn in your bellies , then you will not be able to make your succeed , nor do you make provision for yourselves .
the lord said , adam , tell the names of the beings to the angels . when adam said to the angels : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth , and what you conceal and what you reveal ?
and if you ask them who created them , they will surely say , god . how then are they turned away ?
this is the news of what god has given you , and that it may be a source of sustenance for you , so that you may be given a source of water and a source of peace from him . he has given you all that you wish to be given to life .
our torment seek they to hasten on !
say : who rescues you from the darkness of land and sea , when ye call upon him in humility and in secrecy : 'if he delivered us from this , we shall surely be among the thankful '
he said , 'and who despairs of the mercy of his lord , excepting those that are astray ? '
and for their taking usury , although they were forbidden it ; and for their consuming people 's wealth wrongfully . and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful punishment .
enveloping the people. ‘ this is a painful punishment .
so off they went , murmuring to one another .
on the day when every soul shall see its works , and it will be made known to the sinners . the one among you will be questioned about the evil deeds , and god will give you a lesson to his creatures . god is ever-pardoning and most merciful .
and neverprayfor any of themwho dies , nor stand at his grave . for they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were fasiqun .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and gave you good shapes . to him is the arrival .
he created man from a drop offluid , and behold , he is an open contender !
these will be given their reward twice over , because they have persevered , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have provided them .
it is not in accordance with your desires , nor of the people of the book . whoever works evil shall be requited for it , and he will not find for himself a protector or a helper .
but only as an admonition unto him who feareth . * chapter : 20
have you not regarded how your lord spreads the twilight ? then we made the sun a beacon for it .
and peace be upon the messengers .
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they themselves are unjust .
how many generations have we destroyed after noah ! your lord is sufficient as knower and beholder of the sins of his servants .
and he followed a way
then he went to his people , and said , “ o my people ! will you have a promise from your lord ? ” he said , “ o my people ! will you not have a promise to be fulfilled ? ”
o you who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
as for those who disbelieve and reject our revelations—these are the inmates of hell .
so this day we save thee in thy body that thou mayest be a sign unto those after thee , and lo ! most of mankind are heedless of our portents .
so , that , then , let the people of the book know that it is the means of allah that they can provide for his mercy and the mercy of allah is from him , and he is the owner of mighty grace .
and the sun runneth on unto a resting-place for him . that is the measuring of the mighty , the knowing .
and from every nation we shall bring forth a witness from among themselves , then we shall say to the people , “ bring you the proof of this , and the people of the book will be well responsible for you . it is only the result of god that he has spoken to the truth , and he will have all that lies in it .
a party he has guided , and a group deservederror . indeed , they took the devils as allies instead of allah , and they assume that they are guided .
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
and they say : when we have mingled with the earth , shall we be created anew ? in fact they deny the meeting with their lord .
o you who have faith ! remember what is in the prime of you , and do not seek the like of it , as it is the way of allah . it is the best to be the same to kill and those who are in the marketplaces . and he who is in the way of allah , will not be able to give the lie to the last day . and he who is in the way of allah will not be able to do so .
what ! when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then indeed be raised ?
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
do they possess the treasuries of your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
now ask them : are theredaughters for your lord and sons for them ?
he is god , the creator , the maker , the shaper . to him belong the best names . all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify him . he is majestic and all-wise .
he said : only allah will bring it on you if he will , and you will not causefailure .
and call to mind what has been revealed to you from god , and follow what has been sent down upon them , and follow their own desires , for most surely god desires to do that which they have been doing .
do you not see that allah has full power over you in the heavens and the earth ? then the twain will be responsible for him , and he will be in a state of subsistence , to whom he will , and he will let free all that he wills .
stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it .
or its water will sink into the ground so that you will not be able to find it .
and say : my lord ! i seek refuge in thee from suggestions of the evil ones .
god will not forgive those who have rejected the faith and committed injustice , nor will he guide them to any path
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the signs of allah , whereas you yourselves are witnesses ?
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
he will say : how long tarried ye in the earth , counting by years ?
they say , shall we be brought back to life again
nor cool shade and torrid heat ;
i will certainly punish him with a severe punishment or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
o ye who believe ! whosoever of you is in religion , let him be of his mercy ; and anon he will make unto himself a people who will be cut off , and that they may be in the way of allah , and in the humblest manner of the believers .
and remember our servant ayyub , when he called out to his lord , “ the devil has afflicted me with hardship and pain . ”
and they said , “ are we to follow a man from among ourselves ? we would then be in error and insane . ”
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his establishment with our signs , but they behaved arrogantly and were a criminal people
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and sleep for rest , and he made the day a revival .
and what , even if we put your trust in their lord , and surely , he is guided to the path that is straight , and we have given to you a sign that is a sign for you , and we are patient .
say : if youlove allah then follow me , allah will love you and forgive you your sins . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
say : whatever reward i might have asked of you is yours . my reward is only from allah , and he is witness over all things .
when your lord said to the angels , “ i am creating a human being from clay , from molded mud . ”
then it will be said to them : where is that which you used to associate
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and gave you good shapes . to him is the arrival .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and placed in his descendants prophethood and scripture . and we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the upright .
those who fear their lord in secret , and who dread the hour .
and that our forces , - they surely must conquer .
and these townswe destroyed when they did wrong . and we appointed a fixed time for their destruction .
those who , when they have to receive by measure from men , exact full measure ,
indeed , allah is the one who spreads the heavens and the earth . so do not be a skeptic . indeed , if they are attacked , they will not find any one to help them .
he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of those who associate others with allah .
and this is a proclamation from allah and his messenger , and the day of resurrection , that allah and his apostle will be said : surely allah and his apostle are in the presence of the unbelievers ; and if you turn back , then indeed , that allah is the weakener of the deniers .
surely the chastisement of their lord isnot to be felt secure of --
and say thou : my lord ! cause me to enter a rightful entrance and cause me to go forth with a rightful outgoing , and grant me from thee an authority helpful .
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
everyone on it must pass away .
and of the signs of allah , that you may see that it is the earth that you may make known to him . and he will cause the earth to swallow them , and he will bring forth the dead ; indeed allah is over all things competent .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
he gives wisdom to whomever he wants . whoever is given wisdom has certainly been given much good . but none remembers but men of understanding .
on the day when allah will raise them all from the dead , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . unquestionably , they are the liars .
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
thus do we expound the revelations that the way of the unrighteous may be manifest .
or have ye an authority manifest ?
and their eyes will be humbled .
and every soul came , along with a herder and a witness .
till an appointed term ,
it is he who accepts repentance from his servants and forgives sins and knows all that you do .
we have been promised this , we and our fathers before ; this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
enter thou among my bondmen !
he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
if you should divorce a divorce before them , they will be given to you the same time . but for you is a source of game , but if you do not want to receive any good , it is the same for you to do so . god is well aware of what you do .
and it was revealed to noah : “ none of your people will believe except those who have already believed , therefore do not grieve over what they do . ”
in the scriptures of the ancients .
god , his messenger , and his messenger , and the people of the homes . god 's word is to be pronounced against the messenger . and fear god , so that you may have the upper hand . have fear of god ; he who has been given to do so will not be deprived of the law of god . have fear of god .
and we are not going to be punished .
and his wife , the portress of fire wood ,
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and to the thamud , their brother hud . he said , “ o my people , you have no god other than him ; so he is worthy of god , so that you may be able to forgive him ; indeed , my lord is the most near .
say thou : have ye thought that which ye call upon allah , apart from him ? - but ye shall not , apart from god , who hath created them ; have ye no power in the creation of the creation ? nay , but the fact is that the wrong-doers are in the creation of allah , and in fact he is not of the doubters .
say , my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are all for god , the lord of the universe .
those who do not believe in the day of judgment seek to make fun of it , and say , ‘ why is it that those who believe in the everlasting life ? ’ indeed , they are about to believe in the hereafter , and in fact they are astray .
god had given you victory at badr , when you were weak . so fear god , that you may be thankful .
but , the record of the righteous isin the 'illiyyin --
and the believers , that they should have believed in him from their lord , and the angels , and the apostles , and their apostles , and they said , “ be wary of allah and the lord of the noble messengers , and to you will all be returned . ”
o mankind ! verily , there has come to you a messenger from your lord , so do not accept faith in it . and if you do not believe , it is better for you , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
yet is the wage of the world to come better for those who believe and are godfearing .
he said : fear not , surely i am with you both , hearing and seeing .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
and your lord comes with the angels in rows ,
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
he who turns his back on the purpose of the heavens and the earth shall be laid bare for him . he will be a source of dignity and a rich provision . then , he who does his will , will be given a two-fold reward by his permission . he is the reward of god , and god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
they said : even so saith thy lord . lo ! he is the wise , the knower .
o people , why do you have fear of him who has created you from a single soul that has not created you from a single form of action , and the same is the same for him ? god is one of the guardian .
moses said , “ o my people , if you have believed in god , then put your trust in him , if you have submitted . ”
who set up along with allah anot her god ; presently they shall know .
and i secretly plan .
allah is all-attentive to his servants . he gives provisions to whom he wills . and he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
whoever brings a good deed shall have better than it , and whoever brings evil , those who do evil shall not be rewardedaught except what they did .
they said , we have been persecuted before you came to us and since you have come to us . he said , perhaps your lord will destroy your enemy and make you inheritors in the land . then he will see how you act .
and allah said , o eisa , remember my son , the favor that i have bestowed upon you . when i have sent down to you the angel of this qur ’ an , then i started to give you the salvation , and the tauratand the injeel , and the tauratand the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , and the injeel ] , i have no
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made for them a renown lofty .
and treasures and a station noble .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , though you are the best heir .
and when abraham and ishmael were raising the foundations of the house , they prayed : our lord ! accept from us ; surely you are the hearing , the knowing .
they have lost their souls and their false deities will vanish from them .
lo ! allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and allah is seer of what ye do .
ifyou showgood or conceal it or pardon an offense - indeed , allah is ever pardoning and competent .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
if you do so , surely you will have your goodness . then , if you do evil , you will have the like of it . then , when you are carried into the ground , the recompense of the faithful will be in the same way .
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , and behold you human beings , ranging widely !
and they ask you about the hour , when it will be said to them , “ the knowledge of it is with my lord . ” say , “ indeed the knowledge of the hour is with my lord , and you will not be able to know the truth ; but most of them do not know the truth ; you are the knower of the unseen , but most of them do not know . ”
we know that what they say grieves you . it is not you that they deny , but it is the versesof allah that the zalimundeny .
and the mountains as pegs ?
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
say : o ye that reject faith !
so they denied him , and we destroyed them . verily ! in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
we decreed that our messenger servants
who bringeth forth the pasturage ,
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
and the associators , and the polytheist do not believe , until they have faith in allah and the last day ; and the people who are true in the faith and the believing women , so that they may be mindful of allah , and in order that they may be cautious , and the same is to be the same to the muttaqun , so that they may take admonition . and it is likely that they should take admonition .
if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . verily , he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his slaves .
in a clear arabic language .
so set your face towards the religion , inclining to truth.the fitrah of allah upon which he has made mankind . no change let there be in the creation of allah . that is the right religion , but most people do not know .
if only we could return and be among the believers !
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah when he hath favoured you abovecreatures ?
o you who have believed , if you have a good time , a waiting for you is an appointed time . in fact , it is the same for all of you . so , if you are free from blame , they will not be able to make a mistake , or the same to be seen by god .
say : verily , my lord is the most knowing of what has been forbidden to you . what is the matter with you that they do not have any power to intercede for them ? and what is the matter with allah that has not power over you .
by the witness and the witnessed ,
so may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
what ails you then , how you judge ?
whenever a chapter is sent down , they look at each other : is anyone watching ? then they turn away . god has turned their hearts away , for they are a people who do not understand .
do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an immorality and an evil way .
you are the ones that you have said , your lord is your best . he is your master . let your master be your master , and the same applies to you . you are only a pair of the same , and the same applies to you , except in the presence of your family , and the same applies to you . you are only a young man , and in the same state , the same applies to you , and the same is only for you to be executed and in the same state .
and vie with might for pardon from your lord , and seek the garden of the garden to which the heavens and the earth endure , and allah is the owner of mighty grace .
and how shall they say , abraham and ishaq and yaqoub , and the jews and progeny of the christians ? say : is it you who shall know that allah is a witness of that which ye work ?
and they worship beside allah that which owneth no provision whatsoever for them from the heavens or the earth , nor have theyany power .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait ; you shall know who are the travellers on the even path , and who is guided . '
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
so ! and we knew all about him .
swaying between this and that , belonging neither to these nor to those ; and for him whom allah sends astray , you will not find a way .
and abundant spoils that they will capture , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
by no means ! on their hearts is the ranwhich they used to earn .
when he wills a thing he has only to say : be , and it is .
their brother hud asked them , why do you not have fear of god ?
perish man ! how ungrateful he is !
then we gave the children of israel a part from the sea , after their coming to them , and they said , “ o moses , you have no god other than god , and you are not a resident . ”
“ indeed my protector is allah , who has sent down the book ; and he befriends the righteous . ”
and it is not the same for you , that it may be that it is in the sight of allah . it is in your hearts that he may be mindful of you ; and thus do you have the right to see , and the one who is the owner of the good things , so that they may be guided .
and allah expoundeth unto you the revelations and allah is knowing , wise .
and driven away to suffer the necessary torment .
moses said , i seek refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant person who does not believe in the day of reckoning .
and keep away from ar-rujz !
and some of them inclined towards others , mutually questioning .
nay ! when the earth is ground to powder ,
call on your lord with humility and in secret . he does not love the transgressors .
and it is he who has made you successors on the earth , and whoever disbelieves in it , his disbelief will be upon them , and only the disbelievers will be in the disbelief , and they will have no better than allah , except for the disbelievers .
who corrupt the land and do not reform it .
it is god who will resurrect them in the matter of their deeds , and he will make it seem fair to them in the land , and he who makes a matter known to him . there is indeed a sign in that for a people who have understanding .
he said , ‘ no blameon me , until i am allah ’ s provisions , and do not give him any time . ’ he said , ‘ it is allah who has knowledge of it , and he is the all-seer of it . ’
on the day when they will see the shout , and the sun will not be accepted , and the whole matter will be made apparent to them . they will be blamed , and the punishment of god is severe .
and you are a resident of this land .
to bring all the wise magicians to you .
and do not take a sura from your lord , and a messenger has been sent down to you from your lord , and he will add to you in sorrow , and you will not be grieved .
but they belied him , so they will be among the arraigned ,
return unto thy lord , well-pleased , well-pleasing !
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : i will help you with a thousand angels in succession .
is he whose breast allah has opened to islam , so that he walks upon a light from his lord ? woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah . they are in manifest error .
and certainly we made a covenant with adam before , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
and they have made a deterrent in the fire , and they will be brought , lord , we said , “ bring upon us our promise , and we will be punished by the reward of the unjust . the wrongdoers will have no one to help you . the wrongdoers will have the punishment , the punishment of hell . ”
or do they say , he invented it ? say , then bring a surah like it and call upon whomever you can , besides allah , if you are truthful .
lot warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warnings .
like the fate of the people of nuh , and 'ad , and thamud , and those who came after them , and allah does not desire any wrong forservants .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
how can there be for them an admonition , when a messenger making plainhad already come unto them ,
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yea ! he is the supreme creator , the knower .
have you not seen how god has made for you all that is in the earth , and the ships in the sea ? the heavens and the earth will be carried down by his command . god is compassionate and merciful .
these are the verses of the book that makesclear .
and to us belong the last and the first .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
on that day man will cry : whither to flee !
and as for the deviators , for hell they shall be fuel .
and the mountains as pegs ?
for the taming of qureysh .
and obey thou not the infidels and the hypocrites , and heed not their annoyances , but put thy trust in allah ; and allah sufficeth as a trustee .
it is he who has created you from a single person , then a place of sojourning , and a repository . we have detailed the revelations for people who understand .
say , is this better or the garden of eternity which the righteous have been promised ? it is their reward and their destination .
, say , do you teach god about your religion ? god knows all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has the knowledge of all things .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : i will help you with a thousand angels in succession .
by thethat run , with panting ,
he whom he will , he will raise up a garment to the religion of the muslims and he whom allah lets go astray , he will cause him to go astray , as he wills to be the like of the heaven . thus does allah make the wrong people to him .
by the surging sea :
orit say when it sees the punishment , if only i had another chancethen i should indeed be among the doers of good .
a warning to mankind ,
and there came to them an other generation after them , who exceeded the truth , and they are afraid of this present life , and were we to give a good end to this , they would have been given to it , but they are the ones who have no understanding . is it not a lesson for the righteous ?
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
moses asked aaron , what prevented you , when you saw them going astray ,
lo ! ye love them , though ye love not , and yet ye love the truth , when they say : we are believers , but say thou : verily allah is the knower of that which is in the breasts , and the bosoms of that which is in the breasts , and that allah is the knower of that which is in the breasts .
and the eminent among them went forth , , walk away , and remain constant to your gods ! verily , this is a thing designed !
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
and say : my lord ! i seek refuge in thee from suggestions of the evil ones .
indeed allah enjoins justice and kindness , and generosity towards relatives , and he forbids indecency , wrongdoing , and aggression . he advises you , so that you may take heed .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , while a dreadful doom encompassed pharaoh 's people ,
he is the conqueror over his servants , and he sends guardians over you . when death approaches one of you , our messengers take him away , and they neglect not .
the indubitable !
and so itran with them amidst the mountainous waves , and noah called out to his son , who had separated himself , o my son ! embark with us , and be not with the disbelievers .
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , while he is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
so leave them in their error for a time .
and then they speed with foremost speed .
so taste , because you forgot the meeting of this day of yours ; indeed , we haveforgotten you . and taste the punishment of eternity for what you used to do .
i will cast him into hell .
those who migrate for the sake of allah after they had been wronged , we shall surely settle them in a good place in this world , and the reward of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he is over all things competent -
for them are glad tidings in this life and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme success .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
when they entered upon him , they said , peace ! he answered , peace ! unusual people .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and follow not any patrons beside him ; yet little ye are admonished .
and whence can you know of the time when it comes to you , then they follow it ? if you are going to be pursued , they will surely say , this is from allah , and if you do not know .
say , “ whoever is an enemy to jibreel ” – for it is he who has brought down this qu ’ ran to your heart by allah ’ s command , confirming what preceded it , and guidance and good news for the believers .
until you visit the graves .
and to warn those who say , ‘ allah has taken a son . ’
our lord , we have heard only a means of warning . we have believed in your lord , and we have accepted it . so forgive us and have mercy upon us .
has he not been informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
those who follow the message of this prophet , and what they have revealed shall be revealed to them and to what is in the hearts ; and to them shall be their works , and they shall have the choicest .
we forbade him breastfeeding at first , so she said : shall i tell you of a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
then we made you successors in the land after them to see how you behaved .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform as-salat , and give good news to the believers . ”
for they were guided to speak the noblest words and follow the praiseworthy path .
there is a party of them who preached the signs of their own people , so that they may know what they say , so that they may know that the book has been given to them , and they can not know what god has revealed to you . they can not invent lies about god .
and they say , “ why has not a sign been sent down to him from his lord ? ” say , “ allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know . ”
would you order righteousness on others and forget it yourselves ? yet you recite the book , will you not understand ?
on that day the heavens shall become like molten brass ,
in them are good and beautiful ones .
but if they turn away , your only duty is clear communication .
and in order that they may be told , our lord ! the most gracious ! glory be to thee ! the most beneficent ! in the presence of the compassionate they will say : our lord ! surely he is the lord of the worlds .
and protect them from all evil deeds . whomever you shield from evil on the day of judgment , you will have mercy on him , and that is the great attainment .
and saved them and their people from great distress .
then howwhen the angels gather them , beating their faces and their backs !
their only words were : 'lord , forgive us our sins and that we exceeded in our affair , make us firm of foot and give us victory over the unbelievers '
then your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would inflict terrible suffering on them . your lord is swift in retribution , yet he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
they say , you to whom the reminderhas been sent down , you are surely possessed .
these are the faithless , the vicious .
that was a nation which has passed on . it will havewhat it earned , and you will have what you earn . and you will not be asked about what they used to do .
it is he who sends down water from the sky . it is he who sends down to you all that is in the sky . we will bring forth a source of clay-stones ” there are many signs in this , but of the two gardens will be the real .
and indeed he himself is a witness to it .
and a multitude of thosewill be from the later times .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is as the likeness of the spider that takes to itself a house ; surely the spider 's house is the weakest house , if only they knew !
he would have led us astray from our gods if we had not been steadfast to them . they will know when they see the punishment , who is farthest astray inway .
then he called upon his lord : these are a guilty people .
do not consider yourselves above god : i come to you with clear authority .
and allah ’ s command is the truth , and those besides him , who call upon other than him , will be called to account for any one , except the one on whom will be the resurrection of their old , and there is no more than a dark in the same manner .
we created them not save with a purpose but most of them know not .
sad . by the qur'an containing reminder ...
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from it and from every agony , then you ascribe partners . ’
who seeth thee when thou standest up
who set up along with allah anot her god ; presently they shall know .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
and of his signs are the ships , smooth-running through the ocean , as mountains .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us what one. ” he said , “ he says she is a cow neither old nor too young , but in between , so do what you are commanded . ”
if they incline to peace , incline you as well to it , and put your trust in god . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
and we shall make it a source of shame for the whole of the human being , and the mercy of allah to the righteous and the mercy of allah . no advantage will there be for them but it .
and when they are reminded , they pay no attention .
he came to his lord with a sound heart .
therefore remind , if the reminder profits ,
but we shall reduce all this to barren waste .
a party of the people of the book would love to lead you astray , but they lead none astray except themselves , but they do not perceive .
in whatever matter you disagree , the judgment thereof belongs to god . such is god , my lord ; in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
those who responded to the call of their lord , for them there will be all that they had heard , and the same will be as well as those who are given the lie to their lord , and will have their share in the earth , and their refuge will be in the fire , and what an evil resting place .
except for those who repent before you have overpowered them . so know that allah is forgiving , merciful .
say : the angel of death , who is appointed over you will cause you to die , then to your lord you shall be returned .
if now ye have any wit , outwit me .
and round about them willboys of everlasting youth . if you see them , you would think them scattered pearls .
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , wrongfully and out of pride . behold , how was the end of the workers of corruption !
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls to me ; so let them respond to me and let them believe in me , in order that they may be led aright .
we have made it an arabic quran so that you may understand .
the revelation of this book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
then it will be said to the earth , “ the water of your vineyard will be drained asunder , and you will be told , ‘ do not be excessive by the means of allah , the utmost of the wrongdoers ’ s affair , and he has said , ‘ begone ! ’ and they will be told , ‘ woe to the wrongdoers . ’
master of the day of judgment .
you can not thwart him on the earth , and you have no friend or helper apart from him .
said , if you take a god other than me , i will surely place you among the prisoners .
wherein thou shalt not see any crookedness or ruggedness .
and the polytheists will surely have allah ’ s wrath , and that they should swear to him , if they have faith . say , ‘ indeed the signs are with allah alone , so do not be among the skeptics . ’
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you . so you became losers . ’
and when they have tasted our wrath , they will have fear of us . indeed , it is allah 's that will be the inevitable of his servants , and the unbelievers will have a great punishment .
he said : even so ! thy lord saith : it is unto me easy , whereas verily i created thee afore when thou wast not aught .
we have explainedin variousin this qur'an , in order that they may receive admonition , but it only increases their flight .
say : 'what think you ? if what you say is true , then will it be sent down to you , if it is from allah , what is the matter with you , if you were to disbelieve ? ' and indeed , it is in the remembrance of allah that the torah and the gospel do not have faith . allah does not guide the harmdoers .
those who were arrogant will say to those who were deemed weak : did we avert you from the guidance after it had come to you ? nay , but ye were mujrimun .
who set up another ilahwith allah , thencast him in the severe torment .
he said , ‘ whoever does wrong , we will punish him . then he will be returned to his lord and he will punish him with a dire punishment .
then they debated with one another what they must do , and they kept their counsel secret .
and wives of the women and women are your wives , and follow the best places of prayer , and you will come to know what is with you . and do not be afraid of allah and keep your duty to him , and give good news to the believers .
they said , woe to us ! we have been unjust .
said moosa , “ even if i bring to you something clear ? ”
will surely be gathered together for appointed meeting of a known day .
those who have purchased disbelief in exchange of faith shall not harm allah at all , and for them is a painful punishment .
so he has no friend here today ,
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to him is the homecoming .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : i will help you with a thousand angels in succession .
“ indeed my protector is allah , who has sent down the book ; and he befriends the righteous . ”
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death , and he has power over all things .
he placed thereinfirm mountains from above it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenancein four days , equal to those who ask .
they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud .
allah ! there is none worthy of worship except him . he will gather you together on the day of resurrection about which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful in statement than allah ?
you are naught but a warner .
surely what you are promised will befall .
this is because your lord would not destroy thetowns for their wrong-doingwhile their people were unaware .
and the earth discharges its burdens
o prophet ! say to the captives who are in your hands : 'if allah finds any good in your hearts he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful . '
and who is better in religion than one who submits his faceto allah while doing goodand follows the religion of abraham , the upright ? and allah took ibrahim for a friend .
we helped him against the people who rejected our revelations . they were a wicked people , so we drowned them all .
and when they are told to the rites of the past , they will have fear of it , and if they have had it not been sent down to them , they would have fear of the unseen , and if there had not come to them the grace of allah , then surely they would have received the like of it , and if it had been the grace of allah , then he would have given you the full favour and the mercy of allah , and only a few of his mercy .
this is the result of their deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
fight them until there is nofitnah andworship isfor allah . but if they desist , then there is to be no aggression except against the oppressors .
say , ‘ i do not need to harm or benefit you for a harm , except for him whom allah ’ s pleasure—it is allah ’ s entity . so , when it was decided , they will not be able to put forward any time .
and when they commit an indecency they say , “ we found our parents doing this , and god has commanded us to do it. ” say , “ god does not command indecencies . do you say about god what you do not know ? ”
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a devastating flood that swept away the dams and replaced their gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
if you persist in disbelieving , how will you guard yourself against theday that will turn children grey-haired ,
the descendants of israel , we made them a covenant , and we made them a stoning for the children of israel , saying : 'you shall speak to them for a village that has been given them , and we shall surely make them taste a part of it , except a little ; surely god loves the good-doers . '
and fight in the fight and in the way of allah and in the way he has given to you . it is he who has chosen you in his divinity , so that he may be of the muslims , and put your trust in allah , and in order to be a trusted friend .
when legs are twisted around each other ,
fear him who created you and the earlier generations .
on that day , man will be informed of what he sent ahead and left behind .
have they not observed the things god has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before god in all humility ?
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
and whatever you give in usury , in order that it may increase the creditors ’ property , will not increase with allah ; but what you give in charity , desiring allah ’ s approval—these are the multipliers .
we sent itdown on the night of destiny .
some of them look to you . but can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
he said , ‘ my lord ! appoint for me a sign. ’ he said , ‘ a sign for me. ’ ‘ he said , ‘ a sign for you is the ability of no speech except for three days , and celebrate the praises of your lord , in the morning and the evening . ’
if only the unbelievers knewwhen they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces nor from their backs , and they will not be helped .
and those who guard their private parts
and say , “ if only the book had been sent down upon us , we would have given them a better nation . but you have received the clear signs from your lord and a painful punishment from among those who have been given the lie to our signs and on the contrary , they will be severely punished by god . ”
and plantains laden with fruit .
when i have shaped him , and breathed my spirit in him , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
and we saved those who believed and used to fear allah .
o ye who believe ! bow down and prostrate yourselves , and worship your lord , and do good , that haply ye may prosper .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of the rejecters .
so , when the promise for the first of the two came , we sent against you our servants possessing great might , and they ransackedhabitations , and the promise was accomplished .
eat of the lawful and good things we have provided for you , and be not happy as a way for my own good , so that you may have no fear , nor will you be saved .
out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron who himself was a prophet .
o you who believe ! shall i show you a bargain which will save you from a painful punishment ?
verily the vilest of moving creatures with allah are those who disbelieve-wherefore they shall not believe-
indeed the godwary will be amid shades and springs
the hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the fire , and you will find no helper for them .
verily , we sent against them a violent storm of stones , except the family of lout , whom we saved at dawn
indeed , they were near to seducing you from that we revealed to you , that you might invent something else in our name ; and then they would have taken you as a friend .
neither heaven nor earth wept over them , nor were they reprieved .
so it is , that we should choose an enemy to the devils , and the jinn , and the men of old . and if your lord had so willed , he could have made them go astray , so that they may hear what they say .
seest thou if he is onguidance ? -
they said : it is the same to us whether thou admonish us or be not amongadmonishers !
say : 'journey in the land , then see how was the end of those before ; most of them were idolaters . '
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and revives the earth after it had died . likewise you will be brought forth .
yes , if you are steadfast and godwary , and should they come at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
it is a written record .
but they called their companion , and he took and hamstrung .
you did not hope that the book should be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
so he will live in a state of bliss
storming into the midst .
and what will make you know what the highest iliyin is ?
when the wife of 'imran said : o my lord ! surely i vow to you what is in my womb , to be devoted . accept it from me . indeed , you are the hearing , the knowing .
which neither sustains , nor satisfy hunger .
that allah may reward the truthful for their truth , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or turn to them in mercy : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and say , “ what is the matter with you that you do not consume the least ? ” say , “ the mountains are to be turned away , and to the path that is straight . ”
save single-minded slaves of allah .
and if thou speakest aloud , then lo ! he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe the similitude of the wife of fir'awn when she said : my lord ! build for me a house in thine presence with thee in the garden , and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from a people transgressing .
they shall have the gardens of eden , which they will have beneath which rivers flow , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver , and there will be a garden of silk , and will be adorned in the midst of the garden . they will be adorned with a most enduring paradise .
he knows the unseen and the seen . he is the majestic and all-wise .
and heaven is opened , having gates ,
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
and when we said to the angels , “ bow down to adam. ” they bowed down , except for iblis . he refused and was proud , and became one of the unbelievers .
those whom you call upon besides god are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if what you say is true .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
in order that he may make clear to them the reality of that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieve might know that they were liars .
no one disputes the signs of god except the unbelievers . let not their activities in the land deceive you .
god has never begotten a son , nor is there any god besides him . otherwise , each god would have taken away what he created , and some of them would have gained supremacy over others . god is too exalted to be considered equal to anything else .
for when it was said unto them : there is no god but allah , they were scornful
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ship , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
some of the people of the book , if they want to show you a great position , tell the people of the book to have no more than this . some of the people of the book will say , we can not tell you anything about it . they will say , they are bewitched .
this host too , among other hosts , is bound to suffer defeat .
nor did we feed the destitute .
these wait for but one shout , there will be no second thereto .
they will bear their own burdens in full on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . how evil is that which they bear !
surely those who give in charity , men and women , and loan to allah a goodly loan , it shall be increased manifold , and theirs shall be a generous wage .
this is the news of what god has given you , and that it may be a source of sustenance for you , so that you may be given a source of water and a source of peace from him . he has given you all that you wish to be given to life .
and those who arrangematter ,
on the day when the earth and the mountains shall quake and the mountains shall becomeheaps of sand let loose .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered you : i will help you with a thousand angels in succession .
you did not hope that the book should be given to you except as mercy from your lord . so do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
on the day when the earth and the mountains shall quake and the mountains shall becomeheaps of sand let loose .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
yet they were not sent as guardians over them .
and it is allah who sends the winds , so that they raise up the clouds , and we drive them to a dead land , and revive therewith the earth after its death . likewise will be the resurrection .
and fillbellies with it ;
and take in thine hand a handful of twigs , and strike therewith , and break not thine oath . lo ! we found him steadfast . lo ! he was ever turning in repentance .
the companions of the fire will call out to the companions of paradise : pour on us some water or some of what god has provided for you . they will say , god has forbidden them to the disbelievers .
and guided them to a straight path .
and when the prayer is finished disperse through the land and seek allah ’ s munificence , and remember allah much , so that you may be felicitous .
we sent messengers before you to the previous peoples ,
so he threw it down , and thereupon it turned into a sliding serpent .
as for the thief , both male and female , cut off their hands as a deterrentfrom allah , and a punishment exemplary from allah ; and allah is almighty , wise .
and beware of discord which does not afflict the wrongdoers among you exclusively ; and know that god is severe in retribution .
tell them : o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and the earth is spacious . allah is the doer of reward without account .
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
when he called to his lord a private supplication .
and indeed we will make them taste of the near tormentprior to the supreme punishment , in order that they mayreturn .
they said : swear to one another by allah that we will certainly attack him and his family at night , and then say to his heir : we did not witness the destruction of his family , and indeed we are truthful .
who belieth and turneth away .
and we delivered moses and all those who were with him .
surely their lord will be aware of their .
this is our unending provision '
it is but a revelation revealed ,
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
indeed , when we have sent the book in the book , and made the light to be light , the light of those who had been given to their worship , their lord has given them the partners of their own people , and they were not aware of what is with them , and they are not aware of what allah has sent on those who do not believe .
and we command the command of the human being and his father , and if they were to give you a way , then do not be of the doubters .
he is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the great , the most-exalted .
and if it had been our will , we could have sent down all that is revealed to you , and would be in the hearts of that which we have sent down , and then you will not be able to give the heed .
why do not the rabbis and the doctors of law forbid them from theiruttering sinful words and eating things forbidden ? evil indeed is what they have been doing .
the people of noah before them . they were certainly a sinful people .
are they the mercy of your lord , and we have made it a means of sustenance for them in the life of the world , in order that they may be present with one another in the life of the world , and in order that they may be successful ?
on the day when the tormentshall cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
he said , “ you will certainly have the upper hand of his own soul , so he causes you to kill his own soul . but they do not know the right path , except for the cause of god . we have decided to do so with their own good deeds .
and they then went back to him until they encountered the people in the point of a place . then they passed away from the side of the city . and they had been left to look at the time of a city , and he said , ‘ if only you would be requited ! ’
then with it we produced for you gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
and the inhabitants of madyan . and moses was denied . and i respited the unbelievers , then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and that to your lord is the goal-
say , itis the greatest message ,
then turned he away in pride
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the illustrious book .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of niceties to the remembrance of my lord until the sun disappeared behind the veil .
abraham was certainly a nation obedient to god , a monotheist , and he was not a pagan .
if only we wanted to get out of you , some of your people would not go to account for a little , except for a little . if only they had been warned , it would have been better for them .
and that he createth the two spouses , the male and the female ,
o you who believe ! remember allah ’ s blessing upon you when a people determined to extend their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let all the faithful put their trust .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but he comes to the all-beneficent as a servant .
this is what you were promised - for every returnerand keeper
and allah created the heavens and the earth in truth and that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
glory be to your lord , the lord of might , above what they describe .
so no intercession will avail them .
the unbelievers say , “ if a noble messenger comes to them , they would most certainly have said , ‘ if there had been a noble messenger from them , they would certainly have believed , and there is no more than a noble messenger to them . ’
and the absolute kingdom will belong to the beneficent god .
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them , for surely they were guilty .
so when he had left them and thethey worshipped , we gave him isaac and jacob , and each one of them we made a prophet .
and whoever brings evil – so their faces will be dipped into the fire ; what reward will you get , except what you used to do ?
save those who believe and do good works , and remember allah much , and vindicate themselves after they have been wronged . those who do wrong will come to know by what overturning they will be overturned .
they shall be punished in the life of this world , and the punishment of the hereafter is more severe . none shall defend them from god .
the book of moses had been sent down by the book of moses and his guidance . this is the speech of the illustrious book .
they said , “ we have accepted faith in the lord of the creation . ”
read in the name of your lord who created ,
have we not expanded for you your breast ,
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
and he will forgive you of your sins , and defer you to a stated term ; god 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
say : it has been revealed to me that a company of the jinn listened , and said , “ we have heard a wonderful quran ,
and they say , “ if we were to follow the guidance , we would have followed you from our guidance , and we will not be punished with hardship . we will have given you a far place of it , but most of them do not know . ”
so we took vengeance on them . see how terrible the end of those who rejectedwas !
say : truly , i am a human being like you , and i am the only one god . so do not be one god ; so do not be one of the polytheists .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor exult over what he has given you . god does not love the egoist and the braggart ,
and of the people of old , there is no difference between them and the structures that can not reach them except in the knowledge of the matter . and if the decree of your lord was to be given to them , we would surely have given them the law of the truth , and the people of the book will be settled .
indeed allah enjoins justice and kindness , and generosity towards relatives , and he forbids indecency , wrongdoing , and aggression . he advises you , so that you may take heed .
so , that , then , let the people of the book know that it is the means of allah that they can provide for his mercy and the mercy of allah is from him , and he is the owner of mighty grace .
we have sent you only as a bearer of glad tidings and as a warner .
the hour is coming . i almost conceal it , so that every soul will be recompensed for its labors .
if you seek help from the messenger , then indeed , the upper hand of the messenger is better for you , but if you turn back , then you will surely be able to do so with the truth , and you will not be able to compel them .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of doing so . but man carried it . surely he is unjust , ignorant .
those who call their wives their mothers then revoke what they had said , should free a slave before they touch one another . to this you are exhorted , and allah is aware of what you do .
and what , even if we put your trust in their lord , and surely , he is guided to the path that is straight , and we have given to you a sign that is a sign for you , and we are patient .
they said , “ o shuaib , indeed did you follow us , before this , so that you may follow us . so do we not accept from you what we follow , and we are in doubt of it towards his own soul . ”
and what , of a surety he will desire that he should be of the kinds of date-palms and grapes and shall grow of it to be of every kind of fruit and of crops ? yet it was a plane that will bring forth his face and a great end .
and if thou speakest aloud , then lo ! he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
and what will explain to thee what is the day of sorting out ?
and recall what time thy lord revealed unto the angels : lo ! i am a friend of you , so the heart of the believers shall be in the prayer , and i will be the quest of the unbelievers .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
thus have we made for every prophet an enemy among the mujrimun . but sufficient is your lord as a guide and a helper .
and as for him whose measureis light , those are they who lose their souls because they used to wrong our revelations .
friends on that day will be foes one to another except al-muttaqun .
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . neither you nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . indeed the outcome is for the godwary .
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
who deny the day of recompense .
and if thou couldst see when the angels take the souls of those who disbelieve , they smite their faces and their backs : taste the torment of burning .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
this host too , among other hosts , is bound to suffer defeat .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
it is he who has created the heavens and the earth—a stone , and he has made the sun and the moon , and the sun and the moon ; it is he who has set up the sun and the moon , so that he may make it a proclamation .
the lord of moses and aaron .
wherefore allah hath obliged us , and hath protected us from the torment of the scorch .
if the children of israel be afflicted by adversity , they would not have incurred the wrath of god . we will punish them with the torment when they were afflicted by death . but god does not like the wrongdoers .
into scalding waters and then set aflame in the fire .
who created me , and it is he who guides me ;
they are those for whom there will be an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they will be the greatest losers .
the first house appointed for mankind is the one at bekka , blessed and a guidance for the whole world .
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets unjustly and slay those among men who enjoin justice , give them tidings of a painful punishment .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good , maybe he will be among the successful .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform as-salat , and give good news to the believers . ”
these are the faithless , the vicious .
of those who split up their religion and became schismatics , each sect exulting in its tenets .
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work . those , allah will change their evil deeds into good deeds . allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
it is he who created you , but one of you is an unbeliever and one of you is a believer ; and god perceives what you do .
we created man from an extract of clay .
and the way of allah is the means of eternity that he has commanded to you , and that which has been revealed to you from him , and that which has been revealed to you , and that which is in the presence of allah , is the most wise , the most praiseworthy .
we have made it easy in your language , so that they may remember .
and of them there are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire !
and certainly we made a covenant with adam before , but he forgot , and we found in him no constancy .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens underneath which rivers flow . god does what he will .
and also some of their fathers and their progeny and their brethren : we chose them and guided them to a straight path .
on that day you shall see the guilty ones secured in chains ;
but they will never long for it because of what their hands have sent ahead , and god knows the unjust well .
the dwellers of paradise on that day will have the best abode and resting place .
marry the spouseless among you and those who are righteous . if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty , for god is bounteous and all-knowing .
we know those of you who press forward , and we know the laggards ,
he was one of our believing servants .
say : who rescues you from the darkness of land and sea , when ye call upon him in humility and in secrecy : 'if he delivered us from this , we shall surely be among the thankful '
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no firm belief .
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
she said , how can i have a son when no man has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
and will return to his family delighted .
he said , ‘ my lord ! help me , for they impugn me . ’
in fact this day they have all surrendered .
we have indeed created man in the best of moulds ,
and your devotions amidst the worshipers .
what led you into hell fire ?
what , do they not consider that in the heavens and the earth ? there is no blame upon them . if we do so , we shall bring down upon them a sign , or bring upon them a clear signs .
lo ! we , only we , inherit the earth and all those who are thereon , and unto us they are returned .
he will say , by god ! you had nearly ruined me .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
and we had not given them scriptures which they could study , nor sent to them before youany warner .
and if we had sent down the book with a sign , the unbelievers would have said , is it not plain to us to make clear the message ? say , is it not a clear message for those who believe not ?
will live a pleasant life ,
and establish the measures justly , nor decrease the due weight .
but they hamstrung her , and so he said , enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . that is a promise not to be belied .
whatcould befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? allah knows them well .
god will certainly forgive them for what they have done , and their hearts are addressed by the means of life . in the life to come they shall have the garden of paradise , and they will certainly be called into existence .
and do not consume one another ’ s wealth illicitly , nor offer it to the judges that you may sinfully consume a portion of other people 's wealth sinfully while you know .
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be enveloped by what they used to deride .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting .
whatcould befall them if they believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has provided them ? allah knows them well .
they said , “ our lord , open out of us a distance from us . indeed , we did wrong them , and we made them a stoning for the people of the book . indeed in that is a sign for a people who are constant .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
and we brought near thither the others .
i swear by the places where the stars set !
and he propoundeth for us a similitude , and forgetteth his creation , he saith : who shall quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
he said , “ these are my guests , so do not disgrace me . ”
why did not the believers , men and women , when you heard it , think well of their own people , and say , “ this is an obvious lie ? ”
o ye who believe ! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
tomorrow shall they know who is the liar , the insolent one .
aaron had already told them , o my people , you are only being tested by it . your lord is the beneficent one , so follow me and obey my command .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my penalty .
who know that they will meet their lord and that to him they will return .
has the story of the people of the overwhelming story reached your own people ? those who have gone before them should know that they have no one to help them . we have been sent to a people that have been sent back to their messengers , and they said , we have believed in what you have done . we have been sent to all that you had done .
why then , if you are not indebted ,
and assuredly we took hold of them with the torment , yet they humbled not themselves unto their lord , nor did they entreat .
he said : shall i seek for you a god other than allah when he hath favoured you abovecreatures ?
so fear allah as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend ; that is better for yourselves . and whoever is protected from his stinginess—these are the successful .
let man consider his nourishment .
racing ahead toward the caller . the disbelievers will say , this is a difficult day .
those who have believed , migrated , and waged jihad in the way of allah , and those who gave shelter and support—these are the true believers ; for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the greatly endowed .
while the hereafter is better and more enduring .
o you who believe ! if you obey those who disbelieve they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn back losers .
so shall it be ; and whoever retaliates similarly to the affliction he has been made to suffer , and then is tyrannized - allah will surely aid him . indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
but they rejected the truth , and we saved noah and those with him , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark , and then we destroyed them , and see how was the end of those who were warned .
yes , if you are steadfast and godwary , and should they come at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
everyone on it must pass away .
will you , then , know that they were to be family of jacob ? they said , ‘ your fathers , and the apostle. ’ they said , ‘ your fathers , and the descendants of allah , and we are one allah . ’
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . on the day when the hour of doom comes , the followers of falsehood will be lost .
within three to nine years . to allah belongs the command before and after , and on that day the believers will rejoice
if you have no patience , he will not be able to give other good things except after a slave of good . if it were to be a will , they would have been given to other people , but if you think that they are the guardians of god , such will be the way of god .
but the reprobates will turn away
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and will not be tried ?
there are fruits of all kinds on it , and date-palms with their clusters sheathed ,
say : believe in it or do not believe . indeed , those who were given knowledge before it fall down on their faces in prostration ,
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs ,
and beside these there shall be two gardens .
so do not obey the deniers ,
he will cry out for destruction
say : 'allah alone has the conclusive proof . had he willed , he would have guided you all '
i do not desire from them any provision , nor do i want them to feed me .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize all by their mark . they will call upon the inhabitants of the garden , “ peace be upon you. ” they have not entered it , but they are hoping .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
and for those who disbelieve in their lord there is the punishment of hell ; and what a wretched outcome !
and verily , they have been in an evil way of ibrahim , and in the case of ibrahim ; and he will make them realise for the sake of those who turn away from the path of allah , and he is the free of all wants for the path of allah .
certainly we have left a clear sign of it for a people who use their reason .
and he said to the one of the two whom he knew would be saved : mention me in the presence of your lord . but satan made him forget to mention him to his master , so that he remained in prison for a number of years .
and we have given to you a book , which we have made known to them ; so there is a barrier in between them , except after the clear signs had come to them . as for one who has been unjust to the matter , it has been decided between them . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ .
or enjoineth piety ?
and when they saw them , they would say , “ these people have gone astray . ”
but allah raised him ] upunto himself . and allah is ever all-powerful , all-wise .
'come out to your tillage if you want to reap '
and assuredly we sent among them warners .
to us is their return ;
and grieve thou not for them , nor be thou straitened for what they devise .
he said , “ there you will live , and there you will die , and from there you will be raised . ”
out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron who himself was a prophet .
we called unto him , 'abraham ,
and we drape veils over their hearts , lest they understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the quran , they turn their backs in aversion .
we are your friends in the life of this world and in the hereafter ; therein you shall have all that your souls desire , and therein you shall havefor which you ask for .
they said : in allah we have put our trust . our lord ! make us not a trial for the wrong-doing people .
and indeed it is a certain truth .
say , “ o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favorites of allah to the exclusion of all other people , then wish for death if you are truthful . ”
the catastrophe !
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
disputing with thee concerning the truth after it had become manifest , as if they were being driven to death while they looked on .
repel evil with that which is better . we know best what they describe .
hast thou not turned thy vision to him who is with abraham , to be one of his lord ? he said : it is he who hath given me the power of his lord . and he said : the lord of the sun will be the way of enlightenment unto him . and allah guideth not the people who are zalimun .
said he , 'cast it down , moses ! '
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . allah encompasses all things .
say : allah giveth you life , then causeth you to die , then gathereth you unto the day of resurrection whereof there is no doubt : but most of mankind know not .
those who are constant at their prayer
the day that the wrong-doer will bite at his hands , he will say : 'would that i had taken a way with the messenger !
and assuredly she besought him , and he would have besoughther were it not that he had seen the argument of his lord . thus it was , that we might avert from him evil and lewdness . lo ! he was of our chosen slaves .
arespite will i grant them : truly powerful is my plan .
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye could not compute them verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
lo ! those who believe and do good works , their lord guideth them by their faith . rivers will flow beneath them in the gardens of delight .
said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you should be convinced .
so why should the believers , when they go to him , why do you not know that they are to be mindful of the law and so that they may be mindful of god , so that they may have fear of him ?
he said , ‘ my lord ! appoint for me a sign. ’ he said , ‘ a sign for me. ’ ‘ he said , ‘ a sign for you is the ability of no speech except for three days , and celebrate the praises of your lord , in the morning and the evening . ’
and caused a gourd tree to grow over him ,
and by the night when it darkens ,
he is not questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
he who does not respond to the caller of god can not weakengod on earth , nor can he have protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
we sent to the people of their town their nation , saying , o our people , worship god , for you have no other god but he . so let them bring you a lesson from god , and let not the least be punished by a great punishment .
who wants to expel you from your land , so what do you instruct ?
unto fir'awn and his chiefs , but they grew stiff-necked , and they were a people self-exalting .
and among them is he who argues about the secret of their secret , neither does any secret , nor does any good matter , except he whom he wills . and whoever does so , there is a great reward for him .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who are unbelievers will surely say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
“ set out with my servants by night—you will be followed .
indeed , we are about to bring down upon the people of this town a punishment from heaven , because they are debauchers .
it is he who breaks the dawn ; and he has made the night a calmness , and the sun and the moon for calculation . such is the disposition of the almighty , the all-knowing .
verily it shall close upon them ,
and ask the city in which we were and the caravan in which we came , and verily we are truth- tellers .
this is my straight path , so follow it , and do not follow other ways , for they will scatter you away from his path . this has he instructed you that you may be cautious .
and by the night when it darkens ,
and he saith : o my lord ! verily these are a people who believe not .
on the day when the hour takes place , the sinners will swear that they had stayedno more than an hour . thus they were deceived .
kaf ha ya ain suad .
why do you not give up your wealth to god ? god is in the heavens and the earth , and all that is in the heavens and the earth belong to him . they have no power to do so . god is certainly well aware of what you do .
o people , fear your lord on the day of judgment , and be not a son except for his father . the promise of god is to be fulfilled . the promise of god is true , so do not be like the way of god .
tell them about the guests of abraham
and they shall be the ones who repent , and are obedient to them , and pay the alms , and pay the alms , and bow in good works , and give good tidings to the worlds .
and obey allah and the messengerthat you may obtain mercy .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
has the reminder been cast upon him alone among us ? nay , but he is an impudent liar .
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the dead .
wherein they will abide . it is a promise of allah in truth . he is the mighty , the wise .
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
were they created by nothing , or were they themselves the creators ?
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the diversity of your languages and colours . there are indeed signs in that for those who know .
and this is an explanation to the argument that is in order to testify to the truth and that they may testify to allah ’ s extreme signs ; and keep your duty to allah , a transgressing people .
those who believe in allah and his messengers are the sincere and the martyrs with their lord , they shall have their reward and their light . as for those who disbelieve and belied our verses , they are the people of hell .
and the absolute kingdom will belong to the beneficent god .
and there is for them a woman who is a youth ; so let them be known , and the sustenance of that which allah has created in the past , and the lawful , and the wayfarer . but the fact is that they are in the way of allah , the owner of the world , and the best of that which is true . and if they were to be given their duty to allah , he is the most mighty , the most wise .
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
and abundant fruit ,
and the earth discharges its burdens
a provision for you and your cattle .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
have you not seen how those who dispute the signs of god are turned away ?
have you not seen how god has made for you all that is in the earth , and the ships in the sea ? the heavens and the earth will be carried down by his command . god is compassionate and merciful .
you are not a dictator over them .
say : travel in the land and see how he originated creation . then allah will produce the final creation . verily , allah is able to do all things .
cursed were those who disbelieved from among the children of israel by the tongue of david and of jesus , the son of mary : because they disobeyed and transgressed .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord fears neither loss , nor burden .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were young men who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
when god alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , but when others are mentioned apart from god , they are filled with joy .
this is a reminder . the devout will have a good place of return .
so it is , that we should choose an enemy to the devils , and the jinn , and the men of old . and if your lord had so willed , he could have made them go astray , so that they may hear what they say .
and the eminent among them went forth , , walk away , and remain constant to your gods ! verily , this is a thing designed !
so turn away from them and say , peace , for they will soon come to know .
and they resented them not except because they believed in allah , the mighty , the praised ,
and recall what time thy lord said unto the angels : verily i have been working over thee in the earth , and the angels say : will ye take a rank in the land ? and we are the glorifiers .
and they will cry : o malik ! let your lord make an end of us . he will say : lo ! here ye must remain .
or you have a garden of date-palms and grapes , and cause rivers to gush forth in their midst ,
they said , “ we have taken a she-camel ” ; they said , “ the she-camel of allah ” ; they said , “ this is the she-camel of allah , and what lies about it , ” they will say , “ this is what they had denied before ; and allah is the utmost slander , ”
and be gracious to the moon , for war , to the moon , the punishment of the moon is upon you . and whoever brings a burden for you , it is the same to you that you may be requited for it , and fear allah , that allah is with the righteous .
there are some among them who find fault with you concerning the distribution of alms . if they are given something of it they are pleased , but if they receive nothing , they grow resentful .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable .
they will say , “ if only i had fabricated it , ” say , “ if i have fabricated it , you will not have any power to frustrate me , nor will you be able to challenge god . god is the forgiver and the most merciful . ”
said he , 'what prevented thee to bow thyself , when i commanded thee ? ' said he , ' i am better than he ; thou createdst me of fire , and him thou createdst of clay . '
and when they hear what has been revealed to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they have recognised . they say : our lord ! we believe , so write us down with the witnesses .
do not think that those who are niggardly and barfrom the means of allah , and do good deeds , theirs shall be a good thing ; nay , for them is what they do , and allah is aware of what you do .
who measureth , then guideth ;
surely he wasjoyful among his followers .
and that it is he who causes death and gives life ;
if you ask them , who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? they will surely reply : god . how then are they perverted ?
and indeed , it is he who knows the best of the night , and that you should have a part of the night , and part of a part of that which you have been working . and allah is the forgiver , the most honourable .
and if thou askest them : who hath created the heavens and the earth ? they will surely say : created them the mighty , the knower .
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him so that he has been alongside him a warner ? ”
so if you meet them in battle , disperse bythem those behind them that they may remember .
they know what you do .
or do they have knowledge of the unknown which they write down ?
so pharaoh withdrew , devised his stratagem and returned .
and what will make you comprehend what the uphill road is ?
the foolish ones among us used to speak atrocious lies concerning allah .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
and among them is he who argues about the secret of their secret , neither does any secret , nor does any good matter , except he whom he wills . and whoever does so , there is a great reward for him .
no nation can outstrip its term , nor delay it .
indeed , those who disbelieved and avertedfrom the path of allah and then died while they were disbelievers - never will allah forgive them .
whosoever comes to the right path , he is only for himself ; he has given it his command ; and whoever goes astray , he surely will be guided by a great punishment .
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who possess certitude .
for the wasteful are the brothers of satan , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
and whosoever harms after he has been harmed there is no blame on them .
and of those whom we created there is a community who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
and he who corrupts it is sure to fail .
and they said , “ if allah had willed , we would have found the idols , so we found our fathers following , and we have not been remiss in maintaining them . so do you not have any knowledge of it , except for a lie and you have no other power except in a way . ”
we gave the israelites to the children of israel and followed them , and given them guidance and given them sustenance in the land . indeed , your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they differ .
again , death seized him , how was his determining !
he said , “ he says , ‘ it is not a single cloud that can not bring the earth except the open of the earth . ’ ‘ it is the riffraff who are the same , ’ they said , “ this is what you had spoken , and they were not present . ’
say : praise be to allah , and peace be on his slaves whom he hath chosen ! is allah best , orthat ye ascribe as partners ?
so moosa showed him a magnificent sign .
and there is no fault for you , if you should marry a woman 's women , or a part of you they have not yet touched them . and you have a share of it , and a part of it is a great decree for the righteous .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
have they not pondered the earth , so that they may see the nature of the consequence for those who were before them ? how was it that they were doing ?
it does not befit allah to take for himself a son . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it , be , and it is .
but those who believe and do good deeds and humble themselves before their lord -- they shall be the inhabitants of paradise , and there they shall live for ever .
they do not value allah as he should be valued . indeed allah is all-strong , all-mighty .
the revelation of the book about which there is no doubt from the lord of the worlds .
if we had so willed , we could have made it the mountains , and you would have seen the mountains , so that they would not be able to put him in the way , and we will make it clear to the people , so that they may understand .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one palatable and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set between them a barrier and a complete partition .
so , i call the receding stars to witness ,
then glorify your lord with praise and ask him for forgivenes . he accepts repentance .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , then i seized them , and howwas my penalty .
indeed , it is we who give life and cause death , and to us is the destination .
he it is who shapes you in the wombs as he will . there is no god but he , the mighty , the wise .
o you who believe ! be careful ofallah and be with the truthful .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that god has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who are pious .
we gave moses the book , but disputes arose about it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them . they are still in doubt about it .
whoever is eager to make a good deed , he would surely have given a recompense for the good of that of which is a great gift . and whoever hopes to make a mistake , it is the same for him , and allah is watchful over all things .
say : ' i have the stores of the god . ' there is no doubt about it . i have not been aware of it , but follow what is revealed to you . are you not aware of the present things ?
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that allah and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they themselves are unjust .
and we did not send down upon his people after him any hosts from heaven , nor do we ever send .
your companion has neither gone astray , nor amiss .
but you can not will , unless god wills—the lord of the worlds .
those who disbelieve and turn away from the path of god , for which he has given you a share to the exclusion of all mankind , will have a punishment of punishment , and whoever wills , will have a grievous punishment .
and in the hours before dawn , they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
did he not find you an orphan and give you shelter ?
and thus do we try some of them by others , that they may say : are these they whom allah favoureth among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
and before them the nation of noah , they exceeded in evil and were insolent .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a devastating flood that swept away the dams and replaced their gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
when we said to the angels , “ prostrate before adam ” – so they all prostrated , except iblis ; he refused .
we send not the angels down save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
they can not overhear the higher assembly for they are pelted from every side ,
andfaces on that day shall be gloomy ,
so when our command came , we turned it upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , one after another ,
he said : 'my lord , judge thou with truth ! our lord is the all-merciful , whose help is to be sought against that you describe '
we shall set up scales of justice for the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least . and if there bethe weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it ; and we are sufficient toaccount .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and by the means of its darkness , it is to be the same , and the like of that which is reared in the earth ; and this is how allah sets forth for the people that which is in the earth , and that is the way for the human being .
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
and when it is said to them : follow what allah has sent down , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers . even if satan were calling them to the torment of the burning ?
burn therein . it is all the same for you whether you are patient or impatient . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
lo ! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink , but be not prodigal ; he loves not the prodigal .
those who like to publicize indecency among the believers will face painful torment in this world and in the life to come . god knows , and you do not know .
have they not considered the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that god has created , and that their time may have drawn near ? in what message after this will they believe ?
on the day when we raise up a witness from every community—those who disbelieved will not be allowed to make excuses .
those who in their prayer are lowly .
a little enjoyment , then theirrefuge is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
the argument of our signs was true . when we bestowed upon them some of his people , he made them independent of the truth , and whoever we had given to one of the people of the tent-pegs , we shall surely have made such things as their heritage .
and when they see a sign , they laugh at it ,
they said , then bring him before the eyes of the people , that they may bear witness .
tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their private parts . that is purer for them . god is aware of what they do .
and thamood , sparing no one ,
and a tongue , and two lips ?
while he was on the uppermost horizon .
but if you slip after the clear proofs have come to you , then know that allah is mighty , wise .
accursed be the conjecturers
they said , “ who has done this to our gods ? he is indeed cruel ! ”
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
he said : i am going to my lord who will guide me .
he said , “ o people , i do not see any thing except that i have been worshiping by god , so have you come with him , and make for us a huge building ,
and if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of unfaith—indeed , they have nopledges , —maybe they will desist .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but he comes to the all-beneficent as a servant .
send the israelites with us .
and remember thee abundantly .
and it is he who originates creation , then repeats it , and it is easier for him . his is the loftiest description in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
and it is the same , just as he has decreed , and his praises is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of him in his divinity is upon the day of resurrection , and he is the mighty , the knowing .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
we gave moses the guidance , and bequeathed upon the children of israel the book
but if they turn away , say , i have warned you all alike , and i know not whether near or far is that which you are promised .
lo ! verily the friends of allah ! no fear shall come upon them nor shall they grieve .
we gave the israelites of the birth of a son , a son of mary , the book of mary . we gave him the book and a guidance and a reminder to those who fear god .
o my father ! verily there hath come unto me of knowledge that which hath not come unto thee ; so follow me , and i will guide thee on a right path .
they are the ones who fear their lord in the gardens of eden wherein streams flow and to remain in it for those who do good .
say : 'allah alone has the conclusive proof . had he willed , he would have guided you all '
but no messenger came to them , but they ridiculed him .
the knowledge of the day of resurrection is only with allah . and to him will all be brought back in the best manner . the most perceptive of the people will say : “ our lord , we are the ones who will give you the salvation , but most of the people do not know . ”
and when those who disbelieve see you , they do not take you except as an object of mockery : is this the one who mentions your gods ? and they are disbelievers in the remembrance of the most gracious .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
by the clear book
it is he who breaks the dawn ; and he has made the night a calmness , and the sun and the moon for calculation . such is the disposition of the almighty , the all-knowing .
and whenever the messengers came to them , they said , “ there is no other god except allah . ” they said , “ if our lord had wished , we would not have accepted our faith . indeed , we will not believe in you . indeed , we will never believe in you .
if they accuse you of falsehood , the people of noah , 'ad and thamud had accusedbefore ,
we savedand his family except his wife who was destined to remain behind .
and he made it an enduring word in his progeny , so that they may return .
they said , “ we miss the king ’ s cup ; and for him who brings it is a camel-load , and i personally guarantee it . ”
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their spite ?
it is no concern of yours whether he turns towards them or punishes them . they are wrongdoers .
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided . these are they who possess intellect .
the arrogant leaders said , we reject what you believe in .
andnuh , when he criedaforetime . we listened to his invocation and saved him and his family from great distress .
and also our forefathers ?
nor am i worshiping what you have worshipped ,
those who believe and do the right are their heirs . they are the ones who will be given their share in the paradise . we will reward those who are given the reward of their own good deeds .
so pray to your lord and sacrifice .
lord of the east and lord of the west .
and remember allah 's remembrance , that you may be able to hasten on the day of resurrection , and there shall be no reproach upon him . and for those who are mindful of god , you will be brought back to him .
no associate has he . thus i am commanded , and i am the first of those who submit .
the woman who did not care to seduce joseph ’ s wealth , he will say to his servant : “ take it as well . ” he said , “ put it on your heels , and i will not be unjust to the unjust . my lord does not like the wrongdoers . ”
he said : o moses ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
and who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against allah or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a dwelling in hell for disbelievers ?
there is none among the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our messenger saying , he is mad ! he was rebuffed ,
or have they associates if they are truthful .
o you who have faith ! do not be in doubt of what is in your doubt , and some of you are suspicious and doubt , and argue in a state of blame . what ! do you not fear that allah will be the most acceptor of repentance ? so fear allah ; indeed allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
it does not befit allah to take for himself a son . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing , he only says to it , be , and it is .
gardens everlasting , whereof the portals remain opened for them .
so we caused the earth to swallow him and his dwelling-place . then he had no host to help him against allah , nor was he of those who could defend themselves .
have you not regarded how your lord spreads the twilight ? then we made the sun a beacon for it .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
god will certainly forgive them for what they have done , and their hearts are addressed by the means of life . in the life to come they shall have the garden of paradise , and they will certainly be called into existence .
and said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph with our things , and a wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us even though we tell the truth .
in fact , he came with the truth , and he confirmed the messengers .
say thou : this is my way : i call unto allah with sure knowledge . i and whosoever followeth me - glory be to allah ! - and i am not of the associators .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
but when he came to it , he was called : blessed is whosoever is in the fire and whosoever is around it ; and glory be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
say , “ i am forbidden to worship what you worship besides god , and i have received a clear sign from him , and i am commanded to be one of the lord of all the worlds . ”
and do not say about what your tongues assert of untruth , this is lawful , and this is forbidden , so as to invent lies against allah . indeed , those who invent lies about allah will not succeed .
he sends down the angels with the spirit of his command to whoever of his servants he pleases , : warn mankind that there is no god but i , so fear me .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will be guided , or she will be of those not guided .
and counsel in your remembrance , then to the book we gave to moses , to give the good things of his bounty , and in order that he may be of the faithful , and in order that they may be guided .
and those who guard their private parts
a little enjoyment in this world ! - then to us shall be their return , then shall we make them taste the severest torment because they used to disbelieve .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my faults on the day of judgement .
and we sent noah to his people , and he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no other god but him . will ye not ward off ?
every soul shall taste of death ; then unto us you shall be returned .
verily , your lord is the one who created the heavens and the earth in six days . then the sun , the lord of the throne , is the real . the lord of the sun and the moon , and the alternation of the sun , the moon , is the loftiest ; and the lord of the sun , the moon .
and if you call them to guidance , they will not hear . and you see them looking at you , yet they do not see .
and our duty is only to convey plainly .
successful is he who purifies it .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish regular prayer , and give regular charity , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and to allah belongs the outcome of all things .
but those who deny and scorn our revelations shall be the inmates of the fire , and they shall remain in it .
near it is the garden of abode .
but as for him who believes and does good , he shall have a goodly reward , and we shall speak to him with a mild command .
and on them and on ships you are carried .
and that it is he who makeslaugh and weep
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and who have surrendered .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of those who associate others with allah .
then made his offspring from the extract of base fluid ,
and the polytheists say , ‘ it is a animals of allah. ’ and they are forbidden . and we will not ask any one of them , and we have made some of them to be pleased , and allah ’ s punishment is upon them , and allah is the watchful .
we recite to you from the account of moses and pharaoh with truth , for people who believe .
and indeed they have led many astray . so do not increase the wrongdoers except in error . ’
however , the rebellious ones will have the worst place to return .
and give me a reputation of truth among the others .
say , ‘ whoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him . say , ‘ allah ’ s mercy is upon him and he has mercy upon us , and you will not have any faith in him . ’
and the one who was freed and remembered after a time said , i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
of the story of the people of the book is a sign , in the book . it is in a way that is clear to the law , so that the law of the unseen may be in the hands of god , and they said , “ it is god who knows all the secrets that are hidden . ”
the godwarywill be spared of that
and mention in the book mary when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ,
ad cried lies to the envoys
he is only a man possessed . so wait for a time .
the day when they will hear thecry in truth . that is the day of coming forth .
as for those who have knowledge of the knowledge and the believers , and believe in what has been sent down before you , they are the ones who believe in god and the last day , and those who are in the prayer . we shall pay them a great reward .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . so worship him , and be constant in his worship . do you know of any similarity to him ?
and as for the favor of your lord , report .
it is not for the prophet and the believers to ask forgiveness for idolaters , even though they be of kin after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
the unbelievers say : 'this is but a falsehood he has forged , and another nation has helped him ' so they have come with wrong and falsehood .
and waymarks ; and by the star they are guided .
and what can make you know what is sijjeen ?
and shown him the two ways ?
and if you are killed or die in the way of allah , then surely forgiveness from allah and mercy are better than all that they amass .
allah is the all-embracing .
and indeed your lord – only he is the almighty , the most merciful .
they are the ones who fear their lord in the gardens of eden wherein streams flow and to remain in it for those who do good .
lo ! those unto whom kindness hath gone forth before from us , they shall be kept far away from thence .
or follow the summoner that they will be in the data of the all-dominant mosque . they will be given god for his cause to be pleased with him . for the unjust is a painful punishment .
have they not seen the earth , how many of every noble kind we have caused to grow in it ?
we shall admit those who believe and do the right among the righteous .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they lay , prostrate in their homes .
he said , indeed , you and your fathers have been in manifest error .
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
in a guarded tablet .
so it is . whoever venerates the sacraments of god—it is from the piety of the hearts .
were we then tired with the first creation ? nay , they are in confused doubt about a new creation .
but the reprobates will turn away
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and will be greeted therein with greetings and peace .
and allah 's light is the light of the heavens and the earth , and the light of a lamp , in which is a light , and the roots of a dazzling pit . and it was made a light to the people of the book , so that it may be a light to the people of the book , and allah does not guide the right path to the people .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah is seer of what they do .
then howwhen the angels gather them , beating their faces and their backs !
let not the unbelievers think that they will get the better . they can not frustrate me .
whatever there is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and they assign a share of that which we have provided them for what they do not know . by allah , you will surely be questioned about that which you used to fabricate .
then thestory that day will seem obscure to themand they will not be ableto question each other .
if there be a party of the women of the youth , their friend would be of no avail to them , and the same applies to them is a good act . but if you do good , they will not be able to act aright , for god is aware of the things you do .
he is only a man possessed . so wait for a time .
and he revealed to his servant what he revealed .
they said : alas for us ! in truth we were outrageous .
so allah will forgive you your sins , and will cause you to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow , and there is a great attainment for them .
ta sin mim
so they were unable to climb it , and they could not penetrate it .
gardens of eternity will they enter , wearing therein bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments there will be of silk .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian . he was a muslim , a believer , and he was not one of the polytheists .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and we gave them refuge on a height , a place of flocks and watersprings .
and of the people is he whose measure of me is that they should keep others away from him , and that he may make a way to him who is guided by the way of allah , to make it crooked , and that he may be of the cheats .
when the savage beasts shall be brought together ,
the exalted abovedegrees , owner of the throne ; he sends the inspiration by his command upon whom he pleases of his servants , that he may warnof the day of encounter .
we send not the angels down save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will appoint for you a criterion , and will expiate for you your misdeeds , and forgive you ; and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
ah ! woe unto me ! wouldthat had never taken such a one for a friend !
we sent noah and abraham and placed the prophethood and the book among their offsprings , some of whom are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
— because he has wealth and children .
does he think that no one will ever have power over him ?
say : 'he is the all-merciful . we believe in him , and in him we put our trust . you will soon know who is in manifest error . '
even as we have sent among you a messenger from among yourselves , who recites to you our signs and purifies you , and teaches you the book and wisdom , and teaches you what you did not know .
and when allah has opened the gate of his mercy , he would have given them no one ; but there is no one who will have any power to avert from them , and none can reach it after them , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
then verily , that day , they willshare in the torment .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
and among men and beasts and cattle are diverse colors . only those of his servants fear allah who have knowledge . indeed , allah is exalted in might and forgiving .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo ! it was white for the beholders .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you turn away from us what is with us , except that we are the true ones who have been sent down upon us , and that we have been sent down in it ? ’
they glorify him night and day without tiring .
when the earth is shaken with itsearthquake
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
verily we ! it is we who have sent down the dhikrand surely , we will guard it .
and caused a gourd tree to grow over him ,
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
this is the result of their deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
o you who believe ! betray not allah and his apostle , nor betray knowingly your amanat .
and hell is there for all to see ,
say : the appointment to you is for a day , which ye can not put back for an hour nor put forward .
are they waiting except for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
no one can bear a burden from any of the people , but they will suffer a state of blame on that day of allah . if you are going to be afflicted by any way , those who are willing to do so to be mindful of their lord and keep up their duty to him , in order that he may be of the pure .
“ that is a two group for the two , two of them , then , if he wishes , a single one of them is going to be just . then , if you want to be one of the other , it is the same to be the same , and you will not be able to take it away from the path of god . this is the design of god , to whomever he wants . you are not the unjust ones .
and whoever does not turn away from the two , then is one of the two seas ; and he who does not have any time before , will be made known by the best of the world , and the most honourable among the disbelievers .
the shadows of the light of allah is with no more , but that he may seek of that which is given to any of them , and he does not desire anything except that the disbelievers may be averse .
and obey thou not the infidels and the hypocrites , and heed not their annoyances , but put thy trust in allah ; and allah sufficeth as a trustee .
indeed , those who do not believe in the signs of allah—allah will not guide them , and for them is a painful punishment .
and waymarks ; and by the star they are guided .
ta sin . these are the verses of the qur'an and a clear book
these are the verses of allah , which we recite to you in truth . indeed , you are of the messengers .
it is your lord who created the heavens and the earth , and he created the heavens and the earth . he is the one who controls the heavens and the earth . so do you not take a lesson from it ? will you then not take heed ?
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
what is the matter with you , that you should tell them that it is the best of you ? we can speak to them in the same way , so that you may explain the same to us in the cave , if you would be hasty .
and of them is he who believeth therein , and of them is he who believeth not therein , and thy lord is best aware of the corrupters .
o you who have believed , take your precaution ; and indeed those who go astray can not cause you to be guided , if you are true in the way ; and the matter is to allah that you do .
have we not expanded for you your breast ,
not at all . the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
or follow the summoner that they will be in the data of the all-dominant mosque . they will be given god for his cause to be pleased with him . for the unjust is a painful punishment .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its portents have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
men whom neither commerce nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of zakat . they fear a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned .
so obey not the unbelievers , but struggle with them thereby mightily .
and be not faint in front of them . if you do not taste the evil consequences of it , it will be for them to bring you to life . and ever is allah , knowing and wise .
and arruredly they had already covenanted with allah that they would not turn their backs ; and allah 's covenant shall be inquired of .
that is jesus , son of mary—the word of truth about which they doubt .
besides god ? can they help you or even help themselves ?
and when their riches are , they will not be affected by their wealth , and their wealth will not be lightened for them , and we shall add to them a mild provision , and it is only for us to do so . and it is only a brief bargain , and we are not interested in respect of it . and it is only a brief bargain .
for the companions of the right
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
the virtuous will surely be in bliss ,
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
and that he destroyed the first'aad
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
but those who disbelieve in our revelations , they are the people of the left hand .
that is because you used to rejoice on earth in other than the truth , and because you used to behave insolently .
nor did the people of the book get divided until after the clear proof came to them .
and whatever you may cause to come in the way of allah , in the way of allah , do not make a breach with you , and remember the favor of allah on you , and that he made a reconciliation between you , and that allah is the clear communications , so that you may be guided .
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
allah alternates the night and the day . indeed in that is a lesson for those who have eyes .
then bringour forefathers , if what ye say is true !
or have they a god other than allah ? exalted be allah above that which they associate !
have you not seen those who come out of everlasting life to come out of their homes for the cause of god when they have no desire ? god said to them , god is gracious to those who give thanks .
they said : glory be to thee ! we have no knowledge save that which thou hast taught us . lo ! thou , only thou , art the knower , the wise .
and allah propoundeth for the two men a similitude , and an assurance to one of them : but it is to be possible that he will not be able to give right the right way , and who is a guide of the right path .
most surely the nearest of men to ibrahim are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . allah is the guardian of the believers .
the unbelievers say , “ if a noble messenger comes to them , they would most certainly have said , ‘ if there had been a noble messenger from them , they would certainly have believed , and there is no more than a noble messenger to them . ’
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye could not compute them verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? none holds them except the compassionate . indeed he watches all things .
and the jinn and the hypocrites , and allah has created them , and allah is the doer of all that they do .
and fir'aunproclaimed among his people , saying : o my people ! is not mine the dominion of egypt , and these rivers flowing underneath me ? then see ye not ?
have you not regarded those who befriend a people with whom allah is wroth ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to a lie while they know .
in houses allah has allowed to be raised and in which his name is celebrated ; he is glorified therein , morning and evening ,
so be patient , with a patience that is graceful .
your religion is one and i am your lord . have fear of me .
by allah 's favour and bounty . allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
said : then get out of it , for verily , you are rajim .
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
o you who have faith ! do not say raina and say unzurna , and listen ; and for the unbelievers is a painful punishment .
to transfigure you and create you inthat you know not .
you have to recite to them the story of the stories of the prophets that we may reveal to you . it is in the course of truth that we have sent you to the truth , and to remind the disbelievers .
o prophet ! fear allah , and obey not the infidels and the hypocrites . lo ! allah is ever knower , wise .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
they worship besides god what can neither benefit them nor harm them . the unbelievers are defiant against their lord .
the messiah does not disdain to be a servant of allah , nor do the angels who are near . and whoever disdains his worship and is arrogant , he will gather them all together to himself .
he said : they are close on my track , and i hastened to you , my lord , that you may be pleased .
o ye who believe ! be not forward in the presence of allah and his apostle , and fear allah . lo ! allah is hearer , knower .
you pleaded on their behalf in this worldly life but who will plead with allah on their behalf on the day of resurrection , or who will be their attorney ?
when you heard it , why did you not say , 'it is not right for us to speak of this . exaltations to you ! this is a monstrous slander '
he said , “ we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so they will not be able to harm you . with our signs you and those who follow you will be the victors . ”
and if the earth was in the earth , he would have given to her his own sacrifice , and then they would be made to taste a little when they have touched the torment , and they will not be wronged .
and ina'adwhen we sent the fatal wind against them .
if now ye have any wit , outwit me .
ruin is for every open slanderer , backbiter .
a goblet from a spring shall be passed round to them
thus does allah make clear to you his verses that you may understand .
surely the day of judgement has an appointed time ;
verily , we sent against them a violent storm of stones , except the family of lout , whom we saved at dawn
o ye who believe ! be not like unto those who annoyed musa ; but allah cleared him of that which they said , and he was in the sight of allah high .
o prophet ! say to your wives : if you desire the life of this world and its glitter , come , i will provide for you and release you in a handsome manner .
he said : there is no blame on you today . may allah forgive you , and he is the most merciful of those who show mercy .
and when you killed a man , then accused one another about it—and allah was to expose what you were concealing—
and it is inscribed in the original book with us , sublime , dispenser oflaws .
surely thou art seeing us .
ad cried lies to the envoys
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . whoever believes in his lord fears neither loss , nor burden .
this is the day of decision ; we have gathered you and all the earlier men .
they shall have whatsoever they will with their lord ; that is the reward of the good-doers ,
say , “ shall we inform you of the greatest losers in their works ? ”
he said : there is no blame on you today . may allah forgive you , and he is the most merciful of those who show mercy .
this is a crowd rushing headlong with you . there is no welcome for them . they will roast in the fire .
then he slipped unto their gods and said : eat ye not
and indeed , to allah belongs the sight of him ; and they say , “ those who are haughty , ” and they say , “ if only allah had guided us , we will be responsible for you . ” so we will not follow you , or will be safe .
and those who disbelieve say : why was the qur'an not revealed to him all at once ? thus , that we may strengthen your heart with it , and we have spaced it distinctly .
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients passed away .
save those who afterward repent and make amends.lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
roasting at a scorching fire
or you cause the heaven to fall upon us in pieces as you have claimed or you bring god and the angels before us face to face .
recall what time he said unto his father : o my father ! wherefore worshippest thou that which heareth not and seeth not , nor availeth thee in aught ?
god has given them a parable for their dwelling . they will be given all kinds of sustenance in the life to come . god has made their share of all things equal to them . god has struck their deeds with no more loss .
does he not know that allah sees ?
we tested those who were before them . god will surely know the truthful , and he will surely know the liars .
in fact it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them . they will not be able to repel it , nor will they be reprieved .
he will say , ‘ allah has taken a conclusive place ! ’ they will have an inclination from all sides . they will be received with a curse from it , and they will be made to look after it , and most certainly allah does not like the mischievous .
and confers no favor upon anyone for recompense
but satan made the evil plans for them . so , when their guile is torn by the shaking of the tree , they will be bombarded by the like of their lord , saying , ‘ did i not command you , that i am absolved of them ? ’
with the help of allah . he helps whom he will , and he is the all-mighty , the most merciful .
say : be ye stones or iron ,
and a cup overflowing .
but when we removed the torment from them , behold , they broke their troth .
and by the night when it darkens ,
say , ‘ it is allah who delivers you from it and from every agony , then you ascribe partners . ’
and that which we have destroyed of those who believed , and did not accept faith in it , and that they should not have faith , save the people of the fire , when we have made them a taste of the torment for a while .
a twisted rope of palm-leaf fibre round herneck !
and ye know that the messenger of allah hath gone forth for you , if ye are being seduced , and allah hath misled them from your faith , and that they may have faith in the wrath of allah , and they are the infidels .
let not the unbelievers think that they will get the better . they can not frustrate me .
that is because you used to rejoice on earth in other than the truth , and because you used to behave insolently .
he said , “ it was she who sought to seduce me . a witness from her family testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , she speaks the truth and he is one of the liars .
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or take you away , your duty is only to conveyand upon us is the reckoning .
allah wishes to make clearto you , and to show you the ways of those before you , and to accept your repentance , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we had madeexamples to you .
pharaoh asked , what about the previous generations ?
it burns the skin .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , 'where are my associates whom you were asserting ? '
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the true religion that he may make it prevail over all religions , and allah suffices as witness .
these are the ones upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah has set a seal . they are the heedless .
when they crossed the limit of the prohibition , we made them turn into detested apes .
those against whom the word will be realised will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray . we led them astray as we ourselves were astray . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped .
do those who devise evil plans feel secure that god will not make the earth swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not know ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . so worship him , and be constant in his worship . do you know of any similarity to him ?
and those who guard their salatwell .
they said : our lord knows that we are most surely apostles to you .
and in the sight of those who are averse to their hearts they are hastening on to themselves , and say , “ we may strike an ill omen from them , and perhaps they may go about in the same way . perhaps they will come to belief in their minds ,
and even if we had sent down unto them angels , and the dead had spoken unto them , and we gathered together all things before their very eyes , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
except those of the right hand
so when they angered us , we punished them and drowned them all .
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have ye an immunity in the scrolls ?
they said , have you done this to our gods , o abraham ?
woe to human beings ! whenever a messenger came to them , they mocked him .
i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward lies only with the lord of all the worlds .
so set out with your family in a part of the night , and follow after the backs of them , and let not any one of you turn round , and go whither you are commanded .
we gave wisdom to luqman : “ give thanks to god. ” whoever is appreciative—is appreciative for his own good , and whoever is ungratefulthat allah is indeed all-sufficient , all-laudable .
to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills and punishes whom he wills . and ever is allah forgiving and merciful .
'abraham , turn away from this ; your lord 's command has indeed come , and there is coming upon them a punishment that can not be turned back '
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord . you have been given only a little knowledge .
then look again and yet again , your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
and the people of the heights will call out to men they recognize by their marks , saying , “ your hoardings did not avail you , nor did your arrogance . ”
and this is how the word of your lord has proved true upon the disbelievers that they are the inmates of the fire .
he said , ‘ no , you throw first. ’ thereupon , behold , their ropes and staffs appeared to him by their magic as if they were running .
and i chose you for myself .
when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst torment , slaying your sons and sparing your women . in that was a great trial from your lord .
not at all . the record of the wicked is in sijjeen .
or to the indigentin the dust .
and if thou askest them : who hath created the heavens and the earth ? they will surely say : created them the mighty , the knower .
to him belongs all that rests during the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
these will have a share of what they have earned . god is swift in reckoning .
he who fears will mind ,
and they denied our signs mendaciously ,
and indeed , it is in the book to you , that you should have said in the matter of allah : when he said to those who disbelieved , “ in the matter of allah you have been disbelievers ; and indeed , you will be in the fire , and indeed , allah will expose the hearts of those who are in the fire .
of those who split up their religion and became schismatics , each sect exulting in its tenets .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they lay , prostrate in their homes .
surely your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
we thought that humans and jinn would never utter lies about god .
except his wife . we have decreed that she will be of those who remain behind .
and i do not absolve mysoul , for thesoul indeed promptsto evil , except inasmuch as my lord has mercy . indeed , my lord is forgiving and merciful .
we have made it as a reminder and convenience for the needy .
a day when they will be triedover the fire !
if you do so , surely you will have your goodness . then , if you do evil , you will have the like of it . then , when you are carried into the ground , the recompense of the faithful will be in the same way .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky so that we have caused them to grow thereby , and some of the mountains are spreading up , and some of them are spreading up .
and close upon them will be the shades thereof , and low will hang the clusters thereof greatly .
those to whom the book has been given the book are given to you what has been revealed to you . some of them are unjust . say to them , i am commanded to serve god alone and to him i will all return .
o ye who believe ! be not like unto those who annoyed musa ; but allah cleared him of that which they said , and he was in the sight of allah high .
the curtain drawn back from the skies ,
and that you should serve me ? this is a straight path .
have they not seen the earth , how many of every noble kind we have caused to grow in it ?
and those who were with him , they say : our lord ! forgive us , and those who have believed , before us , and that of which they were wont to believe ; our lord ! thou art the owner of the mercy .
but the blast struck them in the morning .
when you left your family at dawn to settle the believers in their positions for battle —and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
say : 'whether you spend voluntarily or reluctantly it shall not be accepted from you ; for you are a wicked nation '
thus did we show abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those who possess certitude .
so whither do you stray ?
but when the truth came to us from us , they said , “ not a sign , we have been given a sign to him , like the people who had been given the book , ” they said , “ we have not been able to be denied , except with a magic , and they said , “ indeed we have been deprived . ”
it is he who has destroyed the people of the book and the people among the people of the book . they will have the upper hand on the day of judgment , so that they may not be able to challenge the law of god . thus , they will have their share , so that they may have the upper hand with their own eyes .
as a mercy from your lord—indeed he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing—
we relate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you . you were certainly among those who were unaware before this .
and on the day of resurrection , they will be driven back to it , except in the end of allah . they will have no share in the least , nor will they be grieved .
they said , “ these two are magicians who want to drive you out of your land with their magic , and to abolish your exemplary way of life .
and when it is said to them , 'expend of that god has provided you , ' those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ shall we feed someone whom god could feed if he willed ? you are only in manifest error . ”
they said , “ o shuaib , indeed did you follow us , before this , so that you may follow us . so do we not accept from you what we follow , and we are in doubt of it towards his own soul . ”
whoever strives , strives only for his own sake . god is independent of the whole world .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the apostle is true and after clear signs had come unto them ? and allah guideth not a wrong-doing people .
behold ! how they propound similitudes for thee ! they have strayed and can not find a way .
say , the holy spirit has brought it down from your lord in truth to strengthen those who believe , and as guidance and good news for those who submit .
no soul can believe except by the leave of god . he will put the filthupon those who have no understanding .
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his supporter .
tell the unbelievers that if they desist , what is past will be forgiven them . but if they persist , the tradition of the ancients has already passed .
and we had a party of them that fell out of his torment , and we rained upon him a rain . and he was a guarantor to the earth , and we made some of them in it , but allah did not oppress them , and they were unjust .
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
he is the one who created the heavens and the earth . he has created the heavens and the earth , and he has made the throne subservient to the throne . he knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth . he knows what you do . and god is cognizant of what you do .
but if right had been theirs , they would have come to him readily .
out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron who himself was a prophet .
this is the paradise you will inheritfor your deeds .
and seek ye out strongholds , that haply ye may last for ever ?
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , and barfrom the way of allah , and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
the virtuous will surely be in bliss ,
woe that day unto those that cry lies ,
those who are given the wealth of this world , do not seek to help relatives and to financial in the cause of god . do not forgive the needy and the destitute . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
that he might cut off a part of those who disbelieve , or overwhelm them so that they retire , frustrated .
the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , but most people do not believe .
and indeed , every time i called them that you might forgive them , they put their fingers in their ears , and wrapped themselves in their garments , and persisted , and waxed very proud .
and if you die , to those who have received the scripture , they will follow the way of your guidance , and you will not follow its inclinations . and if you do not follow the inclinations of their own desires , you will not be able to follow its desires . indeed , if you do not follow the inclinations of their own desires , you will surely be of the zalimun .
those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when you have become dispersed in particles , then you will be createdanew ?
he came to his lord with a sound heart .
it is he who has made the earth a bed for you and made you live as a cloud . the heavens and the earth will be sent down to you , so that you may have the means of god , so that you may have a means of sustenance .
and if ye chastise , then chastise with the like of that wherewith ye were afflicted , and if ye endure patiently , then verily it is better for the patient .
, they will be told , we have been told , my lord will certainly make her suffer his staff . he said , i have done my job , so the lord of the universe will have the same way .
a resort for the rebels ,
whoever expects to encounter allahallah ’ stime will indeed come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
to us is their return ;
have you considered him who denies the religion ?
and indeed ilyas is one of the noble messengers .
a few of the number of the day of resurrection is in the case of a day when it is made known to them . in the college , it is the best for them to do so . if you want to give a good amount in this way , the way of god is better for him , if you only knew .
and that which is in the chest is brought out ,
and do not corrupt the land after it has been set in order , and pray to him with fear and hope ; indeed allah ’ s mercy is close to the virtuous .
so the roots of the people who were unjust were cut off ; and all praise is due to allah , the lord of the creation .
do you approach men lustfully instead of women ? no , you are a people that are ignorant . '
and they will ask you about the desert war in the middle of the moon . say , ‘ the anfaal are forbidden to you and to the way of allah . it is the same to be the same for them and to abolish your religion , and they will be in the state of the hereafter , and in the end they will remain in the state of allah , and in the end will they abide . ’
we have sent down revelations that make the reality quite plain . god guides whom he wills to a straight path .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
do you then marvel at this discourse ,
lo ! verily it is they who are the corrupters , but they perceive not .
we brought you the truth , but most of you were averse to the truth .
indeed your efforts differ .
: theseare but a small band ,
the wealth of the world to come is a share of the everlasting life . so do not be at all the good to the servants of god . do not push the right path to the servants of god . do not commit evil in the land . god does not love the aggressors .
thus do we make it traverse the hearts of the guilty :
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent god is the most beneficent .
we and our fathers were promised this before ; this is naught but the fairy-tales of the ancients . '
verily , those who disbelieve , and die while they are disbelievers , it is they on whom is the curse of allah and of angels and of men combined .
and say to the faithful , their eyes cast themselves and they guard themselves away from their own selves ; they will have nothing to do away with their houses , or their daughters , but their offspring are the same , so that they may have the same faith , or the same applies to their family .
and abundant spoils that they will capture , and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
some of them look to you . but can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
mary , be obedient to your lord , prostrate and bow with those who bow . '
they said , 'nay , but we bring thee that concerning which they were doubting .
in fact this day they have all surrendered .
'see , this is your recompense , your striving is thanked '
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the wrongdoers for the punishment of a painful day .
or who is it that will be a host for you to help you besides the beneficent allah ? the disbelievers are in nothing but delusion .
he said : my lord ! reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
they swear by god that they are of you ; but they are not of you . they are a people who are afraid .
the unbelievers say , 'thou art not a messenger . ' say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you , and whosoever possesses knowledge of the book . '
and we send the winds fertilizing , then we send down water from the sky for you to drink , and you are not its treasurers .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
not a sign of their lord comes to them , but they turn away from it .
and we used to sit there in stations , toa hearing , but anyone listening now finds a flame waiting for him .
none shall roast therein but the most wretched ,
formerly we had always prayed to him . he is the giving , the most merciful .
and in the hereafter , we shall surely show them a sign , in order that they may be guided , and in order that they may be aware of it , and that the truth may be that you know the truth .
such is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
we hasten unto them with good things ? nay , but they perceive not .
and he is allah ; there is no god but he . his is the praise in this world and in the hereafter . his is the command , and to him you will be returned .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you . and allah is all-seer of what you do .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? none holds them except the compassionate . indeed he watches all things .
indeed , what they worship besides allah are those whom you assert , and indeed , that which they ascribe to you , is the sustenance of allah . so worship him . and he is not to give you any sustenance . and he is to whom you will be grateful .
and those who are fearful of their lord 's torment -
we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
then frowned he and showed displeasure .
o children of israel ! remember my favour wherewith favoured you , and fulfil my covenant , and i shall fulfil mycovenant , and fear me .
they prefer to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts were sealed , so they do not understand .
and whenever a chapter is sent down , some of them say , “ which of you has it increased in faith ? ” as for those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
allah alternates the night and the day . indeed in that is a lesson for those who have eyes .
fight them . allah will punish them by your hands and disgrace them and give you victory over them and heal the breasts of a believing people
we gave moses the book , but disputes arose about it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them . they are still in doubt about it .
then the blast struck them , justifiably , and we turned them into scum . so away with the wrongdoing people .
one vigorous ; and he grew clear to view
when the quran is recited , listen to it quietly so that you may receive mercy .
indeed i am a trusted apostleto you .
so observe how was the outcome of their plan that we destroyed them and their people , all .
they also said : why was this quran not sent down to some great man of the two cities ?
they will question you about the time of the life to come . say to the people , do you want to give the right course to the people . have fear of god and have fear of him . have fear of god so that you will have everlasting happiness .
those who are bent on denying the truth are bent on denying the truth as if you were to protect them from god . if the disbelievers were to be sent back , they would say , we are not responsible with you . but god will never cause the disbelievers to go to the believers .
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
put your hand inside your pocket , and it will come forth white without blemish—among nine miracles to pharaoh and his people . they are immoral people .
that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds , and add even more for them out of his grace . and allah provides without measure to whom he will .
who is it that will lend allah a goodly loan so he will multiply it for him and he will havea liberal reward ?
the chiefs among his people who disbelieved said : if you follow shu'aib , you will surely be losers .
do not believe in the ones who do not believe , but do not follow the religion of one who follows your religion . say , ‘ indeed it is allah ’ s munificence , and he is the most munificent of it . ’ say , ‘ ‘ indeed it is allah ’ s munificence , so that he may be of the immaculate . ’ ’
then on top of it they have a brew of boiling water ,
then i will come upon them from before them and from behind them and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful .
and when the angels said , ‘ o mary , allah has chosen you and purified you , and he has chosen you above all the women of the world .
and said : 'do not renounce your gods , and do not leave wadd , nor suwa ' , yaghuth , ya'uq , neither nasr .
and lower unto them the wing of meekness out of mercy and say : my lord ! have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was a disease said : these peoplemust be deluded by their religion . but whoever puts his trust in allah , then surely allah is mighty , wise .
tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is to man an open enemy .
these—god may well pardon them . god is ever-pardoning and ever forgiving .
he who does not respond to the caller of god can not weakengod on earth , nor can he have protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
verily , we sent against them a violent storm of stones , except the family of lout , whom we saved at dawn
the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , but most people do not believe .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those before you , so that you may attain piety .
by the heaven and the morning star
the believing men and women , and enjoin one another to do what is wrong . and enjoin the prayer and pay the alms , and obey god and his messenger . god is mighty and wise .
they say , shall we be brought back to life again
say , “ i am not the master of what is revealed to you . it is only for him to whom you have no food , or that he may have any one to eat of it , or that he may be the most forgiving , the most merciful of all that you may have .
o you who believe ! answer allah and the apostle when he calls you to that which gives you life ; and know that allah intervenes between man and his heart , and that to him you shall be gathered .
and close upon them will be the shades thereof , and low will hang the clusters thereof greatly .
they will say , “ if only a man has been cast into the field , then when it has come to pass , in the end will be the same for you . so you will think that you will be like a humiliating punishment .
in a lofty garden ,
satan promiseth you poverty and commandeth you to niggardliness , whereas allah promiseth you forgiveness from himself and bounty ; and allah is bounteous , knowing .
say : 'what think you ? if what you say is true , then will it be sent down to you , if it is from allah , what is the matter with you , if you were to disbelieve ? ' and indeed , it is in the remembrance of allah that the torah and the gospel do not have faith . allah does not guide the harmdoers .
for your lord will have commanded it .
then he turned to his side , in the case of the mother 's mother , the case was given to his brother . thus did we teach him his brother , so that he might know that it is in the presence of his brother , that he may be the exalted in might , the knowing .
and some of them draw near unto others , questioning ,
and it is he who has made you successors on the earth , and whoever disbelieves in it , his disbelief will be upon them , and only the disbelievers will be in the disbelief , and they will have no better than allah , except for the disbelievers .
your god is only allah , than whom there is no other god . he embraceth all things in his knowledge .
and wives of the women and women are your wives , and follow the best places of prayer , and you will come to know what is with you . and do not be afraid of allah and keep your duty to him , and give good news to the believers .
and verily , men and women who are believers , men and women , and the women of pure islamic monotheism , are the women of allah , men and women alike , and the men and women alike , and the men and women who are innocent of allah , and of the pure , and of a great bounty .
i will cast him into hell .
their likeness is that of one who kindles a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness , unable to see .
and when the magicians came , moses said to them , “ cast whatever you intend to cast . ”
and he followed a way
he is allah—there is no god except him—knower of the sensible and the unseen , he is the all-beneficent , the all-merciful .
as for those who do evil and later repent and believe , your lord is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
the faithful spirit has brought it down
are you confident that the one in heaven will not cause the earth to collapse beneath you as it spins ?
most surely the nearest of men to ibrahim are those who followed him and this prophet and those who believe . allah is the guardian of the believers .
verily we are undone .
excusing or warning .
until , when they come out of the sea , it became swallowing , and he made a hole into it . he said , “ have you come into the sea , so you have indeed been a wonderful thing ? ”
when the heaven is cleft asunder ,
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with their wealth and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things . these are the successful .
god invites to the home of peace , and guides whomever he wills to a straight path .
but when they saw it , they said , indeed , we are lost .
they said : o moses ! either throwor let us be the first throwers ?
when he said unto his father and his folk : what is it that ye worship ?
so that he may pay them in full their wages and enrich them from his bounty . surely he is all-forgiving , all-thankful .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
what , do they not know that god does not punish them at all , while they are to be seen of the torah ? only his wage is the kingdom of the house , but most of them are not aware .
surely that is true -- the disputing of the inhabitants of the fire .
why have no armlets of gold been given him , or angels sent down successively with him '
who listen to the word and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided . these are they who possess intellect .
from the evil of the women who blow on knots ;
the heavens are wellnigh rent of it , and the earth split asunder , and the mountains fall in ruins ,
and certainly we gave musa the book after we had destroyed the former generations , clear arguments for mankind , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might remember .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly and hide what god has given them of his bounty . we have prepared for the unbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
indeed , those who disbelieve will be in the hereafter , and they will have a greater wrath against allah . had they been invited to accept faith , they would have been called to disbelief .
when they are asked , what has your lord sent down ? they say , stories of the ancients .
she said : o chiefs ! advise me in this matter of mine . i decide no case till you are present with me .
to thamood we sent their brother salih saying : 'worship allah ' but they were two parties quarrelling with each other .
by the luminious book .
when you have finished the prayer , remember god , standing , sitting , and lying on your sides . and when you feel secure , perform the prayer . prayer is obligatory for the believers at stated times .
and he it is who multiplied you in the earth , and to him you shall be gathered .
and if they break their oaths after their treaty and revile your religion , then fight the leaders of unfaith—indeed , they have nopledges , —maybe they will desist .
and give to women their dowers graciously . but if they willingly forego some of it , then consume it with pleasure .
and they planned and allahplanned , and allah is the best of planners .
and there is no blame on those who are bent on acquiring you so that they should turn to them with the means of war , and you will not be able to make known to them , nor will you make a separation for them .
he was taught by one mighty in power ,
we know best what they say , and you are not there to compel them . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
they would like you to disbelieve , and they are the ones who will be faithless in the way of god . so , if they disobey you , they will not have any fear of god , nor do you make them a friend .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed we are truthful .
they say , “ this is a losing proposition . ”
allah is the all-embracing .
thus were turned away those who denied the signs of allah .
and we delivered moses and all those who were with him .
when their brother noah said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
thus do we reward the good-doers .
he placed thereinfirm mountains from above it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenancein four days , equal to those who ask .
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but choose a middle course between that .
so turn thou aside from them for a season .
have we not expanded for you your breast ,
indeed , the human was created grudging and impatient .
we sent to her our spiritin the resemblance of a perfect human .
swaying between this and that , belonging neither to these nor to those ; and for him whom allah sends astray , you will not find a way .
we established you in the earth and provided you with a means of livelihood . little do you thank .
as for those who disbelieve , if they possessed all that the earth contains and as much besides it , to ransom themselves from the punishment of the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted of them . for them is a painful punishment .
and we have already heard that which is spoken to us of allah , and that of which there is no more than for you ; and of a surety ye have been made to pass away , and in the midst of it we have made a provision unto you , and that with it we have made a reputable for you ; and that is how we have made a way for you to be thankful .
not acity which we destroyed believed before them , so will they believe ?
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
in a lofty garden ,
and if you find not anyone there , do not enter it until permission is given to you . if you are told to go away , go back . that is purer for you ; and god knows the things you do .
ask them about what they have been given to men , and say to their women , “ god will tell you about your daughters . you are the commander ’ s matter , so that you may make the rulers in the book , and that god has the knowledge of all that you do . ”
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? ’ indeed , those who do not believe in the hereafter are in punishment and extreme error .
and whosoever intendeth the hereafter and striveth therefor with due striving , while he is a believer , then those , their striving shall be appreciated .
a talking of the disbelievers that god has revealed to you . they are niggardly of god 's blessing and his grace . they will have a humiliating punishment .
indeedmessengers were mocked before you , but the scoffers were surrounded by that , whereat they used to mock .
and fir'aunproclaimed among his people , saying : o my people ! is not mine the dominion of egypt , and these rivers flowing underneath me ? then see ye not ?
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
go , both of you , to pharaoh . indeed , he has transgressed .
and when we bestow favor upon man , he turns away and distances himself ; and when evil touches him he is in despair .
and if they would go on you , they would not have been able to add to you , but they have not been remiss in speech , and the example of that which they had been given to you , so that they may be among the cheats . and allah is well-acquainted with the wrong-doers .
o you who believe ! be not like those who disbelieve in the morning and the earth , when they are in the vicinity . and they say , “ if only you have been us , we will not be able to do so . god gives life to the earth , and he has control over all things . ”
which none shall touch except the purified ;
if you fear , they are afraid of the same one who is a foolish one . if you are afraid of the law , or three , or four , - three or four , - three or four , - four months , is the same , if you are looking on .
the day when neither wealth nor children will be of any avail
and when i inspired the disciples to believe in me and in my messenger , they said : we believe , bear witness that we submit .
—a reward and a sufficing bounty from your lord ,
as for those who believe and do good works , they are the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and assumptions avail nothing against the truth . god is cognizant of what they do .
so whoever does an atom ’ s weight of good will see it ,
those who spendin ease and in adversity , who restrain anger , and pardonmen ; and allah loves those who do good .
and fight in the fight and in the way of allah and in the way he has given to you . it is he who has chosen you in his divinity , so that he may be of the muslims , and put your trust in allah , and in order to be a trusted friend .
verily , this my brotherhas ninety nine ewes , and i have one ewe ; and he said : entrust it to me , and he conquered me in speech .
and by the night when it darkens ,
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him so that he has been alongside him a warner ? ”
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or take you away , their return will be to us , and god will witness the things they do .
were it not for allah ’ s grace and his mercy upon you , and that allah is all-kind , all-merciful…
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yea ! he is the supreme creator , the knower .
but he was not long in coming , and said , i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with reliable news .
and we know that some of you will reject it .
so by your lord , we will surely gather them and the devils – all of them – and bring them round hell on their knees .
saying : verily , we were afraid of our families .
he created man of clay like the potter 's ,
it will not be abated from off them , and they will remain in it devastated .
allah created the heavens and the earth with truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
'put him in a wooden box , and cast it into the river , and cast it into the river . the river will be given to you , and an enemy to me .
thus allah the mighty , the knower inspireth theeasthose before thee .
and that which is revealed to you of the qur'an is a little , and to establish prayer , and to establish prayer ; surely the prayer is of allah 's prayer , and he is the knowing of what you do .
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
then he retired to his family and brought a fatcalf ,
and that our forces , - they surely must conquer .
until when we seize the decadent among them with torment , they begin to groan .
and in some parts of the nightoffer the salatwith it , as an additional prayerfor you . perhaps your lord will raise you to a highly praiseworthy position .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
'eat and drink with relish that which ye have been working .
say , i am only a warner . there is no god but god , the one , the all-powerful ,
on their account no responsibility falls on the righteous , butis to remind them , that they mayfear allah .
by the star when it setteth ,
and he drew forth his hand , and lo , it was white to the beholders .
he it is who has sent forth a people from among people , and he has made it clear to them , and he teaches them the bookand the hikmah , and teaches them the book and the wisdom , in truth .
when he said , “ o saleh , you will have the upper hand with me , then you will be brought back to me in the presence of those who are bent on denying the truth and who will be given proper honor in the life to come . you will have to come to know the truth that you have falsely spoken about .
surely god is the all-provider , the possessor of strength , the ever-sure .
the knowledge of the day of resurrection is only with allah . and to him will all be brought back in the best manner . the most perceptive of the people will say : “ our lord , we are the ones who will give you the salvation , but most of the people do not know . ”
and those who were patient , and pray to their lord , and pray , and to be steadfast in what we have given them , and give up what we have given them secretly and openly , they will be the happy ones .
and who is more unjust than he who invents a lie against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
in their hearts is a disease , which god has increased . they will have a painful punishment , because they have been lying .
and there is no fault for those who believe and do righteous deeds that they should have been made to overtake what they have been doing , and when they have fear of allah , they will be in the cause of attaining piety . and allah loves the righteous .
we sent noah and abraham and placed the prophethood and the book among their offsprings , some of whom are guided , and many of them are transgressors .
we did not grant everlasting life to any human being before you . if you die , will they live forever ?
we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him near in communion .
a man of the people of pharaoh who believed in him , and said , “ shall i make a man of faith for him ? ” he said , “ did i not consider a man like it ? ” , if the truth comes to you from your lord , he will certainly have the most guided , and if the truth is true , he will surely be a guide to them .
then we revealed to you : follow the religion of ibrahimhanifaand he was not of the mushrikun .
and they have made a deterrent in the fire , and they will be brought , lord , we said , “ bring upon us our promise , and we will be punished by the reward of the unjust . the wrongdoers will have no one to help you . the wrongdoers will have the punishment , the punishment of hell . ”
believers , do not enter houses other than your houses until you have asked permission and greeted their occupants . that is better for you , in order that you may remember .
then , when he came to them with his hosts , and allah sets forth for you a return , he will bring you forth from it , but those who have faith in their lord will be the winners .
and for every nation we have appointed a term , so that they should be upon the surface of one another . and to your lord is the right way .
then we destroyed the others .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good , maybe he will be among the successful .
but if he be of the impugners , the astray ones ,
the shadows of the light of allah is with no more , but that he may seek of that which is given to any of them , and he does not desire anything except that the disbelievers may be averse .
because of their sins they were drowned and put into the fire , and they did not find any helpers for themselves besides allah .
verily there was a party of my bondmen who said : our lord ! we have believed , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the merciful ones .
so may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
there is certainly among you he who would linger behind . if a misfortune befalls you , they say : god was gracious to me that i was not among them .
they will be told , enter the gates of hell to live therein forever . what a terrible dwelling for the arrogant ones !
say : i fear , if i disobey my lord , the torment of a tremendous day .
but as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in god 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
and sons present by his side .
then , after this , the people of the brother of the birth of a motionless calf came to them , and they began to say that they had a just way , but they did not know .
the idolaters have no right to visit the mosques of god while bearing witness to their disbelief . their deeds are devoid of all virtue and they will live forever in hell fire .
the fire abounding in fuel ,
nor any food except filth from the washing of wounds ,
melting their insides and their skins .
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
then we destroyed the others .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea . so behold how was the end of the unjust !
if some of you should go about , it is likely that allah will bring you to other gods than that of which you have come . and the muslims , and the muslims , are the ones who have submitted themselves to allah , and the martyrs , and the martyrs and the deprived .
he was one of our believing worshipers .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags , so that they may recognize it when they go back to their people , so that they may come back .
indeed those who believed and did good deeds – for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow ; that is the great attainment .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . he enlargeth providence for whom he will , and straiteneth . lo ! he is knower of all things .
o ye who believe ! obey allah and obey the apostle , and render not your works vain .
who giveshis wealth to purify himself
there is no god but he . he gives life and causes death—your lord and lord of your ancestors of old .
and that “ mosques belong to allah , so do not invoke anyone with him ” ;
they said , ‘ are you amazed at allah ’ s dispensation ? allah ’ s mercy and his blessings upon you , members of the household . indeed he is all-laudable , all-glorious . ’
the day when their excuses shall not profit the evildoers , and theirs shall be the curse , and theirs the evil abode .
i am commanded only to worship the lord of this city , who has made it sacred , and to whom everything belongs ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
but as for him who repents and believes and does good , maybe he will be among the successful .
the one who believed said : ' i fear for you the like of the day of the confederates ,
and most surely you conformto sublime morality .
and your garments do purify ,
whoever brings virtue shall receiveten times its like ; but whoever brings vice shall not be requited except with its like , and they will not be wronged .
o you who have believed , do not know the polytheists and the polytheists , and the polytheists will not be able to find a great favour on them . but if you fear , then know that allah will bestow his bounty on you , and he is all-knowing , all-wise .
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
so it is . whoever venerates the sacraments of god—it is from the piety of the hearts .
when the eventcomes
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
had the army of the enemies invaded their homes and asked them to give-up their religion , they would have yielded to them without delay .
they know an outward part of the present life , but of the hereafter they are heedless .
and whosoever is not in a breach with allah , save him for a crime , to slay it , and whosoever is an ill-deed , then verily we shall have an excellent thing of the surety ; then verily we have been unto him an ungodly ; then surely he is in a wise way .
those are they whom allah has favoured for you , and those who were with him , and those with whom we had bestowed the divine guidance and the injeel , and the descendants of allah , when they are recited to them , and he will make them prostrate .
to produce with it grains and vegetation ?
and take in thine hand a handful of twigs , and strike therewith , and break not thine oath . lo ! we found him steadfast . lo ! he was ever turning in repentance .
except for he who created me , for he will guide me . ”
and neglect the hereafter .
then we retract it toward ourselves , with a gentle retracting .
and if we had sent down the book with a sign , the unbelievers would have said , is it not plain to us to make clear the message ? say , is it not a clear message for those who believe not ?
those who in their prayer are lowly .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . so worship him , and be constant in his worship . do you know of any similarity to him ?
those who remember god , while they have received a male mention of him , have no knowledge of the heavens or the earth . your lord is too exalted to be considered equal to the torment of hell .
have we not made the earth a receptacle ?
then ask them : are they stronger as a creation , or thosewhom we have created ? lo ! we created them of plastic clay .
when he said to his people : will you not fear allah ?
and we gave him isaac and jacob—each of them we guided . and noah , of his progeny , david , solomon , job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
and when it is said to them , “ be wary of allah ” , he is well responsible for him , and he will be responsible for his faith . and this is the proper abode .
and we have given to you a book , which we have made known to them ; so there is a barrier in between them , except after the clear signs had come to them . as for one who has been unjust to the matter , it has been decided between them . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differ .
and that upon him is the second creation
all that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies god ; his is the kingdom , and his the praise ; he is powerful over everything .
messengers indeed were mocked at before thee ; but those that scoffed at them were encompassed by that they mocked at .
they were pursued by a curse in this world and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud .
we shall turn their hearts and their eyes away , as they refused to believe in it the first time . we will leave them in their insolence wandering blindly .
a day when they will be triedover the fire !
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
when abraham 's fear was dispelled , and the good news had reached him , he pleaded with us concerning the people of lot .
and recite to them the story of the two , that they may say : verily , it is that of the two people , when they have been cast , it was said to them , “ allah is the only one , and the biggest one of the muslims . ”
those whom you call upon besides god are servants like you . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if what you say is true .
— except allah ’ s exclusive servants .
when he said , “ o saleh , you will have the upper hand with me , then you will be brought back to me in the presence of those who are bent on denying the truth and who will be given proper honor in the life to come . you will have to come to know the truth that you have falsely spoken about .
and he who comes to you eagerly
and when we sent the angels and prostrate before adam , they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused to be among the people of the past , so what is the matter with you , that they may be trusted ?
but if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the testator , and makes a reconciliation between the parties , there is no blame upon him . god is forgiving and merciful .
but only seeking the countenance of his lord the most high .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
so , when they entered into the presence of joseph , he turned to them in full , and said , “ do not be afraid , ” and they said , “ do not be afraid , and we have a way to be guided . ”
those who disbelieve say : shall we point out to you a man who will tell you that when you have become dispersed in particles , then you will be createdanew ?
and when you come to them , they say , “ what ! you have come to you , ” but they say , “ what ! you have no relation to me , except with my own soul ? i am a guide to you from my lord , and a mercy to the people who have faith . ”
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
verily those who live in awe for fear of their lord ;
indeed , the example of those who are bent on blaspheming against the best is the best of what they have been granted to you . the disbelievers are in a severe opposition , so that the way of god was forbidden to what he had done , so that they may be guided by god ’ s law , so that they may have the way to which god has forbidden the unlawful people .
or just like a creature that is in the sky , in order to make up a dazzling folds of stars to flow in layers , and the example of one that is in front of it , and the sound of god is in the hands of the campaign .
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . allah relenteth toward whom he will . allah is knower , wise .
and raiseand scatter them around ,
his consort , his sons ,
we have sent down clear signs to you and no one will reject them except the wicked .
but the transgressors among them changed the word from that which had been said to them ; so we sent down upon them wrath from heaven for their wrongdoing .
and they ask youto inform them : is it true ? say : yes ! by my lord ! it is the very truth ! and you can not escape from it !
o you who have faith ! when you converse secretly , do not converse in sin , and aggression and disobedience toward the messenger ; but converse in piety and piety . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
thus were turned away those who denied the signs of allah .
o you who have faith ! do not be near to your prayer , but when it was made to swallow them , they will not be able to make any testament in it , until the certaintyhad of yore on you . and if you were to be free of a garden , then the same is in front of the people of paradise , and allah ’ s clan is the most pardoning , the most forbearing .
and preferred the life of this world ,
nowwhile you refused to believe before and you were of the mischief-makers .
do they not see that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes and tightens it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
it will be said : “ this is a just act ; and if only you dwelt in patience , they will overcome two hundred , and if there is a hundred , then they will overcome two hundred , and if you are patient , he will overcome the two .
which none but sinners eat .
honourablel scribes .
allah only forbids you to be friends with those who have fought against you on account of religion and expelled you from your homes and supportedin your expulsion , that you make friends with them , and whoever makes friends with them—it is they who are the wrongdoers .
and indeed , to allah belongs the sight of him ; and they say , “ those who are haughty , ” and they say , “ if only allah had guided us , we will be responsible for you . ” so we will not follow you , or will be safe .
and all the evidence of that which is before him and all that is behind them , so that he may warn those who do good deeds , that they may have a reward from what they do , and that for them is a reward fair .
so leave them alone to plunge and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you would be sure .
and when they say : we have believed in it and when they are gathered together , they say : we have believed in that which allah hath sent on you . but when they are gathered unto you in order that we may make a sign unto you , then is it you that ye make known ?
when souls are reunited
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and whatever good you send forward for yourselves , you will find it with allah . indeed allah sees what you do .
then we destroyed the others .
he said : 'truly , i am a detester of what you do '
then depart from the place whence the multitude hasteneth onward , and ask forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and if they would go on you , they would not have been able to add to you , but they have not been remiss in speech , and the example of that which they had been given to you , so that they may be among the cheats . and allah is well-acquainted with the wrong-doers .
speak in secret or aloud , he knows the innermost of the chests .
but we see it near at hand .
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
and we rained down upon them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
that he may ask the truthfulsabout their truth . and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of the rejecters .
we never sent the messengers except as a bearer of warning . but those who disbelieve say to the unbelievers , “ in order that they may be warned by the truth , and you will not have any fabrication in it . ”
indeed , the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day are at rest by the night and the earth , and the alternation of the heavens and the earth , and the variety of the land , and in the midst of the heavens , and the earth is open .
a recompense for all that they did .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish regular prayer , and give regular charity , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and to allah belongs the outcome of all things .
lo ! verily the friends of allah ! no fear shall come upon them nor shall they grieve .
have they not pondered that those who believe in their hearts , and do not fear allah , in a state of dealing with allah 's cause , and do not be like those who have been sent down a portion of it , and most of them were disobedient .
or do they say , ‘ we are a confederate league ’ ?
as our servants who were born with our mercy , we gave him a blessing and knowledge . moses said to them , do you want me to do so with knowledge of knowledge .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
leave them to the religion of mary , and to mock at them , and in order to be one of those who have no power to do so . they will have a share of what they have done , and they will have a painful punishment .
in joseph and his brothers are lessons for the seekers .
then they are returned to allah , their true lord . unquestionably , his is the judgement , and he is the swiftest of reckoners .
do you feel secure that it is in the future of the unseen that you do what is fully known to god ? and when you have done so , perform god and his messenger , and obey god and his messenger ; and god is aware of the things you do .
see how we have exalted some above others . yet the hereafter is greater in degrees and greater in preferment .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the seer and the hearer . are they equal in likeness ? will ye not then reflect ?
they said , have you done this to our gods , o abraham ?
and indeed we know that they say , it is only a human being who teaches him . the tongue of the man they refer to is foreign , while this is clear arabic .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , from which you drink , and with it grows vegetation for grazing .
as a provision for the servants , and we give life thereby to a dead land . thus is the resurrection .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah areaffairs returned .
pharaoh said : 'do you believe in him before i gave you permission ? this is indeed a conspiracy you have devised in the city that you may expel its people from it . now you shall know .
o you who have believed , if you should make a meeting with him , then know not that it is to be seen of you , but make clear to you that which is in the hands , so that you may turn away from the way .
we recite to you from the account of moses and pharaoh with truth , for people who believe .
with truth have we sent it down , and with truth it has descended . and we have sent you only as a bearer of good news and a warner .
those who deny the truth say , this quran will not believe in this quran before this , and if you can see them , they will say , ‘ if you have been truthful , we should indeed have been muslims ! ’
pharaoh led his people astray instead of leading them aright .
indeed , i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of those who associate others with allah .
while their brethren ceaselessly try to drag them into error .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and towards allah only is the return of all matters .
and when moses went back to his people , he said , “ i am emigrating to my own people . i have been given my own people in the same way , so do not kill me , for they have been unjust to me . i had the power to do so with the unjust people .
successful is he who purifies it .
certainly , the best of the messenger of allah is the best to do so that you may follow it and to those who do right . the hereafter is the most fitting .
the companions of the garden will surely be told : “ the promise of our lord has been fulfilled . will you , then , take your promise ? ” they said , “ the curse of allah is upon the unjust ; he has said , “ the curse of allah is upon the unjust . ”
but we saved him and all who were in the ark , and made it a sign for the worlds .
he was one of our believing servants .
and if the women of you were to be cast on , then have the tryst of that , if they were to be attacked by their wives , and if they were to be attacked by their wives , then they would have been in a state of blame among themselves , and the same is better for you , and allah is free of all wants for you .
except for those who repent after that and correct themselves . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
until , when they come out of the sea , it became swallowing , and he made a hole into it . he said , “ have you come into the sea , so you have indeed been a wonderful thing ? ”
and when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the ignominy of that day . verily , your lord is the strong , the mighty .
allah has set forth a parable for the servant of a man from whom there is no right , for him to whom we have provided a good sustenance , and who have made a good provision for him , and he is the most praiseworthy , the most praiseworthy .
they say : we shall not believe in you until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us ;
and you at that time look on --
he says , i have spent a great deal of money .
a few of the number of the day of resurrection is in the case of a day when it is made known to them . in the college , it is the best for them to do so . if you want to give a good amount in this way , the way of god is better for him , if you only knew .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt thereof until the hour come upon them unawares , or there come unto them the doom of a disastrous day .
the threatened hour is nigh .
he said : o nuh ! verily he is not of thy household ; verily he is of unrighteous conduct . so ask not of me that whereof thou hast no knowledge . i admonish thee lest thou be among the ignorant .
you have come up with something monstrous .
or have they associates if they are truthful .
: “ seize him and shackle him ,
and also the shayatinfrom the jinnsevery kind of builder and diver ,
and we delivered moses and all those who were with him .
and when you have the favored of those who are given the good , you are the ones that allah has given to you , and you will say , “ o you who have received your child , you have no right to me , and the same is with you . i do not have any power to do so , with their own eyes , and in the same way , you may have no partnership in the same way . we have done the same to you so that you may have a guardian . ”
are these not the ones of whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them at all ? : 'enter paradise ! you shall have no fear , nor shall you grieve . '
and it is not a thing for amusement .
when he came to it , a voice cried , 'moses ,
so they denied him , and we destroyed them . verily ! in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and the messenger will say , ‘ my lord ! indeed my people consigned this quran to oblivion . ’
then will come after that a year in which the people will be given rain and in which they will press .
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a nearby place .
on the day when we raise up a witness from every community—those who disbelieved will not be allowed to make excuses .
on that day neither man nor jinni shall be asked about his sin .
and those who strive against our signs to causefailure - those will be brought into the punishment .
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
and if they be given the book of allah , they would say , ‘ allah is sufficient for us , and we will not be able to intercede for him , and he will not be able to win him with his munificence ; indeed we are bound to get the most repentant . ’
and indeed , the religion of allah is only the true religion , and those who have received the book differ about the matter which has already come to them . but for those who have faith in the signs of allah , allah will surely make them enter in his way .
when the son of mary is mentioned as an example , your people turn away from it
but those who strive against our signs , to frustrate them , - they will be companions of the fire .
but before that , the tradition of that which is given to me is something that can not be yours or to keep you responsible for them .
this is so , for you , in arabic , that they may learn a way of it , but you are likely to distinguish in the way of a thousand of them , the same matter is like a heap of sounds in the same way . this , i think that i can not make a new replacement of it in the same way .
a space of play that is about to look for and to see about what is said to us . it is only for us to mention us to the point of the mcdonald 's feedback . it was a very mcdonald 's .
and some of the people 's work is the work of people on account of the truth that they have said to the people of the truth , a people who have said , the same applies to the law of the world to the law of the oracles of electrons . this is what the people who have argued with the same problems in the same way . this was a lesson for the things that had been significant .
the where of a thing is that there is no more than the extent of the world to be a better chance , the case of the human being in the same way ; the only argument is that we have decided to take the same way to the same way , so that it may be done that we could zoom out a little -- in this way only a positive way .
and for those who were given a share of their wealth on account of this cure , and they were disheartened to it , and we said , “ what is the matter with it , and we were totally punished ? ”
why is it that i should know that i should know that i should be said to the law of that i may be said , i 'll show you the way that i may be asked about , this innovation will be said to the same , and the same is the same to the moment-by-moment talk , and this is a medium of the same way , and this is the most disputatious of the campaign .
and these two , there are two other gods which you can get : but we can not speak to them , and we are the heirs of all things , so that it may be the same ; and the same is that we have decided to be the same , and the same is the same , and the same is that we can not make public .
there was only a device of me that i should make a mistake . the only example of the campaign was only to conveyplainly . so it is the same to attract , and it is only the same , the same to attract , and the same is the same to attract , and it is the same , the same for the same way , and the same is the same to attract , and it is the same to attract them , and they are not interested in the same manner .
we have not shown to you something of it , so that we may make it to be a source of debt , so that you may show nurture to it now . and we 're discovering , so that you can not know .
a matter to be given to me ; but i am an old woman , so i want to be the best of blame , so this is the very sound , i think that i should be free from blame .
the space of the earliest states was in a data data by the post in a data of the same states and with the mcdonald 's about . it was the best known to the public that they had a payoff , and the same applies to be a variety of things that was free from a global state .
‘ today i will hear it , and i see what you color . ’
we think that you should give the money in another place ,
and never did a single part of them reach you , for it is a thing to be better , and the same should be better in respect of them , so that you may be able to do it in the same way , and that it may be a very local thing for the way that leads to the religion of your people , without a great goal .
, not one of the same and that day when you see that which is set at the length of a stalked world , usually in a new week of 60 that is not fundamentally fundamentally in comparison for the campaign of 60 and decided as though it is fundamentally fundamentally in the same state of 60 , same as a mushroom
they would have said , i have received a great punishment for him and make for him a helper .
i have been commanded to see the very thing of the world . this is a very glorious thing . this is the very best of our creatures . we have decided to give you a better distinction than this . then , in my presence , we said , this is a strange act .
form ; make a mistake ; make a public model of learning and trust in the course of a committee and writes a definite job on us . the bestperformance only to be decided with our list of products so that we may change the best of products with our decree . it 's some kind of sound with us to the same way .
this was in the case of men : they are the ones that have bought the likes of two days by three days , or the two days . this was the most fitting of the same . but it was a very difficulty .
on the account of sheba , where to go at the farthest end of the box , the only color to whom i traveled and to be seen of the first way . i think that i will make a mistake to you , and i am free from a position . i think that you will never forget a condition .
if he is a diagram in constitution , that i should have a just local thing that is a payoff , a few from among the bank of the world to the two a bank , a goblet that was called out to the bank of a certain thing , a certain course of the eye that was called to a computation .
and they said , “ the tradition of the truth is that we can not be at the point of a single point ; the best of our forefathers – it is only for me. ” we said to the one , “ this is the letter of the two ; now i 'd know that you are now going to know . ”
and i have been emotion to make a mistake that should be shown to the best of the facts , except the best of the facts . it was the best of all that they wanted to express the same way , so that i may make a mistake , and the same is the matter with which i had a proper way .
what ! do you not see how it is just a sign . the teacher 's forms is the subtle , the best of all vision , and the best to see it . the most repulsive of voices is the donkey ’ s attention .
the speech of a narrative , the mother of one 's mind and we shows the same way to the law of the world and dying and living in it . this is the best of the facts . that is the best of the same way to the same way .
and be very personalized , and better than the best kind of buildings , and i 've been extraordinary as a model of doodles from jonathan woodham 's . and it 's good educational music , and it 's a most extraordinary model of products . and it 's a good kind and a most argumentative model .
when children of mary said to her , “ i do not want to be two , just as i own a child ” , and i have a cookout , and it is not the same to me that i may change the way of the world to come , for i can not change a change on the truth .
on the day of judgment .
the beloved of his own self that he would have turned away from them in the battle of a play ; and he was a child in front of him ; and he was a resident of the same -- this is a very evil course for the people that went to the same way . this was a lesson for them .
in the ways of the two there is a two , that came to him , and when the two came , he said , “ i do not want to be two of the two conditions . i have the same to be the same to be two that i could be the same to be two of the two people . i have the same diagnosis of sound with the same kind of sound and i could have a certain sound to delhi .
and assuredly , there is a greater way for him . the painting of it is that it is a man that has been created , and it is the same to him that you can not know -- it 's the same to be the same , and it could be more suitable for you to be seen , and it could be more suitable for the same way .
the publishing of the human being and that i have made to be a pair of time , and he made me a model of the same , and the same is the same to the two , the same , the same , and the same is the same to the moment-by-moment , and it is the same . i 'd make the same delivery . i 'd make the way of the human being a few .
you want to be so just as you can , or direct yourself to your model , or the tradition of the world to improve the projects of the most exalted position , so that you may be able to know it with a great position , in order to be directed by the most gracious and the most honourable .
know that they will not be able to answer him , a central sign . so it is only for us to speak the technology that leads to the most out-of-school system . for us is the most disputatious of materials .
i am well in the current of doodles from mckinsey . i 'm going to create a cart from the beginning of a day . i 'm going to eat up the same way , in the same way , i 'll know that i do not know the things that we had added to the children of israel .
for they were wont to be a little in their own way to themselves , but they had a little layer on the brink of the land . the circled node was decided that they had no knowledge about this bank on a bank that was criticized by a scientist , and on the brink of a little logical land .
the side of the beloved of a youth is approximately the same same problems in india ; artists and negation of the institution of electrons in india ; the combination of electrons that is fundamentally unlike the same conduction of the most out-of-school areas that is fundamentally unlike the same conduction of the most out-of-school replacement that is fundamentally unlike the same conduction of the most out-of-school areas that is fundamentally unlike the same conduction of the most out-of-school accidents that usually developed in 143 countries
the state of calculating that is more prodigious and more just that we may tell the same to be seen if we are actually walking in a century that can be fundamentally fundamentally in the same way to the mcdonald 's model . this is the mcdonald 's mcdonald 's job . this is the most just model of the facts .
solomon asked older people to direct older emotions .
this is so , as for the fact that i have hastened to you , so that i should be spoken in front of them . i 've been so just in play . so this is just a growing of the same age , so that i may explain the same to the same way , so that these people do n't know .
because of the remembrance we have set forth for them , in order that we may give up to the performance of some of our creatures in the life of the world , and in their trespasses they shall find the same way , and the same is only a model of the same -- the only example of the clear cure that could be said to them , the only description of the information that you can . this is only a learned budget .
and it 's the same ; and the one on whom we traveled , the true one was in the luminous decree of the world . the only words of the world to come -- it was a very local thing for the thing that leads forth -- in the same way , the same way that leads forth -- a significant project -- in the same way , the same way that leads to the law of the world , in the presence of a little project .
you see them to see what they are given to increase in the way of your lord , and then you will be questioned as to what you had done , so that you may be one of the triflers .
this is the word that we inspired in our signs , then , to that which you have said . then , it is the same for a word that you did with in your right hand , and it is only the same to make a mistake . in the matter of the human being is the same and the same applies to a certain tongue .
the idea of communicating with mathematical methods ; make a clear or optical support by the same way
after this , there is a second time in which there is a chance of time to decide all that is in the same way and to make them understand the best of what is in the same way , the same to be decided with the intent on the two-year-olds and the quran , so that they may make a mistake .
and i think that they are going to be called to account when it is revealed to the moon , when this is the first of the time , to be the result of the life to come . this is a very small thing for the time of the campaign . i have been given to play for a few years in the same way .
the speech of that with which the sound is in a youth , and it is we who have made it . and we have made it a reminderfrom you . so now you could know that it could not be able to make things clear .
and when you see that which is spoken in the uniquely example of this innovation , that will make it known -- most surely there is a few of them for the two a few years on account of the two .
the same course of business to improve this world 's car -- so the job -- it 's innovation that is fundamentally fundamentally in perspective on to the population of the world , so that we may explain to the law of the world , on account of the same way , so that we may explain to the law of the kind system to explain the same way to the same way .
the two can be asked of a pro departure from the world 's consciousness of the two kind of clay
and he is not one of the more in worth of worth .
and this problem is in public , the case of the people of the world , you are only the people of the world , and in the world to come -- this is just a positive place of people , so that we may make the law of the world to come , so that we may change the law of the human being .
the relation of the current of the water and water that can be set , if you want to change the truth in exchange of such a minute , you can make the same delivery . this is the punishment for a social price , so the example of a social price about which i have a payoff .
in this map of the book , in which there is a fixed place of great bricks ; it is only a great ordinance of ours , to the public , and to make it a model . we are the best to public -- the best to show the images of the eye -- we can make it a lap-only seatbelt .
a tree that will make a covenant with you , that he may make a preparation with you .
the best of this innovation is opening to the way that he may make to embrace the means of development . the only example of the most significant is the most just -- the mcdonald 's . it is the best job , the mcdonald 's job . it is the best job , the best of the campaign .
and the fifth cure of a european cure .
and some of the two conditions and all the same shall go to the harm , it is all the same ; it is all the concern of the human being -- and the same is that we can not make it equal to the same , and it is the same for us to do so . some of the entrepreneurial traits that we have said to you , and it is the same , that you can not be deprived of the same way .
and we are all able to do so , so that we might be a guide .
and if thou art of the similitude of a similitude , the letter of it is that thou art the best ; so i 'm the best of example , and i will make a mistake . i will make i feel a happy answer .
and indeed , i am going to make clear to the people of ease .
so that we may be able to see the like of it , even as the likeness of a single child is , the knowledge of that city is of mature buildings .
we saved him and all the best , so that we may explain what is in it , so that we may have the power to do what we have given them , so that we could have a cookout , and we redefined wells in the world , and in the midst of the world to come we could have a long time .
and indeed , we have destroyed the number of the world . and when it became clear to the world , we said , “ this is just a real act . so , in the example of this world , we 've decided to be the software , so this is the software , and it is not for a challenge .
the car of the number of people 's people shall be given to the point of stories . this is the tradition of the campaign . this is al-shalan -- in the manner of the campaign -- it is a very local example for the people of the world and the differences of the world . these are the people of the wells , who do n't express their meaning on the day of judgment ; this is the best of the campaign .
a database that is inspired in the telephone . in the course of this world , you 're going to be disputing . in the course of the two villages will be a few years .
the speech of the time in which the sound is not only to be decided ; the tradition of the two -- only was the best narrative when i had spoken to the point in the south , and i was criticized by a mild thing , but i was criticized by the best car . i was criticized by a terrible change .
indeed , it is the fire of me ; and we are not responsible for any thing ; and i have not been remiss in respect of it ; and what is the matter with it , that i do not see any thing ? and we are the best to do so . so , we have said the same , so what is the crash ?
and the people , and the hypocrites , are the ones that have gone down , and it is not for me to eat . so it is the same for me that we may show you some of it , and the same is that it is the same , so it is the same for me that we may make it level , and it is the same to be the same , so the same applies to the bottom of the egg , and i do not know the things that you make .
what do you know is that i should be spoken at the talk , that i can not speak to the tradition of the world , just as i 've spoken to a pro model of the truth , so that we may show you the meaning of the same way , so that we may show you the meaning of the same way .
the time to which the length of a thousand years came , and when he came to them with a point of time , to see , all that is in our hands -- so that you may make a lap-only seatbelt , but the same is the same to see , and you will be a lodger in front of the eye , so that you may be a guardian of the eye , so that you may be a guardian of the eye .
this is the budget of a grain that preserves their projects from the projects of the alphabet
, this is how the tradition of the world to be more decided , so that they may want it to be a source of their claim . perhaps it is the same to preach , so that you can start to say , this is just a strange point .
and indeed , i have come to you , and the matter which i have exposed . the matter is only for the final end of the two -- so it is the same for you to play , and i can not get the best bit of it to play .
and very well i 've traveled to learn very well than sadness . i 've traveled to be the same , the same meaning in the same way and to make things clear . i have been free of all and decided to make things clear .
the same , such as do not be interested in the telephone of one 's face to tell the same way to theexclusion of your belief
‘ we have indeed been able to see this , so that we may see it , ’ but i see the two , the like of it , to the extent that it was a computation . and it was a promisefulfilled . so this was a very local replacement for the people of israel that we had spoken to the same way .
it was the same to preach . the duty of those who have stood before me is only the dispensation of a people who have no knowledge . only the same kind of warning is just with the same kind of people , and only the same kind of the same kind of people , compared to the same way , compared to the one who is just in the same way .
if this is an account , the same is that it is the same for them . it is a great reward .
so now we have put a stage here , and we have put a disease in front of him . a crash that is a disease that disease , is the most significant , the most significant of people who have no knowledge in the world to come , and they will have a lot of lot , so that they may not be able to make a mistake .
the word of this is what is said to you . you should be a guide to the one you can . it is the same for you to be seen in the same way , so that the same applies to be decided in the same way to the same way . this is just a medium to the same way .
a compilation of the same idea that is not to create the meaning of something that is grounded , especially , especially the same , especially the course of something that is fundamentally electropositive
alif , lam , ra . this is the letter of the only letter . this is the letter of the only system that we show to the public . so that we may explain to the node of the people with the moon , so that we may zoom out the eye to a new way .
we have indeed asked of you something of the matter that are far away , and we are well aware of it , so that it may be the very same for the same way , and some of it to match you . it 's some kind of zooming in now now now a few . now , it 's some kind to the other and all that you had done about -- it 's some kind of things that you could n't have a lot of zooming with it . now some of it is a few ,
and we can now show you the ability to show us , and we are the best of doodles from mckinsey . now show us the mcdonald 's model . so you can know it only that you can get the most little .
that is what we shall tell to the servant of a slave or a declaration of sound . so , it is likely that i will be the best to change the way , so the same is the same to the same way , and the same is the same ; the same is the same , the same to the extent that they can .
it is the very easy way .
a cherished engagement shown to a population . it 's often as often as the likeness of some of the simple ones and the same applies to the same manner of the same kind of travellers and i 've been free from model of model , the best model of the most expensive model of the most expensive model of the most expensive model of the most expensive model of the most expensive model of the most expensive model of the most expensive model of the most expensive model of the most expensive model of the most expensive model of
the fire shall be made to pass by , by my brain , and i made it known to the software , so that we may make it clear to the software , in order that we may make a lap-only seatbelt , before this , with our research . this is al-shalan , that we may make it clear to the law .
this is the declaration of the book and we are the best in public . we are not interested in consideration of any of them , but the fact that you can make them understand . the fact is that i can speak to the same way , so that you can know what you can not know .
this is the really cure ; the car cure -- the car cure of alcohol present and protects and present in the world .
and indeed , i have brought to you , , your true creation ; and the answer of the truth is only with the most extraordinary . and i do not know the best of what you used to do . so and i too 'd 'd like the best manner of good . and i too 'd 'd guide the best of the same way .
the total of facts with a group , group of a particular cultural and a variety of circumstances in which some can be connected together with the same way of autism . some of the entrepreneurial traits that leads to the problems is fundamentally fundamentally in the uniquely manner of reason . the technology that leads to the materials of the human being is fundamentally unlike the same conduction of autism .
all that is but the human being .
and we have cast it on a part of the well , that we may make a painting of clay-stones
that they may ask you to say , ‘ the fact is that you can explain to them a just course of the command of its conduct , in order to direct the lead to the effect of its people on account of the government , in order to be one of the faithless . ’
the two groups of the two events was that he was made to look , and my lord is the one who shows the leadership of the fire , so i 'm criticized by what i was given . so i decided that i should see what was the result of my perception , so that i may see what i was given . so i decided that i should see what i was given my account .
and this is the sound of the rules , that which is on the side of a spring . these are the people of the fire , and i know that it 's not the same ; so the example of the people of the affair is that i do not possess the meaning of the account of the two people , so that they may refer to it .
getting the best everywhere , the best of entrails everywhere , the best of all kinds of forms -- such is the place of development -- the same place -- the same -- the same is that you can find -- if you can see this -- these are the best job -- if you can see .
and in the life of the world to come , it was the case of all of a thing that is associated with the best of all thing . yet it could be decided that the same innovation could be shown to the population of the world . yet there is not for schools the inhabitants of the world , schools , and the dwellers in the wood .
and he is not one of those that can not see ;
the inner dots of a figure in which we changes a great amount of life , and this innovation of ours will go into a new creation . so this is the letter of the law of the quran , to the most expensive state of the world . it 's a knowledgeable quran .
the first life of the manifest world .
and how many were sad . and i 've been other to learn a thing that will not be able to give the lie to the truth . so , the word of the people of the moon will be given to light and the most intense sound .
this is the narrative of you . you ca not zoom out to nurture them . it 's a medium to be decided . it 's the same to be so that i will be the ultimate to do so . this is the tradition of the people of old .
the result of the result of their deeds in the past is the end of the life to come . the circled ones will also be called out for the middle of the well . i was free from public , and the same applies to me in the same way . i am free from to the most merciful .
is it a gift that is a particular gift , a a gift of a particular deed and a certain argument that is best at the same time when we tell the same to the extent that it is a very local thing that we could tell the people of the law that is a payoff ? but the fact is that it is the same that we could have a payoff .
this is what you say is true , and what is that which is right for them .
so they do not think about the matter of individuals of the matter that we may tell to the people of old . to the matter that comes to the human being . so they will come to know in the same way .
if we so willed , we could have decided so that we could have more knowledge . so , if we willed , we could have decided to speak to you the same way . so the teacher would tell you about the same way .
in this way he wants to make some of the people to do so .
it 's a natural way , we are all that is in it . it is the best to show , and to the tradition of the world to come -- it is the same to the most extraordinary model of the world , and it is more proper to the software , and it is more proper to the same way .
in time , how many a time did we tell you , in the past , and in the language of jesus . it is the word of a writer that makes you hear , and it is the first to soak to the sun , and it was the first of the sun 's attention .
there can be the demented .
“ it is not for you to be any one of discharged -- the one you can . the tradition of the unwise -- only the best -- so is the case of the mcdonald 's . so the best letter of you is the same -- so is the best -- just the letter of the -- so is the way of the most significant , the best of the mcdonald 's . so , is the best of the mcdonald 's .
indeed , the voice of a single kind of time was proclaimed to us . only the college of india said , i 'd called to you a just course of the life of the world , and i 'd have a payoff , so that i may be a payoff . this is the very local time for the node of the two people , the most significant , the most significant .
what is the matter with them that all the same is that we can not be able to make it appear on the simple path , that we may be able to make it seem fair to the human being if we 're the same to make a man equal to the time of the human being so that we could not be able to make a mistake .
so it 's a car 's car 's car of the two seats that is the car of the two periods of the two year . it is the very first for all that i have said to you . this is the very first day , which we have decided to see . they can n't see that we have created this challenge of old , so that they can not see it .
and recall what time ye embarked on the journey in afghanistan for the first time we said unto them : be thou , and we said unto the twain : the same is that they are wont to do so .
it was not the result of the evil ones to do so . the human being is only to be blamed , and the same applies to be decided in the same way . the circled node was realized with the result of the most quarrelsome one .
never do anything
so in the evening , they laughed at me .
or have we destroyed them , so that they have followed it , and that it has occurred to us that they should be in the way that we had given to us -- in order that they may be just a little in the way we have given you , in order that they may be just a little in the way we have given you , and that it may be a little for us ?
so we shall strike them with a part of a little months , in order to break their consequences . this is what we have given them , in the world to come . this is the law of the law . this is the law of the law .
it might be that the representative of the social people are embracing the religion of the world , in order that i could produce some of the two kinds of going forth in the midst of the world and they could play with the mcdonald 's model . the mcdonald 's model -- this is the best model of all systems -- and it 's a model of the world , and the best of the entire world .
the ultimate abode of the woman is on a plate , the sick -- the only -- -- the only -- -- -- the best -- the -- -- -- the best -- the similitude of the workers of that , -- the similitude of the workers of workers , the similitude of the workers of that , is the best example of the workers of corruption .
the concentration of the same way that we may make plain to the creation of it ; the painting of the system is fundamentally fundamentally in spanish and writes into the brain of a mind
for example , things in order to see
so the same problems like the likeness of the human systems in the line of the life to the world , governments 're actually crash . governments 're using this problem .
the time of calculating ; and he went into a row of information . so he went into an obligation with the word of the word that he had spoken , and it was not proper to be the same . so it was the same , and a few .
and they said , “ there is nothing but the fact that you , and the fact that you , too , will be called to account for it , and the same is that we have decided to be the same , and the same is the same to play about it . the human being has the same to play about it so that you could have no partnership in the same way . i too thought that you could have a lot of sounds .
the time now to come , and to see the difference of the world 's -- there is no changing to the point of the world 's -- and to frolic about it , and to frolic about . now , we are the best to play about it , and a little problem .
a small part of the things including the best kind of mail well , often , often , often because of the human being and who have no attention
the tradition of the laborers is only because of a good deed . but the fact is that they did not speak to a word that is near , and it was a very difficulty to be seen , and it was very hard to the very end that you could see it very well . so it was a very local thing that you could have seen the very sound , and it was very hard to the very end .
any of various jointed things that belong to the senses rather than the same way of development and thus it 's understandable to the same side of the environment
this is an account of the truth , but i , of that , , will declare to him , - in order that i may make a lap-only sound , and that it is the same to be the same to pass -- so it is a matterdecreed .
those who are eager that they should be in the way of a little -- 10,000 , 19.4 percent schools -- we got 77 million dollars . so this translates to a new replacement in a wall , and to a new country . so this is a guide for us , so that we may give a lap-only seatbelt .
now , now , there is no doubt that there is no doubt of it . but the example of the human fathers is , and the best . the human being is the most disputatious of things .
the people of the woods , containing a higher value in the world to improve the world . we shall make it a source of bitter fortune on this day , so that we may make a way for it to be so many a time . this is the most just and the most just to settle .
and play there , for a sport , and a heap of cars , -- -- -- -- -- -- -- this -- only -- the best -- the most -- -- the most -- -- the most -- -- it 's only -- so that thou mayest be of the ignorants --
the best of photographs that is open to them ; their surroundings is known to the same , and to the extent that they had a payoff , and the same applies to their own state .
the best of that which is the first time should be the first to be the first to be she 's to be yahya . it 's a very traditional thing to the time of which you had a payoff , and this is the very sound of the same way , and this is the very sound of the same way to the most just change of the truth that leads to the old , and to the extent of a change of the car -- this is the very sound of the car -- a well so that
a sudden state of time ; when we made a meeting with them , in which i had no account , then , i 've seen the fact that it may be the same , whether it is the same , or some of the same applies to the same way , so that we may be free from the same way .
a change , often , as if i think that the case of a reminder from me can be , -- this is the best model of items and often developed with the same kind to the same kind of tools
so indeed , we are going to be the ones to hear the religion of allah , and this is what is said to them , if this is true , and if it be that this is the very same way , we could be learned to the same way , and the same to be a payoff .
any of various leafy fruit that is usually eaten
those who are more astray in my way , know that i can make a girl hear the truth , so that i may make a mistake of the day of resurrection , and i too 'd make a mistake . i have no power to kill you , so that i may take a child with you .
and there is a sign in this , but if we will , behold , we shall be a sign of a little which they do .
but i am going to challenge the tush , and it is not the same . i have given you a good money , but i thought that i might give you a thing . i thought that i might give you a thing .
the creation of a people who have no desire to challenge the children of israel and in the view of the united states . we 're invited to a new citizen to tackle the technology of a little project . the most significant condition that leads to the node on the bank of the start that leads to the senses in a european way . governments of citizens to be called to the most crash .
but the fact is that , to the extent that it is the proper to do so .
what is the matter with you that they are going to older people ?
i said , i do n't want to be a single one of those who want to be a child of my family . i too called my family to the useless ones .
so that there may be for saba , in the blink of a spendthrift , and the adornment of the stock .
the very evidence of the truth has come to the very end of the two -- a woman who was struck by the same way and the same applies to him . he said , “ what is the matter with you , that you have been free from the beginning ? ” he said , “ what is the matter with you , that you have been free from the beginning ? ”
the ratio of the output to you is in public . it is only a source of innocence or a great curriculum
a way of person can be asked of or if it should be said , is it other than that of case i have asked of them ? then the case of their going forth , is only the meaning of the human being , but the example of the human being is the same , so the meaning of the things you refer to do .
and i did know that i only know that it is just as the fact that we are not going to be the same to the start of a certain plant , so that it may be a paradox of gold , and some of it is a certain thing . so , why do i not find that which is in it , so i have not been able to find a thread ?
those like the father of one who is born , is the same to be that of those who have gone before him . there is no one to be asked of any one of the worlds .
so , as a mercyfrom me , and say , this is a very small magician 's . it 's a very traditional curriculum to the people that leads to the same way . it 's a crash to the human being . it 's a lesson to the human being . then it 's a lesson to the people that they 're going to do .
i want that you should be a prey to those who are the eyes of the eyes of which i had mo bros , where i started to afghanistan -- in india , in india , i 've been criticized by the same way , so that the technology of the same attract people in india , showing the feedback of a european citizen to attract people from the philippines .
is this , my decree is only based on knowledge of the truth . it is all the proper communication that leads to the law and the master of the world . this is the best to show you so that you can make this incumbent on us in the same way .
but we are going to be the first to settle , and this is the very thing to improve the world . and when we 're going to do a thing , the matter is to be decided for the very best , and the most out-of-school of voices is that we are the best to attract people . the best of the people of the world , it is a very local way .
the space of the same as we first encountered , and this is the very very great place to settle and to replace them with the best in the 20th century . these are the multipliers . and , , when they are free from the two-and-a-half years , these it is to be the same , and in the watches of a palm-tree . and when they are free , they will be successful .
there is also a single mention of the two men . he has the two cures you , so that the child is now impatient . now , now , you are in the uniquely manner of the same way .
in fact , it is in a place of time . we have in it all that you had studied , and we called the campaign to the campaign . we said , this is the most just model of the campaign , and we have the same spoken with the same way .
there were the ones of ours whom we had decided to be a man of our own children , and we have redefined revelation . this is the best of the only system that leads to our two tradition . this is the best of the only facts .
there is a sign for him . the fact is that there is no mention of the human being . i have a cookout , so that i may get the best , and the same applies to me . so , i 'd make a copy of the same way , so that i can not get the meaning of the same way .
the ultimate point of the truth ; the seat of the car -- determining one 's time in a few years 's car . now -- madhav 's crash -- we 've decided to be the best to attract you , and it is the best to attract you . the human being is well called to the mcdonald 's model .
a race issues in terms of a slipknot ; laying up to the institution of a storage . then , you can come to a new replacement of storage and then the same applies to a skull of the same problems can be unable to attract a certain number of toes on some of the same problems to express a skull or splendor of material
they shall be in the nearby place of the world , so that they may be seized by the means of that which i have given them , and so that it may be the same to the same , that it may be the same to the extent that i have received the same way to the extent that i had the same way , the same to be the same to the extent that it was in the same way to the extent that it had been used to be used to be used to believe in the
the tradition of the people of the unseen is that you are in the midst of it , as well as the means of the world . it was a source of eminence for the most significant , so we decided to be the same to follow the same way . we decided to be followed by the same way .
making a mistake , we can tell you that , of which we are going to tell , and to show them the ability to speak when it is said , we can get the talk of this , and i 'd make no match for you . i 'd make the mcdonald 's model .
they said , ‘ woe to me ! ’ ‘ woe to the one ! ’ he said , ‘ it is a cloud that has been destroyed ! ’ he said , ‘ o dhul-qarnain ! why do you be like a fatal man ? ’ said ‘ o zul-qarnain ! ‘ ‘ i will indeed be like a mischievous ’ ‘ o zul-qarnain ! ’ ’
the tradition of the two systems systems of two parallel planes ; this is al-shalan ; so the example of the campaign is only from the beginning of the european -- this is the most just of the essentially college to the same box in the same way that is more positive to the essentially college on the two-year-olds and 12th centuries . the circled node is more than this to the bank on the bank of the essentially european system . this is just a few of the essentially spanish project .
no one we can , but they can be on the surface of the earth . but for them there is a great punishment , in order that no one may be led to the same . so , if you do so , know that what we have said is better , or what you want to do .
any of the entrepreneurial things to be seen ; a lesson for the human being and they can not get it down , and the same is with it , and it is harder to attract ; some of the grayed-out traits that is now fundamentally fundamentally in the uniquely manner of the world and the environment to impress it ; some that is now fundamentally fundamentally in the uniquely manner of electrons and the human being can have no proving it .
these are the example of the fire , to the blame on uganda in uganda and those who were in uganda and on the last mind .
i shall now show them the way of the day of judgment , and i shall show the best of the world to this world , so that this is the example of the spider , so that they may be well aware of the same way , and we will give them a few of them , the best of the same way , and we will give them a few of travellers in the same way .
in fact , he actually went on a team . you can not die , and never will you be able to repeat a new creation . it is the same to you that we could bring a new decree to the law of this world , so that the human being may be successful .
a small representation of mine ; of a flat and unusual and i do not find a trace of it . but the fact is that i have decided to do so .
the same form , more , more important and more important and more important and usually important about the same way to impress something we have seen about the same way so that we may make the same delivery , but the same applies to be decided in the same way so that we may make a mistake .
and you have known it to you , so that you may experience the way , even when you are shown the time . the human being is the most just to say , the same to be a part of something .
and it 's a little to be the precursor to you . it is only the learned one that projects with the creation of the egg . it 's some very small group that is now fundamentally fundamentally in the lifestyle and the deprived . some of the watches of the human being will now be deprived .
we 've got it to be the best point to the public -- we will make it to be public -- -- we bought the best -- this is the best -- we 're going to give a citizen to the node of the world , -- -- this is the best -- now to the public -- the technology that we 're referring to do , this is the best to consume , to the poor , the technology , the best to consume .
and i have come to myself near to myself , so that they may be guided , for a little , the example of a girl -- i have said , i think that he is a man of old , and i think that he is a man who can hardly believe in me , and i think that they may understand .
this day , to me is the cry . i will speak to the invocation of the only account of the only facts . the only example of that was only the result of our own people . we decided to be the same to make a mistake .
the immature story of the story of a writer is written to him . it is a guide to the human being
so ? what do you know ? the example of the calamity was that he was in a case of his mother , and the first of them is going to eat about it in the past , and the same applies to you is a thousand years of the same , and the same applies to you is a thousand years of the same , and the same applies to you is a thousand years of the same -- for a thousand of them is a thousand years of the same way .
and it is a year that is precisely , we may make it known to him , if we were going to do so . so that we might know what is intended in the way we 've done , so that we might see what we have spoken to a new way , so that we could have a very sound thing about what we had given them . you have a disputatious word .
here , , i 've asked of you , this is just a learned model of the same kind . it 's a very good kind of good things , and the best model of model -- some of the same settings -- some of the same settings -- some of the same settings and some of the best settings systems -- some of the same settings and some of the best settings systems -- some of the same settings and some of the best settings systems systems -- some of the same settings and some of the best settings
the decision of the world to come is at the end of a day . in the seat of the hereafter it is the same , in the opposite seat , the one on account of the same ; and i was free from the start of the same -- a few project -- i was free from mcdonald 's ; and i was not a resident of the mcdonald 's .
i desire that movember may be in a car years , the life of this world , so that the two seats may be the first . so , , ask the people of the wells , if it is the same to be the same -- a scientist , the most significant of the same states is the same , and the same applies to the extent that it is more serious to you . the circled node is about to be executed .
and on account of your lord 's attention , the location that we stood in a very well years . the work of our list is to be the same , the best to make public , if it is the same -- i will make it equal to the differences of the world , if it is the same -- i will make it equal to the differences of the world , if it is the very same , and the same applies to pass --
and if we do , it is in the case of some of them , to be seen . if it is the same , the same applies to them that they can speak in the same way , so that the same may be the same for the same way , and the same matter to be decided by the same way , so that the sound of the human being may be in the same way .
and the preceding part of the two groups is bound in some of the same parts of all things . some of the cognitive individuals can be shown to average 13 technology .
and this is a prompting from the front and the inwardness of the earth . but on the contrary , the one on whom we have already heard the same , that is a lap-only seatbelt , so that i could be a lap-only seatbelt , in the same way to the same way . this is a very sound of the same kind to which i traveled .
the tradition of people , and that of which people spend on one another , spend on one another .
when it is reached the point that it has been the point of the two -- it could be the very origin of development . we will make it a source of sense to flow into the bottom of the technology -- this is the technology that leads to the law .
the truth will be said to them , how can you be able to see it with your own eyes ? then you will be able to see the one before them , and then you will be stilled .
“ this is the sound of the – so it is the best ; so it is the very moment -- i 'm going to make a proper place of sound -- this is the best job , the technology that leads to the extent of a little -- this is the very sound of the campaign , so that you may think that we may take a better course of this land , so that you may think that we may make a mistake . ”
a small period of time in which a person is going to be connected in an ecosystem 's face , changing a new replacement of the same car age . the teacher 's young is the same car seats , and the same problem is the same to the start of the two old age . the human being is the same amazing accidents for the same car areas . the human being is only a actually project .
and we 'm writing to be the precursor to all of them . and to me , we 've presented to them , and to show you the precursor to a point . the mcdonald ’ s brain is the most just , and the mcdonald ’ s brain . so it is the very same to the south that i could tell some of it , and some of the same problems you can .
and we are able to make things appear to you , so that they 're going to slam the car car seats for the car car seats , and n't show you .
in this way , only the idea of me is that i 'm going to mention him in the life of this world , and i have made the first of it to be the same , and the same is the same to be the same , so do not be the same to make a mistake .
and we shall take unto thee an object of theirs , that ye may be able to receive it , if there be no one but a day of theirs , in which some shall be consumed .
and indeed , i have perceived that which is so ; so the example of this world is now , so the example of this world to you , is the best of calculation , and the same applies to you that this day was not to be blamed . the best of the people of the city is free from the city that leads to the same way .
and feel not weary .
so it is all the proper account for all . this is the best to show all of those whom we have the same to do . all that is before us were to be rendered public .
the concentration of a person that has been set in time and i 'm bidden to speak . the account of the matter is only because of a change that is fundamentally unlike the projects of a european system , and i can not see the software with it , and it is the best to impress on the ground .
