but that 's not the case .
doctors , lawyers , bankers , accountants . over 50 percent of managers are women these days , and in the 15 professions projected to grow the most in the next decade , all but two of them are dominated by women . so the global economy is becoming a place where women are more successful than men , believe it or not , and these economic changes are starting to rapidly affect our culture -- what our romantic comedies look like , what our marriages look like , what our dating lives look like , and our new set of superheroes . for a long time , this is the image of american manhood that dominated --
and we had a lot of fun , and in 2004 , i said to the guys ,  that was so much fun . we need to legitimize this so we can get away with it year on year .  so we started thinking about that , and we were inspired by the women around us and all they were doing for breast cancer . and we thought , you know what , there 's nothing for men 's health .
it can come from any way that you can create electricity , including renewables . and it can come from biofuels . and that 's quite exciting . the vision here is to have each local community play to its natural strength in creating the hydrogen . a lot of hydrogen 's produced today in the world . it 's produced to get sulfur out of gasoline -- which i find is somewhat ironic . it 's produced in the fertilizer industry ; it 's produced in the chemical manufacturing industry . that hydrogen 's being made because there 's a good business reason for its use . but it tells us that we know how to create it ,
the last three of the five , i 've grouped together .
the gs , as carl magnusson says ,  brute-iful ,  as the idea of what could be a motorcycle , if you add two more wheels . and so , in conclusion , my lesson that i wanted to pass on to you , was this one here . i 'm also going to steal a little quote out of  little prince .  there 's a lot to be said about trust and love ,
right , here 's a reconditioned coffee machine . it actually looks better than a brand new one -- so looking good there . now reusing is vital . and we filter our own water . we put them in bottles , refrigerate them , and then we reuse that bottle again and again and again . here 's a great little example . if you can see this orange tree , it 's actually growing in a car tire , which has been turned inside out and sewn up . it 's got my compost in it , which is growing an orange tree , which is great . this is the kitchen , which is in the same room .
and this is all relative to unrestrained -- the bigger the bar , the better . okay .
1,500 miles before we eat it . so we talked to kids about that , and we really start to feed kids regional food . and then we talk about organic food . now , most school districts ca n't really afford organic food , but we , as a nation , have to start thinking about consuming , growing and feeding our children food that 's not chock-full of chemicals . we ca n't keep feeding our kids pesticides and herbicides and antibiotics and hormones . we ca n't keep doing that . you know , it does n't work . and the results of that are kids getting sick . one of my big soapboxes right now is antibiotics .
it was n't what i wanted to do . i did n't want to be a stylist in this way .  advertising is the price companies pay for being unoriginal .  so , i had to start on my own . so i moved to san francisco , and i started a little company , fuseproject . and what i wanted to work on is important stuff . and i wanted to really not just work on the skins , but i wanted to work on the entire human experience . and so the first projects were sort of humble , but they took technology and maybe made it into things that people would use in a new way ,
in our own lives , and this is a bonus taboo . av : a quick bonus taboo for you , that we should not be working together , especially with three children -- and we are . rg : and we had reservations about this on the front end . everybody knows , you should absolutely not work with your spouse . in fact , when we first went out to raise money to start babble , the venture capitalists said ,  we categorically do n't invest in companies founded by husbands and wives , because there 's an extra point of failure . it 's a bad idea . do n't do it .  and we obviously went forward . we did .
my girlfriend at the time , who 's no longer my girlfriend — — hated it .
i could n't improve on this as a good example of how flow enters the workplace .
you get a z.q . score when you wake up . you say ,  oh , ok.  and a z.q . score is adjusted to age , and you want to get as high as you possibly can . so this is the moment-by-moment , or minute-by-minute sleep . and you see that z.q . there was 80-odd . and the wake time is in orange . and this can be a problem , as i learned . because it not only helps you with quantifying your sleep , but also tells others you 're awake . so , when my wife came in and she could tell you 're awake .  eric , i want to talk . i want to talk . 
not adding that on after all the learning has been done and you 've eaten your cognitive greens . so el sistema in venezuela uses a violin as a technology of learning . taio rocha uses making soap as a technology of learning .
but we do n't understand these native pollinators or all those other parts of our community . and of course , bees are not the only important factor here . there are other animals that pollinate , like bats , and bats are in trouble too . and i 'm glad i 'm a bee man and not a bat man , because there 's no money to research the bat problems . and bats are dying at an extraordinary rate . white-nose syndrome has wiped out populations of bats . if there 's a cave in new york that had 15,000 bats in it , and there are 1,000 left . that 's like san francisco becoming the population of half of this county in three years .
i wish for food for my children .
lawyers take cases on contingency with the hope of a big share of a big settlement by a sympathetic jury , because this patient really ended up badly . the high cost of health care in the us is partly due to litigation and insurance costs . i 've seen pictures , graphs in today 's usa today showing it skyrocketing out of control , and this is one factor . well , how can the ted community help with this situation ? i have a couple of ideas to begin with . as a starting point for discussion with the ted group , a major part of the problem is the nature of the written extent
but essentially , do something like this , which i do n't know exactly how much it would cost to do , but there 's no reason i could see why this should be much more expensive than a regular car seat . it 's just actually -- you see , this is folding up -- it 's behind the seat . you 've got a regular seat for adults , and then you fold it down , and the kid sits on top , and it 's integrated . it seems to me that this ca n't be a very expensive solution , and it 's got to work better than what we already have . so the question is , is there any hope for adoption of something like this ,
the next thing is that if you want to predict the effect of one species on another , if you focus only on that link , and then you black box the rest , it 's actually less predictable than if you step back , consider the entire system -- all the species , all the links -- and from that place , hone in on the sphere of influence that matters most .
why do children learn so much ? and how is it possible for them to learn so much in such a short time ? i mean , after all , if you look at babies superficially , they seem pretty useless . and actually in many ways , they 're worse than useless , because we have to put so much time and energy into just keeping them alive . but if we turn to evolution for an answer to this puzzle of why we spend so much time taking care of useless babies , it turns out that there 's actually an answer . if we look across many , many different species of animals ,
how might you persuade them that they 're wrong ? bg : well , unfortunately , the skeptics come in different camps . the ones who make scientific arguments are very few . are they saying that there 's negative feedback effects that have to do with clouds that offset things ? there are very , very few things that they can even say there 's a chance in a million of those things . the main problem we have here , it 's kind of like aids . you make the mistake now , and you pay for it a lot later . and so , when you have all sorts of urgent problems , the idea of taking pain now that has to do with a gain later ,
later , i joined the world bank , which sought to fight such poverty by transferring aid from rich to poor countries .
which we hopefully will do some more . who knows ? the new york timesselect , the op-ed page , asked me to do a column , and they said , you can do whatever you want . so , once a month for the last year , i 've been doing a column called  the principles of uncertainty ,  which , you know , i do n't know who heisenberg is , but i know i can throw that around now . you know , it 's the principles of uncertainty , so , you know . i 'm going to read quickly -- and probably i 'm going to edit some , because i do n't have that much time left -- a few of the columns .
you put down your arrowheads and say ,  i 'd like to trade these arrowheads for finished arrows . i 'll split you 50/50 .  the other one says ,  fine . looks good to me . we 'll do that .  now the job is done . once we have language , we can put our ideas together and cooperate to have a prosperity that we could n't have before we acquired it . and this is why our species has prospered around the world while the rest of the animals sit behind bars in zoos , languishing . that 's why we build space shuttles and cathedrals while the rest of the world sticks sticks into the ground
how do you prevent -- and some of the data that you 've produced , the good science that you 're talking about you 've produced , is hot to handle . how do you prevent either the media 's interpretation of your work or the scientific community 's interpretation of the implications of your work , kind of like the mozart metaphor , where ,  oh , mris show that play enhances your intelligence . well , let 's round these kids up , put them in pens and make them play for months at a time ; they 'll all be geniuses and go to harvard .  how do you prevent people from taking that sort of action
after my year at home , i sat down and i wrote out a detailed , step-by-step description of the ideal balanced day that i aspired to . and it went like this : wake up well rested after a good night 's sleep . have sex . walk the dog . have breakfast with my wife and children . have sex again . drive the kids to school on the way to the office . do three hours ' work . play a sport with a friend at lunchtime . do another three hours ' work . meet some mates in the pub for an early evening drink . drive home for dinner
she is the founder of body shop , the natural cosmetics king . it 's kind of a passion that comes from doing the best and having flow while you 're working . this is an interesting little quote from masaru ibuka , who was at that time starting out sony without any money , without a product -- they did n't have a product , they did n't have anything , but they had an idea . and the idea he had was to establish a place of work where engineers can feel the joy of technological innovation , be aware of their mission to society and work to their heart 's content .
the other kind of reviewer is a certain flavor of feminist who thinks they know what little girls ought to be .
waiting 10 years for the payoff from education is too long when you need to meet daily needs , when you 've got siblings to look after or a business to help with . so you need education to be relevant and help people to make a living there and then , often . and you also need to make it intrinsically interesting . so time and again , i found people like this .
and the study showed that , compared to other buildings , there is a reduced incidence of eye irritation by 52 percent , respiratory systems by 34 percent , headaches by 24 percent , lung impairment by 12 percent and asthma by nine percent .
then to move up with development , clinical trial validation and then changing medical practice , the most challenging thing of all , requiring attention to reimbursement , healthcare policy , healthcare economics . the other big thing , besides having this fantastic institute to catalyze this process is guidance , and that 's of course relying on the fact that medicine goes digital . if we understand biology from genomics and omics and wireless through physiologic phenotyping , that 's big . because what it does is allow a convergence like we 've never had before . over 80 major diseases have been cracked at the genomic level ,
and interval research is kind of the living example of how that can be true . so david and i decided to go find out , through the best research we could muster , what it would take to get a little girl to put her hands on a computer , to achieve the level of comfort and ease with the technology that little boys have because they play video games . we spent two and a half years conducting research ; we spent another year and a half in advance development . then we formed a spin-off company .
you can do small , trivial things and yet still get these benefits from doing this . these are only two countries . we also wanted to go even broader and look at every country in the world if we could to see what the relationship is between money and happiness . we got data from the gallup organization , which you know from all the political polls that have been happening lately . they ask people ,  did you donate money to charity recently ?  and they ask them ,  how happy are you with your life in general ?  and we can see what the relationship is between those two things .
i resolved to give back .
i asked ,  where were you on 9/11 ?  and one young ranger in the back -- his hair 's tousled and his face is red and windblown from being in combat in the cold afghan wind -- he said ,  sir , i was in the sixth grade .  and it reminded me that we 're operating a force that must have shared purpose and shared consciousness , and yet he has different experiences , in many cases a different vocabulary , a completely different skill set in terms of digital media than i do and many of the other senior leaders . and yet , we need to have that shared sense .
this is a variant on something that has been done . it 's an important advance , but it 's like a fast reactor , and a lot of countries have built them , so anybody who 's done a fast reactor is a candidate to be where the first one gets built . ca : so , in your mind , timescale and likelihood of actually taking something like this live ? bg : well , we need -- for one of these high-scale , electro-generation things that 's very cheap , we have 20 years to invent and then 20 years to deploy . that 's sort of the deadline that the environmental models have shown us that we have to meet .
ebay for errands existed . six months later , leah quit her job , and taskrabbit was born . at the time , she did n't realize that she was actually hitting on a bigger idea she later called service networking . it 's essentially about how we use our online relationships to get things done in the real world . now the way taskrabbit works is , people outsource the tasks that they want doing , name the price bid to run the errand . yes , there 's actually a four-stage , rigorous interview process that 's designed to find the people that would make
of disease , and this will work in due course . here is an example of a slightly more complicated device . there 's the chip . you dip in a corner . the fluid goes into the center . it distributes itself out into these various wells or holes , and turns color , and all done with paper and carpet tape . so , i think it 's as low-cost as we 're likely to be able to come up and make things . now , i have one last , two last little stories to tell you , in finishing off this business . this is one : one of the things that one does occasionally need to do is to separate blood cells from serum .
in over 192 countries . the places being rented out are things that you might expect , like spare rooms and holiday homes , but part of the magic is the unique places that you can now access : treehouses , teepees , airplane hangars , igloos . if you do n't like the hotel , there 's a castle down the road that you can rent for 5,000 dollars a night . it 's a fantastic example of how technology is creating a market for things that never had a marketplace before . now let me show you these heat maps of paris to see how insanely fast it 's growing . this image here is from 2008 .
pooping in the foreground — — kind of an in-your-face joke by the artist . and you can just imagine them . but it brought it alive to them . i think they suddenly saw that these were n't just old faded tapestries . these were images of the world in the past , and that it was the same for our audience . and for me as a curator , i felt proud . i felt i 'd shifted the needle a little . through this experience that could only be created in a museum , i 'd opened up the eyes of my audience -- historians , artists , press , the general public --
now , malaria is an incredibly complicated disease . we could spend hours going over this . it 's got this sort of soap opera-like lifestyle ; they have sex , they burrow into your liver , they tunnel into your blood cells ... it 's an incredibly complicated disease , but that 's actually one of the things we find interesting about it and why we work on malaria : there 's a lot of potential ways in . one of those ways might be better diagnosis . so we hope this year to prototype each of these devices . one does an automatic malaria diagnosis in the same way that a diabetic 's glucose meter works :
right ? if you go down below on a boat , your inner ears are you telling you you 're moving . your eyes , because it 's moving in register with the boat , say i 'm standing still . your brain can not deal with the uncertainty of that information , and it gets ill. the question  why ?  is one of the most dangerous things you can do , because it takes you into uncertainty . and yet , the irony is , the only way we can ever do anything new is to step into that space . so how can we ever do anything new ? well fortunately , evolution has given us an answer , right ?
and when you get an aura you can try it and see how it works . well , the next thing they have to show is what was on abc news , channel 7 , last week in new york city , in the 11 o'clock news . anchor : for anyone who suffers from migraine headaches -- and there are 30 million americans who do -- tonight : a possible answer . eyewitness news reporter stacy sager tonight , with a small and portable machine that literally zaps your migraines away . christina sidebottom : well , my first reaction was that it was -- looked awfully gun-like , and it was very strange .
so i knew there were two cars with two license plates on each . if i could n't sell all four , i could at least get one . i learned that at a young age .
in addition , there can be some infectious agents that can also cause autism .
it 's like they took five valiums -- you know , they 're all over the place . and we ca n't talk to her . i remember his son had the l.l . bean bootlaces , and we 're trying to do up his laces . so , we try to get to the door , and we run to the door , and we open the door and it 's like walking into a blast furnace . there 's people screaming , there 's the sound of glass breaking , there 's these weird thumps . and the whole room filled with smoke in about two seconds . and gene turns around and says ,  we 're not going to make it .  and he closes the door , and the whole room is now filled with smoke .
so the highest bar is what you 're striving to beat .
to the beauty of this lost medium . a few years later , i was invited to be the director of the museum , and after i got over that --  who , me ? the tapestry geek ? i do n't wear a tie !  -- i realized the fact : i believe passionately in that curated museum experience . we live in an age of ubiquitous information , and sort of  just add water  expertise , but there 's nothing that compares with the presentation of significant objects in a well-told narrative , what the curator does , the interpretation of a complex , esoteric subject , in a way that retains the integrity of the subject , that makes it -- unpacks it
we subscribed to a lot of magazines , did our homework , but really everywhere you look around , we were surrounded by images like this . and we went into parenting expecting our lives to look like this . the sun was always streaming in , and our children would never be crying . i would always be perfectly coiffed and well rested , and in fact , it was not like that at all . rg : when we lowered the glossy parenting magazine that we were looking at , with these beautiful images , and looked at the scene in our actual living room , it looked a little bit more like this .
maybe a small space , a hotel room . so when you go home and you walk through your front door , take a second and ask yourselves ,  could i do with a little life editing ? would that give me a little more freedom ? maybe a little more time ?  what 's in the box ? it does n't really matter . i know i do n't need it . what 's in yours ? maybe , just maybe , less might equal more . so let 's make room for the good stuff . thank you . let 's just start by looking at some great photographs . this is an icon of national geographic , an afghan refugee taken by steve mccurry .
over the next few decades -- and this 50-year time bubble you kind of move along in . and in that 50 years , if you look at the population curve , you find the population of humans on the earth more than doubles and we 're up three-and-a-half times since i was born . when you have a new baby , by the time that kid gets out of high school more people will be added than existed on earth when i was born . this is unprecedented , and it 's big . where it goes in the future is questioned . so that 's the human part . now , the human part related to animals : look at the left side of that .
a fantastic thing . but in the developing world a lot of vaccines spoil before they 're administered , and that 's because they need to be kept cold . almost all vaccines need to be kept at refrigerator temperatures . they go bad very quickly if you do n't , and if you do n't have stable power grid , this does n't happen , so kids die . it 's not just the loss of the vaccine that matters ; it 's the fact that those kids do n't get vaccinated . this is one of the ways that vaccines are carried : these are styrofoam chests . these are being carried by people , but they 're also put on the backs of pickup trucks .
what i call the human portion -- humans and their livestock and pets -- versus the natural portion -- all the other wild animals and just -- these are vertebrates and all the birds , etc. , in the land and air , not in the water . how does it balance ? certainly , 10,000 years ago , the civilization 's beginning , the human portion was less than one tenth of one percent . let 's look at it now . you follow this curve and you see the whiter spot in the middle -- that 's your 50-year time bubble . humans , livestock and pets are now 97 percent of that integrated total mass on earth
 where did they go ?   went to india and back .  went straight to the president . he said ,  do you know there 's a solar-electrified village in sierra leone ?  he said ,  no .  half the cabinet went to see the grandmothers the next day .
and at that point , you think ,  hey , guess what ? i 'm probably going to jump . there 's no way to get out of this at this point .  you go through some additional checks , and then they open the door . and this was that tuesday morning in september , and it was pretty nice outside . so nice air comes flowing in . the jumpmasters start to check the door . and then when it 's time to go , a green light goes and the jumpmaster goes ,  go .  the first guy goes , and you 're just in line , and you just kind of lumber to the door . jump is a misnomer ; you fall .
so , this is the data i just showed , ok ?
of informed consent that the patient or spouse must read and sign . for example , i asked the epilepsy people what are they using for informed consent . would you believe , 12 pages , single space , the patient has to read before they 're in our trial to cure their epilepsy ? what do you think someone has at the end of reading 12 single-spaced pages ? they do n't understand what the hell it 's about . that 's the present system . how about making a video ? we have entertainment people here ; we have people who know how to do videos , with visual presentation of the anatomy and procedure done with animation .
and he decided that maybe he should leave the country for a few days , and seek out some more intelligent , open-minded people in a place called oxford , and come and try and tell the story at that place .
and that 's completely possible . and if that 's the case , then i think we 're stuck with conventional car seats for a long time to come . thank you very much .
and after the battle , they bring this mobile theater and they do what they call an  after action review  to teach you what you 've done wrong . sort of leadership by humiliation . they put a big screen up , and they take you through everything :  and then you did n't do this , and you did n't do this , etc .  i walked out feeling as low as a snake 's belly in a wagon rut . and i saw my battalion commander , because i had let him down . and i went up to apologize to him , and he said ,  stanley , i thought you did great .  and in one sentence ,
and that traditional approach to development had three key elements . first , transfer of resources from rich countries in the north to poorer countries in the south , accompanied by reform prescriptions .
with a gun on it . then traffic jams , and power systems , and some dots for digital . where it 's going to lead -- i have no idea . and so i just put robotic and natural cockroaches out there , but you can fill in whatever you want . this is not a forecast . this is a warning , and we have to think seriously about it . and that time when this is happening is not 100 years or 500 years . things are going on this decade , next decade ; it 's a very short time that we have to decide what we are going to do . and if we can get some agreement on where we want the world to be --
maybe , to really be happy , we need to stay completely immersed and focused on our experience in the moment . maybe these people are right . maybe mind-wandering is a bad thing . on the other hand , when our minds wander , they 're unconstrained . we ca n't change the physical reality in front of us , but we can go anywhere in our minds . since we know people want to be happy , maybe when our minds wander , they 're going to someplace happier than the place that they 're leaving . it would make a lot of sense . in other words , maybe the pleasures of the mind allow us to increase our happiness with mind-wandering .
we have to start collecting from 555. kbs : girls and boys in hyderabad , going out , pretty difficult , but they did it . woman : even though they are so young , they have done such good work . first they have cleaned the society , then it will be hyderabad , and soon india . woman : it was a revelation for me . it does n't strike me that they had so much inside them . girl : thank you , ladies and gentlemen . for our auction we have some wonderful paintings for you , for a very good cause , the money you give us will be used to buy hearing aids . are you ready , ladies and gentlemen ? audience : yes !
so you can find a little feature on a bacterium that you do n't like , like staphylococcus -- i do n't like it in particular , because it killed a professor friend of mine last year . it does n't respond to antibiotics . so i do n't like it . and i 'm making an aptamer that will have this attached to it . that will know how to find staph when it 's in your body , and will alert your immune system to go after it . here 's what happened . see that line on the very top with the little dots ? that 's a bunch of mice that had been poisoned by our scientist friends down in texas ,
because we , at the moment , have had brilliant leaders in business , in finance , in politics , making terrible decisions . so a high i.q . does not mean that you 're a good leader , because the essence of leadership is being able to see the iceberg before it hits the titanic . and we 've had far too many icebergs hitting our titanics . in fact , i have a feeling that if lehman brothers was lehman brothers and sisters , they might still be around . while all the brothers were busy just being hyper-connected 24/7 , maybe a sister would have noticed the iceberg , because she would have woken up from a seven-and-a-half- or eight-hour sleep
sheep , goats -- domestic chores . so we thought of starting a school at night for the children . because the night schools of tilonia , over 75,000 children have gone through these night schools . because it 's for the convenience of the child ; it 's not for the convenience of the teacher .
so that 's when i started to feel like a cyborg . it 's when i started to feel that the cybernetic device was no longer a device . it had become a part of my body , an extension of my senses , of my official image .
so let 's look at this fourth factor -- this is going to be a key one -- and this is the amount of co2 put out per each unit of energy . and so the question is : can you actually get that to zero ? if you burn coal , no . if you burn natural gas , no . almost every way we make electricity today , except for the emerging renewables and nuclear , puts out co2 . and so , what we 're going to have to do at a global scale , is create a new system . and so , we need energy miracles . now , when i use the term  miracle ,  i do n't mean something that 's impossible .
they often hit their target but miss the point .
and if you 'll begin to look closely at the husky that 's bearing her throat to the polar bear , and look a little more closely , they 're in an altered state . they 're in a state of play . and it 's that state that allows these two creatures to explore the possible . they are beginning to do something that neither would have done without the play signals . and it is a marvelous example of how a differential in power can be overridden by a process of nature that 's within all of us . now how did i get involved in this ? john mentioned that i 've done some work with murderers , and i have .
when they 're not mind-wandering . as it turns out , people are substantially less happy when their minds are wandering than when they 're not . now you might look at this result and say , okay , sure , on average people are less happy when they 're mind-wandering , but surely when their minds are straying away from something that was n't very enjoyable to begin with , at least then mind-wandering should be doing something good for us . nope . as it turns out , people are less happy when they 're mind-wandering no matter what they 're doing . for example , people do n't really like commuting to work very much . it 's one of their least enjoyable activities , and yet
your blackberry , but to create a zone where their curiosity can expand . and whether it 's in the expression of a greek sculpture that reminds you of a friend , or a dog pooping in the corner of a tapestry , or , to bring it back to my tutor pietro , those dancing figures who are indeed knocking back the wine , and that nude figure in the left foreground . wow . she is a gorgeous embodiment of youthful sexuality . in that moment , our scholarship can tell you that this is a bacchanal , but if we 're doing our job right , and you 've checked the jargon at the front door ,
this was one of the leading composers of american music back in the '70s . and the interview was 40 pages long . but this little excerpt is a very good summary of what he was saying during the interview .
might be sensed as a trigger for electro-stimulation like we 're doing with epilepsy . but even if there is no signal , electro-stimulation of an appropriate part of the brain can turn off a brain disorder . and consider treating psychotic disorders -- and i want this involved with the ted group -- such as obsessive-compulsive disorder that , presently , is not well treated with drugs , and includes five million americans . and mr. fischer , and his group at neuropace , and myself believe that we can have a dramatic effect in improving ocd in america and in the world . that is the first wish . the second wish is , at the present time ,
it does not tell the traveler where she 's going until the very last minute , and information is provided just in time . similarly , dutch airline klm launched a surprise campaign , seemingly randomly handing out small gifts to travelers en route to their destination . u.k.-based interflora monitored twitter for users who were having a bad day , and then sent them a free bouquet of flowers . is there anything companies can do to make their employees feel less pressed for time ? yes . force them to help others . a recent study suggests that having employees complete occasional altruistic tasks throughout the day increases their sense of overall productivity .
there are two basic types of innovation .
you can just say you like the design . so , i 'll finish with just one thought : if we all work together on creating value , but if we really keep in mind the values of the work that we do , i think we can change the work that we do . we can change these values , can change the companies we work with , and eventually , together , maybe we can change the world . so , thank you .
is that everything i 've said applies as well to pain . and how you think about what you 're experiencing , your beliefs about the essence of it , affect how it hurts . one lovely experiment was done by kurt gray and dan wegner . what they did was they hooked up harvard undergraduates to an electric shock machine . and they gave them a series of painful electric shocks . so it was a series of five painful shocks . half of them are told that they 're being given the shocks by somebody in another room , but the person in the other room does n't know they 're giving them shocks .
so i want to share with you a couple key insights about complexity we 're learning from studying nature that maybe are applicable to other problems .
because i had a 61 percent average out of high school and then 61 percent average at the only school in canada that accepted me , carlton --
and they actually -- although it 's great they do n't require fuel -- they have some disadvantages . one is that the density of energy gathered in these technologies is dramatically less than a power plant . this is energy farming , so you 're talking about many square miles , thousands of time more area than you think of as a normal energy plant . also , these are intermittent sources . the sun does n't shine all day , it does n't shine every day , and , likewise , the wind does n't blow all the time . and so , if you depend on these sources , you have to have some way of getting the energy
because of the other things it brings . we need to get away from feeling , in the same way , human rights matters because of the other things it brings , or women 's rights matters for the other things it brings . why should we get away from those arguments ? because they 're very dangerous . if we set about saying , for example , torture is wrong because it does n't extract good information , or we say , you need women 's rights because it stimulates economic growth by doubling the size of the work force , you leave yourself open to the position where the government of north korea can turn around and say ,
it 's happening all over the world . in india , poor women are learning english faster than their male counterparts in order to staff the new call centers that are growing in india . in china , a lot of the opening up of private entrepreneurship is happening because women are starting businesses , small businesses , faster than men . and here 's my favorite example , which is in south korea . over several decades , south korea built one of the most patriarchal societies we know about . they basically enshrined the second-class status of women in the civil code . and if women failed to birth male children , they were basically treated like domestic servants .
normally hiding inside concrete . and the classroom , the ceiling is made out of both of them used together . in this school , there was a simple idea : to create comfort in a classroom . do n't forget , it can be 45 degrees in burkina faso , so with simple ventilation , i wanted to make the classroom good for teaching and learning . and this is the project today , 12 years old , still in best condition . and the kids , they love it . and for me and my community , this project was a huge success . it has opened up opportunities to do more projects in gando . so i could do a lot of projects ,
what the poor thought was important would be reflected in the college . i went to this village for the first time . elders came to me and said ,  are you running from the police ?  i said ,  no . 
and then we asked them how happy they are again . and what we see is sort of amazing because there 's human universals on what you do with your money and then real cultural differences on what you do as well .
but this man does n't need to go there . he needs just a piece of paper where he can put down little marks , and as he does that , he can imagine sounds that had not existed before in that particular combination .
and , of the 100,000-dollar prize money , that ted was so generous to give me , i am donating 50,000 dollars to the neuropace people to get on with the treatment of ocd , obsessive-compulsive disorder , and i 'm making another 50,000 available for a company to optimize the design of the device for migraines . and that 's how i 'll use my 100,000-dollar prize money . well , the third and final wish is somewhat -- unfortunately , it 's much more complicated because it involves lawyers . well , medical malpractice litigation in the us has escalated the cost of malpractice insurance , so that competent physicians are leaving their practice .
so the question we are trying to address -- and i 'm way over time -- is how to put more and more of everyday life in that flow channel . and that is the kind of challenge that we 're trying to understand . and some of you obviously know how to do that spontaneously without any advice , but unfortunately a lot of people do n't .
and they actually monitor and supervise 150 schools for 7,000 children . she got the world 's children 's prize five years ago , and she went to sweden . first time ever going out of her village . never seen sweden . was n't dazzled at all by what was happening . and the queen of sweden , who 's there , turned to me and said ,  can you ask this child where she got her confidence from ? she 's only 12 years old , and she 's not dazzled by anything . 
to 50 percent when they 're working , to 40 percent when they 're exercising , all the way down to this one short bar on the right that i think some of you are probably laughing at . ten percent of the time people 's minds are wandering when they 're having sex . but there 's something i think that 's quite interesting in this graph , and that is , basically with one exception , no matter what people are doing , they 're mind-wandering at least 30 percent of the time , which suggests , i think , that mind-wandering is n't just frequent , it 's ubiquitous . it pervades basically everything that we do . in my talk today , i 've told you a little bit about mind-wandering ,
because we have very cold , very hot , and so on . this is the desert to the west . near the pakistan border . and you see here a little clip of -- one of these villages -- the first thing that these children did was to find a website to teach themselves the english alphabet . then to central india -- very warm , moist , fishing villages , where humidity is a very big killer of electronics . so we had to solve all the problems we had without air conditioning and with very poor power , so most of the solutions that came out used little blasts of air
and fewer older people answered affirmatively to that question than middle-aged people , and younger people as well .
the microprocessor is a miracle . the personal computer is a miracle . the internet and its services are a miracle .
to a position of terrible power . we now wield the paintbrush . and that 's serious : we 're not very bright . we 're short on wisdom ; we 're high on technology . where 's it going to lead ? well , inspired by the sentences , i decided to wield the paintbrush . every 25 years i do a picture . here 's the one -- tries to show that the world is n't getting any bigger . sort of a timeline , very non-linear scale , nature rates and trilobites and dinosaurs , and eventually we saw some humans with caves ... birds were flying overhead , after pterosaurs . and then we get to the civilization above the little tv set
and finally , another example : sudden cardiac death . each of these has a sensor . we can give glucose a sensor for diabetes to prevent it . we can prevent , or have the earliest detection possible , for breast cancer with an ultrasound device given to the patient . an ipatch , irhythm , for atrial fibrillation . and vital-signs monitoring to prevent sudden cardiac death . we lose 700,000 people a year in the u.s. from sudden cardiac death . so , i hope i 've convinced you of this , of the impact on hospital clinic resources is profound and then the impact on diseases is equally impressive
individual mobilized social activist movements in the united states on protest against legislation -- pushing for legislation to stop global warming . and on july 7th , around the world , i learned only yesterday , there will be global live earth concerts . and you can feel this optimistic move to save the earth in the air . now , that does n't mean that people understand that global warming hurts the poorest and the weakest the most . that means that people are beginning the first step , which is acting out of their own self-interest . but i am seeing in the major funders , in care , rockefeller , rockefeller brothers fund , hewlett , mercy corps , you guys , google ,
so they take the data , and they use it to measure progress . they have this very continuous feedback loop . they learn something , they put it back into the product , they put it back into the market . they have a whole team called  knowledge and insight .  it 's a lot like other consumer companies . so if you 're running namibia for coca-cola , and you have a 107 constituencies , you know where every can versus bottle of sprite , fanta or coke was sold , whether it was a corner store , a supermarket or a pushcart . so if sales start to drop , then the person can identify the problem
i love this little bit of water that comes off the back of his tail . but the centerpiece species of zakouma are the elephants . it 's one of the largest intact herds in this part of africa . here 's a photograph shot in moonlight , something that digital photography has made a big difference for . it was with the elephants that this story pivoted . nick , along with researcher dr. michael fay , collared the matriarch of the herd . they named her annie , and they began tracking her movements . the herd was safe within the confines of the park , because of this dedicated group of park rangers .
and then finally , a point that you do n't think of so much in developed world medicine : it eliminates sharps . and what sharps means is needles , things that stick . if you 've taken a sample of someone 's blood and the someone might have hepatitis c , you do n't want to make a mistake and stick it in you . it just -- you do n't want to do that . so , how do you dispose of that ? it 's a problem everywhere . and here you simply burn it . so , it 's a sort of a practical approach to starting on things . now , you say ,  if paper is a good idea ,
the patient or spouse agrees not to file a lawsuit if one of the known procedure failures occurs . now , in america , in fact , you can not give up your right to trial by jury . however , if a video is there that everything was explained to you , and you have it all in the video file , it 'll be much less likely that some hotshot lawyer will take this case on contingency , because it wo n't be nearly as good a case . if a medical error occurs , the patient or spouse agrees to a settlement for fair compensation by arbitration instead of going to court .
in this environment , because it 's tough . that was my journey . i hope it 's not over . i came to believe that a leader is n't good because they 're right ; they 're good because they 're willing to learn and to trust . this is n't easy stuff . it 's not like that electronic abs machine where , 15 minutes a month , you get washboard abs . and it is n't always fair . you can get knocked down , and it hurts and it leaves scars . but if you 're a leader , the people you 've counted on will help you up . and if you 're a leader , the people who count on you need you on your feet .
so you 'd think , with all this extra space , we 'd have plenty of room for all our stuff . nope .
you have to look at our future workforce . and here the story is fairly simple . women are getting college degrees at a faster rate than men . why ? this is a real mystery . people have asked men , why do n't they just go back to college , to community college , say , and retool themselves , learn a new set of skills ? well it turns out that they 're just very uncomfortable doing that . they 're used to thinking of themselves as providers , and they ca n't seem to build the social networks that allow them to get through college . so for some reason men just do n't end up going back to college .
he 's invented more than 200 games to teach virtually any subject under the sun . in the schools and communities that taio works in , the day always starts in a circle and always starts from a question . imagine an education system that started from questions , not from knowledge to be imparted , or started from a game , not from a lesson , or started from the premise that you have to engage people first before you can possibly teach them .
today , this young woman is me , a nobel laureate . i 'm now on a journey to fulfill the wish , in my tiny capacity , of little african girls -- the wish of being educated . we set up a foundation . we 're giving full four-year scholarships to girls from villages that we see with potential . i do n't have much to ask of you . i 've also been to places in this u.s. , and i know that girls in this country also have wishes , a wish for a better life somewhere in the bronx , a wish for a better life somewhere in downtown l.a. , a wish for a better life somewhere in texas ,
that 's when the real action happens . stuart brown : so i would encourage you all to engage not in the work-play differential -- where you set aside time to play -- but where your life becomes infused minute by minute , hour by hour , with body , object , social , fantasy , transformational kinds of play . and i think you 'll have a better and more empowered life . thank you . john hockenberry : so it sounds to me like what you 're saying is that there may be some temptation on the part of people to look at your work and go -- i think i 've heard this , in my kind of pop psychological understanding of play ,
you 're enormous , that would have no effect on you . you 're huge . what they do , we now understand , is they get in you , they wait , they start growing , they count themselves with these little molecules , and they recognize when they have the right cell number that if all of the bacteria launch their virulence attack together , they are going to be successful at overcoming an enormous host . bacteria always control pathogenicity with quorum sensing . that 's how it works . we also then went to look at what are these molecules -- these were the red triangles on my slides before . this is the vibrio fischeri molecule .
are governments delivering services to the citizens ? so for instance , several governments in africa and eastern europe are opening their budgets to the public . but , you know , there is a big difference between a budget that 's public and a budget that 's accessible .
and he says that his hand seems to be moving by itself . now , i could look at my hand for two weeks , and i would n't feel any awe or wonder , because i ca n't compose . so what it 's telling you here is that obviously this automatic , spontaneous process that he 's describing can only happen to someone who is very well trained and who has developed technique .
that is , that it is one single , powerful , deterministic gene that causes the autism . however , in other individuals , it 's genetic , that is , in part with the developmental process that ultimately determines that risk for autism . we do n't know in any one person , necessarily , which of those two answers it is until we start digging deeper . so the question becomes , how can we start to identify what exactly those genes are . and let me pose something that might not be intuitive . in certain individuals , they can have autism for a reason that is genetic but yet not because of autism running in the family .
and then he did what ’ s called the purdue creativity test . you might know it as ,  how many uses can you find for a paper clip ?  it ’ s basically the same thing as the 30 circles thing that i just had you do . now , actually , he gave the test before the drugs and after the drugs , to see what the difference was in people ’ s facility and speed with coming up with ideas . and then he asked them to go away and work on those problems that they ’ d brought . interesting solutions -- and actually , quite valid solutions -- to the things that they ’ d been working on .
where he photographed for nine months almost every day . looking at these photographs today brings back the smell of smoke that lingered on my clothes when i went home to my family at night . my office was just a few blocks away . but some of these photographs are beautiful , and we wondered , was it difficult for joel meyerowitz to make such beauty out of such devastation ? jm : well , you know , ugly , i mean , powerful and tragic and horrific and everything , but it was also as , in nature , an enormous event that was transformed after the fact into this residue , and like many other ruins
later , i understood why my father got so upset .
look at the coffee table -- it grows in height and width to seat 10. my office folds away , easily hidden . my bed just pops out of the wall with two fingers . guests ? move the moving wall , have some fold-down guest beds . and of course , my own movie theater . so i 'm not saying that we all need to live in 420 sq . ft. but consider the benefits of an edited life . go from 3,000 to 2,000 , from 1,500 to 1,000. most of us , maybe all of us , are here pretty happily for a bunch of days with a couple of bags ,
they do the simple mathematics , averaging , etc. , etc . and now we want to share . that 's the next step . so we 're going to write this up and try to submit this for publication . right ? so we have to write it up . so we go , of course , to the pub . all right ? the one on the left is mine , okay ? now , i tell them , a paper has four different sections : an introduction , a methods , a results , a discussion . the introduction says , what 's the question and why ? methods , what did you do ? results , what was the observation ? and the discussion is , who cares ? right ?
and that 's been something that 's been nurturing me for some time , and it 's an important statement to understand . if we do n't stand up and make a difference and think about sustainable food , think about the sustainable nature of it , then we may fail . but , i wanted to get up and show you that we can do it if we 're more responsible . environmentally conscious businesses are doable . they 're here . you can see i 've done three so far ; i 've got a few more to go . the idea is embryonic . i think it 's important . i think that if we reduce , reuse , refuse
i just wanted to use my skills and build a school . but how do you do it when you 're still a student and you do n't have money ? oh yes , i started to make drawings and asked for money . fundraising was not an easy task . i even asked my classmates to spend less money on coffee and cigarettes , but to sponsor my school project . in real wonder , two years later , i was able to collect 50,000 u.s. dollars . when i came home to gando to bring the good news , my people were over the moon , but when they realized that i was planning to use clay ,
so almost everywhere we look we see that giving money away makes you happier than keeping it for yourself . what about your work life , which is where we spend all the rest of our time when we 're not with the people we know . we decided to infiltrate some companies and do a very similar thing . so these are sales teams in belgium . they work in teams ; they go out and sell to doctors and try to get them to buy drugs . so we can look and see how well they sell things as a function of being a member of a team .
and basically what you 'll see is what economists talk about as the polarization of the economy . now what does that mean ? it means that the economy is dividing into high-skill , high-wage jobs and low-skill , low-wage jobs -- and that the middle , the middle-skill jobs , and the middle-earning jobs , are starting to drop out of the economy . this has been going on for 40 years now . but this process is affecting men very differently than it 's affecting women . you 'll see the women in red , and you 'll see the men in blue . you 'll watch them both drop out of the middle class , but see what happens to women and see what happens to men .
rockett : but what ? is n't he coming ? miko : i do n't think so . i mean , i heard his band is playing at another party the same night .
and here 's just two of the ones we saw that are just really interesting to think about . one person wrote in ,  when i win , i 'm going to buy my own little mountain and have a little house on top . 
there 's the dark areas and the light areas . the dark areas are lava flows . they 're basaltic lava flows , and that 's what this sand looks like , very similar to the sand that you would see in haleakala . other sands , when these micrometeorites come in , they vaporize and they make these fountains , these microscopic fountains that go up into the -- i was going to say  up into the air ,  but there is no air -- goes sort of up , and these microscopic glass beads are formed instantly , and they harden , and by the time they fall down back to the surface of the moon ,
to just knock me off my feet . and instead , when the baby was placed in my hands , it was an extraordinary moment . this picture is from literally a few seconds after the baby was placed in my hands and i brought him over . and you can see , our eyes were glistening . i was overwhelmed with love and affection for my wife , with deep , deep gratitude that we had what appeared to be a healthy child . and it was also , of course , surreal . i mean , i had to check the tags and make sure . i was incredulous ,  are you sure this is our child ? 
and , up there , you see uganda . they had almost five percent infected , and quite a big bubble in spite of being a small country , then . and they were probably the most infected country in the world . now , what has happened ? now you have understood the graph and now , in the next 60 seconds , we will play the hiv epidemic in the world . but first , i have a new invention here . i have solidified the beam of the laser pointer . so , ready , steady , go ! first , we have the fast rise in uganda and zimbabwe . they went upwards like this .
that does n't mean you have to go to an mba program . it does n't mean you have to get through school . it just means that those few things have to feel right in your gut . and we 've heard those things about  is it nurture or is it nature ,  right ? is it thing one or thing two ? what is it ? well , i do n't think it 's either . i think it can be both .
i 'm absolutely sure . but i 'm also sure , pretty sure , that absolutely nobody is thinking of this . this is a polio vaccine . and it 's a great thing actually that nobody 's had to think about it here today because it means that we can take this for granted . this is a great technology . we can take it completely for granted . but it was n't always that way . even here in california , if we were to go back just a few years , it was a very different story . people were terrified of this disease . they were terrified of polio , and it would cause public panic .
you 've got a whole new problem set . but typically you do ; typically it opens . and of course , if your leg straps are n't set right , at that point you get another little thrill . boom . so then you look around , you 're under a canopy and you say ,  this is good .  now you prepare for the inevitable . you are going to hit the ground . you ca n't delay that much . and you really ca n't decide where you hit very much , because they pretend you can steer , but you 're being delivered . so you look around , where you 're going to land , you try to make yourself ready .
thank you very much . i have a tough job to do . you know , when i looked at the profile of the audience here , with their connotations and design , in all its forms , and with so much and so many people working on collaborative and networks , and so on , that i wanted to tell you , i wanted to build an argument for primary education in a very specific context . in order to do that in 20 minutes , i have to bring out four ideas -- it 's like four pieces of a puzzle . and if i succeed in doing that , maybe you would go back with the thought
 but car seats are so expensive and complicated , and they have this big tangle of latches , how could they possibly not work better than seatbelts because they are so expensive and complicated ?  it 's kind of an interesting logic , i think , that people use . and the other logic , they say ,  well , the government would n't have told us [ to ] use them if they were n't much better . 
tough , rugged , in control of his own environment . a few years ago , the marlboro man was retired and replaced by this much less impressive specimen , who is a parody of american manhood , and that 's what we have in our commercials today . the phrase  first-born son  is so deeply ingrained in our consciousness that this statistic alone shocked me . in american fertility clinics , 75 percent of couples are requesting girls and not boys . and in places where you would n't think , such as south korea , india and china , the very strict patriarchal societies are starting to break down a little , and families are no longer
and spent another year transforming them into design heuristics , for designing computer-based products -- and , in fact , any kind of products -- for little girls , ages eight to 12. and we spent that time designing interactive prototypes for computer software and testing them with little girls . in 1996 , in november , we formed the company purple moon which was a spinoff of interval research , and our chief investors were interval research , vulcan northwest , institutional venture partners and allen and company . we launched a website on september 2nd that has now served 25 million pages , and has 42,000 registered young girl users .
and it 's done by men and women working just like this , making cars . now this little quote about sculpture from henry moore , i believe that that  pressure within  that moore 's talking about -- at least when it comes to cars -- comes right back to this idea of the mean .
but the more we learn about aging , the clearer it becomes that a sweeping downward course is grossly inaccurate .
time after time that kids who feel secure , who are in a kind of trusted environment -- they ’ re the ones that feel most free to play . and if you ’ re starting a design firm , let ’ s say , then you probably also want to create a place where people have the same kind of security . where they have the same kind of security to take risks . maybe have the same kind of security to play . before founding ideo , david said that what he wanted to do was to form a company where all the employees are my best friends . now , that wasn ’ t just self-indulgence .
you would be very hierarchical . you would tell everyone below you what to do . but that 's not what an ideal leader is like now . if you read management books now , a leader is somebody who can foster creativity , who can get his -- get the employees -- see , i still say  his  -- who can get the employees to talk to each other , who can basically build teams and get them to be creative . and those are all things that women do very well . and then on top of that , that 's created a kind of cascading effect . women enter the workplace at the top ,
unfortunately , a lot of people 's experience is in apathy . the largest single contributor to that experience is watching television ; the next one is being in the bathroom , sitting . even though sometimes watching television about seven to eight percent of the time is in flow , but that 's when you choose a program you really want to watch and you get feedback from it .
from brighton to rio to perth , something new was emerging , and these festivals were really different . they 're open , these festivals , because , like in minto , they understand that the dialogue between the local and the global is essential . they 're open because they ask the audience to be a player , a protagonist , a partner , rather than a passive spectator , and they 're open because they know that imagination can not be contained in buildings , and so much of the work they do is site-specific or outdoor work . so , the new festival , it asks the audience to play an essential role in shaping the performance . companies like de la guarda , which i produce , and punchdrunk
she has very little chance here of having the kind of life that you probably would like her to have .  so , everyone told me afterwards that inviting the prospective parents over was , again , the stupidest thing i could have possibly done , because who 's ever good enough for your relative ? but he invited me to come to a ceremony they were having that day for her grandmother . and they actually take items of clothing and photographs , and they burn them as part of the ritual . and you can see how different she looks just in three months . this was now , i think , february , early february .
donorschoose.org is a non-profit for mainly public school teachers in low-income schools . they post projects , so they say ,  i want to teach huckleberry finn to my class and we do n't have the books ,  or  i want a microscope to teach my students science and we do n't have a microscope . 
tourists in glass-bottomed boats would be viewing the drowned towers of miami through 150 feet of tropical water . for , in weather , we 're not only dealing with forces of a far greater variety than even the atomic physicist encounters , but with life itself . larry brilliant : should we feel good , or should we feel bad that 50 years of foreknowledge accomplished so little ? well , it depends , really , on what your goals are . and i think , as my goals , i always go back to gandhi 's talisman . when mahatma gandhi was asked ,  how do you know if the next act that you are about to do is the right one
just as citizens are demanding voice and accountability .
back to germany , where they meet up with their families for the first time . and then back to the states to recuperate at veterans ' hospitals , such as here in walter reed . and finally , often fitted with high-tech prosthesis , they exit the medical system and attempt to regain their pre-war lives . jim took what could have been a straight-up medical science story and gave it a human dimension that touched our readers deeply . now , these stories are great examples of how photography can be used to address some of our most important topics . but there are also times when photographers simply encounter things that are , when it comes down to it ,
it was consuming so much of our time after hours on weekends that we thought , we either need to close this down or figure a way to fund movember so that i could quit my job and go and spend more time in the organization and take it to the next level .
so , let me show you what happens . these are three-year-old dummies , by the way . so here -- this is the car seat . now watch two things : watch how the head goes forward , and basically hits the knees -- and this is in the car seat -- and watch how the car seat flies around , in the rebound , up in the air .
that would have seemed like science fiction just a few years ago . the paradox of happiness is that even though the objective conditions of our lives have improved dramatically , we have n't actually gotten any happier . maybe because these conventional notions of progress have n't delivered big benefits in terms of happiness , there 's been an increased interest in recent years in happiness itself . people have been debating the causes of happiness for a really long time , in fact for thousands of years , but it seems like many of those debates remain unresolved . well , as with many other domains in life , i think the scientific method has the potential to answer this question .
and he said that there were still times when he wished he could go back and play the organ the way he used to , and that for me , medical school could wait , but that the violin simply would not . and after two more years of studying music , i decided to shoot for the impossible before taking the mcat and applying to medical school like a good indian son to become the next dr. gupta . and i decided to shoot for the impossible and i took an audition for the esteemed los angeles philharmonic . it was my first audition , and after three days of playing
and this is just a very simple way of understanding what kind of innovation , what kind of different design we need .
and so instead of giving orders , you 're now building consensus and you 're building a sense of shared purpose . probably the biggest change was understanding that the generational difference , the ages , had changed so much . i went down to be with a ranger platoon on an operation in afghanistan , and on that operation , a sergeant in the platoon had lost about half his arm throwing a taliban hand grenade back at the enemy after it had landed in his fire team . we talked about the operation , and then at the end i did what i often do with a force like that .
he said ,  that 's all we can do , we 've got to stop the smoke .  i mean , gene -- thank god for gene . so , we put the room service menus over the vents in the wall , we put blankets at the bottom of the door , we put the kids on the windowsill to try to get some air . and there was a building , a new building , going up , that was being built right outside , across the street from our hotel . and there , in the building were photographers waiting for people to jump . eleven people ended up dying in the fire . five people jumped and died , other people were killed by the smoke .
it 's really a truth . and i think this idea of soul , as being at the heart of great cars , is very applicable . you all know it . you know a car when you 've seen it , with soul . you know how strong this is . well , this experience of love , and the experience of design , to me , are interchangeable . and now i 'm coming to my story . i discovered something about love and design through a project called deep blue . and first of all , you have to go with me for a second , and say ,
they have heroin addiction and also prostitution in iran . india has many because they are many . southeast asia , and so on . but , there is one part of africa -- and the difficult thing is , at the same time , not to make a uniform statement about africa , not to come to simple ideas of why it is like this , on one hand . on the other hand , try to say that this is not the case , because there is a scientific consensus about this pattern now . unaids have done good data available , finally , about the spread of hiv . it could be concurrency . it could be some virus types .
that if i land this client once , and every week i get paid by that person , that 's way better than trying to sell one clothespin thing to one person . because you ca n't sell them more . so i love that recurring revenue model i started to learn at a young age . remember , i was being groomed to do this . i was not allowed to have jobs . i would caddy , i would go to the golf course and caddy for people . but i realized that there was this one hill on our golf course , the 13th hole that had this huge hill . and people could never get their bags up it .
so anyway , i left . and my friends actually said they were very interested in adopting her . and i said ,  look , i think i 'll scare the grandmother to death , if i actually write to her and tell her that you 're willing to adopt her , i want to go back and talk to her .  but i was off on assignment . i figured i 'd come back in a couple of weeks and talk to the grandmother . and on christmas day , i was in bangkok with a group of photographers and got a telegram -- back in those days , you got telegrams -- from time magazine saying someone in korea had died ,
and i said to the translator ,  what did he say ?  and she said ,  he wants to know who you are .  and i said ,  well , tell him that i am a photographer .  i started explaining who i was , and he interrupted . and she said ,  he says he knows who you are , what do you want ?  i said ,  well , tell him that i was asked by this little girl 's grandmother to find a family for her .  and he said ,  i 'm her uncle , she 's fine , you can leave now .  so i was -- you know , the door was being slammed in my face , it 's incredibly cold , and i 'm trying to think ,
so this provides some of the data that autism is genetic . well , how genetic is it ? when we compare it to other conditions that we 're familiar with , things like cancer , heart disease , diabetes , in fact , genetics plays a much larger role in autism than it does in any of these other conditions . but with this , that does n't tell us what the genes are . it does n't even tell us in any one child , is it one gene or potentially a combination of genes ? and so in fact , in some individuals with autism , it is genetic !
the blackawton bees project , and first she 's going to tell you the question that they came up with . so go ahead , amy . amy o'toole : thank you , beau . we thought that it was easy to see the link between humans and apes in the way that we think , because we look alike . but we wondered if there 's a possible link with other animals . it 'd be amazing if humans and bees thought similar , since they seem so different from us . so we asked if humans and bees might solve complex problems in the same way . really , we wanted to know if bees can also adapt
the teams that spend money on themselves are just the same winning percentages as they were before . the teams that we give the money to spend on each other , they become different teams and , in fact , they dominate the league by the time they 're done . across all of these different contexts -- your personal life , you work life , even silly things like intramural sports -- we see spending on other people has a bigger return for you than spending on yourself . and so i 'll just say , i think if you think money ca n't buy happiness you 're not spending it right . the implication is not you should buy this product instead of that product
that was actually removed from vaccines in the year 1992 , and you can see that it really did not have an effect in what happened with the prevalence of autism . so again , there is no evidence that this is the answer .
 what 's the story .  so he summoned me and said ,  can you train me 150 grandmothers ?  i said ,  i ca n't , mr. president . but they will . the grandmothers will . 
but cars are what we are , in many ways . and as long as we can solve the problems of automobiles , and i believe we can , with fuel cells or hydrogen , like bmw is really hip on , and lots of other things , then i think we can look past that and try and understand why this hook is in many of us -- of this car-y-ness -- and what that means , what we can learn from it . that 's what i want to get to . cars are not a suit of clothes ;
you want me to go to church and call my mother .  and i understand . i truly understand how that can be daunting . but an incident that happened a couple of years ago gave me a new perspective . my wife , who is somewhere in the audience today , called me up at the office and said ,  nigel , you need to pick our youngest son  -- harry --  up from school .  because she had to be somewhere else with the other three children for that evening . so i left work an hour early that afternoon and picked harry up at the school gates . we walked down to the local park ,
and then as you get close , you lower your rucksack below you on a lowering line , so that it 's not on you when you land , and you prepare to do a parachute-landing fall . now the army teaches you to do five points of performance -- the toes of your feet , your buttocks and your push-up muscles . it 's this elegant little land , twist and roll . and that 's not going to hurt . in 30-some years of jumping , i never did one . i always landed like a watermelon out of a third floor window . and as soon as i hit , the first thing i did is i 'd see if i 'd broken anything that i needed .
but five years ago , i went on a personal journey . i wanted to visualize the story of life . it 's the hardest thing i 've ever attempted , and there have been plenty of times when i felt like backing out . but there were also revelations . and one of those i 'd like to share with you today . i went down to a remote lagoon in australia , hoping to see the earth the way it was three billion years ago , back before the sky turned blue . there 's stromatolites down there -- the first living things to capture photosynthesis -- and it 's the only place they still occur today .
paul maccready : if we could have the second video , the one-minute , put in as quickly as you can , which -- this will show the pathfinder airplane in some flights this past year in hawaii , and will show a sequence of some of the beauty behind it after it had just flown to 71,530 feet -- higher than any propeller airplane has ever flown . it 's amazing : just on the puny power of the sun -- by having a super lightweight plane , you 're able to get it up there . it 's part of a long-term program nasa sponsored . and we worked very closely with the whole thing being a team effort ,
boredom begins to be very aversive and apathy becomes very negative : you do n't feel that you 're doing anything , you do n't use your skills , there 's no challenge .
and this study has been published on september 8 , 2008 , and it 's available on the government of india website . our experience points to an amazing increase in human productivity by over 20 percent by using these plants . and also a reduction in energy requirements in buildings by an outstanding 15 percent , because you need less fresh air . we are now replicating this in a 1.75-million-square-feet building , which will have 60,000 indoor plants . why is this important ? it is also important for the environment , because the world 's energy requirements are expected to grow by 30 percent in the next decade . 40 percent of the world 's energy is taken
i do n't want to get alzheimer 's disease . what i want is a cure in the next 20 years , soon enough to protect me .
but if they really were intelligent , why would they use a stick to extract termites from the ground rather than a shovel ? and if they really were intelligent , why would they crack open nuts with a rock ? why would n't they just go to a shop and buy a bag of nuts that somebody else had already cracked open for them ? why not ? i mean , that 's what we do . now the reason the chimpanzees do n't do that is that they lack what psychologists and anthropologists call social learning . they seem to lack the ability to learn from others by copying or imitating
now , the program says that the opposite of play is not work , it 's depression . and i think if you think about life without play -- no humor , no flirtation , no movies , no games , no fantasy and , and , and . try and imagine a culture or a life , adult or otherwise without play . and the thing that 's so unique about our species is that we 're really designed to play through our whole lifetime . and we all have capacity to play signal . nobody misses that dog i took a picture of on a carmel beach a couple of weeks ago . what 's going to follow from that behavior
and find other proteins that show a similar fingerprint . so if you 're in drug discovery , for example , you can go through an entire listing of what the genome has on offer to find perhaps better drug targets and optimize . most of you are probably familiar with genome-wide association studies in the form of people covering in the news saying ,  scientists have recently discovered the gene or genes which affect x .  and so these kinds of studies are routinely published by scientists and they 're great . they analyze large populations . they look at their entire genomes , and they try to find hot spots of activity
i was myself pregnant while i was doing the research for the book . and one of the most fascinating insights i took from this work is that we 're all learning about the world even before we enter it . when we hold our babies for the first time , we might imagine that they 're clean slates , unmarked by life , when in fact , they 've already been shaped by us and by the particular world we live in . today i want to share with you some of the amazing things that scientists are discovering about what fetuses learn while they 're still in their mothers ' bellies .
the captain of the cheerleaders . beauty pageant . used to do their christmas card every year . gene 's been restoring this car for a million years . kodak hired natasha to be a translator for them at the olympics in korea . her future husband , jeff , was working for canon cameras , and met natasha at the olympic village . this is her first trip back to korea , so there 's her uncle . this is her half-sister . she went back to the village . that 's her best friend 's mother . and i always thought that was a very annie hall kind of outfit . it 's just , you know , it was just so interesting , just to watch --
and we can actually pick up a wing-beat frequency . so you may be able to hear some mosquitoes flying around . nm : that 's a mosquito wing beat you 're hearing . ej : finally , let 's see what this looks like . there you can see mosquitoes as they fly around , being lit up . this is slowed way down so that you have an opportunity to see what 's happening . here we have it running at high-speed mode . so this system that was built for ted is here to illustrate that it is technically possible to actually deploy a system like this , and we 're looking very hard at how to make it
societies with millions of talented , emotionally stable citizens who are healthier and better educated than any generations before them , armed with knowledge about the practical matters of life and motivated to solve the big issues can be better societies than we have ever known .
the first : study up . you have to be familiar with the issues we 're talking about today . there are some great resources out there . the cdc has a program , heads up . it 's at cdc.gov . heads up is specific to concussion in kids . the second is a resource i 'm personally really proud of . we 've just rolled this out in the last couple months -- co kids with brain injury . this is a great resource for student athletes , teachers , parents , professionals , athletic and coaching staff . it 's a great place to start if you have questions . the second thing is : speak up . just two weeks ago ,
only in her underwear . when i asked ,  who is that ?  she said ,  that 's wei . the meaning of her name is pig . her mother died while giving birth to her , and no one had any idea who her father was .  for two weeks , she became my companion , slept with me .
at seven years old i figured it out . i got three and a half cents for a thousand coat hangers . i sold license plate protectors door to door . my dad actually made me go find someone who would sell me these things at wholesale .
and in fact , among all the diseases that existed in this land , it was the worst . it killed the most children .
and my people now can use their skills to earn money themselves . usually , for a young man from gando to earn money , you have to leave the country to the city , sometimes leave the country and some never come back , making the community weaker . but now they can stay in the country and work on different building sites and earn money to feed their family . there 's a new quality in this work . yes , you know it . i have won a lot of awards through this work . for sure , it has opened opportunities . i have become myself known . but the reason why i do what i do
what should our report card look like ? well , let 's go out to where we really need to get , and then look at the intermediate . for 2050 , you 've heard many people talk about this 80 percent reduction . that really is very important , that we get there . and that 20 percent will be used up by things going on in poor countries , still some agriculture , hopefully we will have cleaned up forestry , cement . so , to get to that 80 percent , the developed countries , including countries like china , will have had to switch their electricity generation altogether . so , the other grade is : are we deploying this zero-emission technology ,
and we women are going to lead the way in this new revolution , this new feminist issue . we are literally going to sleep our way to the top , literally . because unfortunately for men , sleep deprivation has become a virility symbol . i was recently having dinner with a guy who bragged that he had only gotten four hours sleep the night before . and i felt like saying to him -- but i did n't say it --
is share with you four parenting taboos . and of course , there are many more than four things you ca n't say about parenting , but we would like to share with you today four that are particularly relevant for us personally . so the first , taboo number one : you ca n't say you did n't fall in love with your baby in the very first minute . i remember vividly , sitting there in the hospital . we were in the process of giving birth to our first child . av : we , or i ? rg : i 'm sorry . misuse of the pronoun . alisa was very generously in the process of giving birth to our first child --
and now let 's look from the south , looking up , and let 's see this in relief . a minimum of 20 to 40 inches of increase in seas , coupled with increasing flows from the himalayas . and take a look at this . as many as 100 million refugees from bangladesh could be expected to migrate into india and into china . this is the difficulty that one country faces . but if you look at the globe , all around the earth , wherever there is low-lying area , populated areas near the water , you will find increase in sea level that will challenge our way of life . sub-saharan africa , and even our own san francisco bay area .
would they give me charts and graphs that i could color ? so i 've been trying to learn to do things that are hands-on . i 've always liked to draw , so i 'm doing it more even though i 'm really very bad at it . i am learning some basic origami . i can make a really great box . and i 'm teaching myself to knit , which so far i can knit a blob . but , you know , it does n't matter if i 'm actually good at it . what matters is that my hands know how to do it . because the more things that are familiar , the more things my hands know how to do ,
and they jam recognition of the real thing . by targeting the red system , what we are able to do is to make species-specific , or disease-specific , anti-quorum sensing molecules . we 've also done the same thing with the pink system . we 've taken that universal molecule and turned it around a little bit so that we 've made antagonists of the interspecies communication system . the hope is that these will be used as broad-spectrum antibiotics that work against all bacteria . to finish i 'll just show you the strategy . in this one i 'm just using the interspecies molecule , but the logic is exactly the same . what you know is that when that bacterium gets into the animal ,
of others there were out there on skid row alone who had stories as tragic as his , but were never going to have a book or a movie made about them that got them off the streets ? and at the very core of this crisis of mine , i felt somehow the life of music had chosen me , where somehow , perhaps possibly in a very naive sense , i felt what skid row really needed was somebody like paul farmer and not another classical musician playing on bunker hill . but in the end , it was nathaniel who showed me that if i was truly passionate about change ,
now we always focus , naturally , on how much we raise , because it 's a very tangible outcome , but for me , awareness and education is more important than the funds we raise , because i know that is changing and saving lives today , and it 's probably best exampled by a young guy that i met at south by southwest in austin , texas , at the start of the year .
so i wrote him back and i said ,  what about an n of 45,004 ?  because i had the other 45,000 other real-world crashes . and i just think that it 's interesting that the idea of using real-world crashes , which is very much something that economists think would be the right thing to do , is something that scientists do n't actually , usually think -- they would rather use a laboratory , a very imperfect science of looking at the dummies , than actually 30 years of data of what we 've seen with children and with car seats . and so i think the answer to this puzzle
the botanical names are in front of you . areca palm is a plant which removes co2 and converts it into oxygen .
it 's just that they have stopped getting worse . and it has -- the steady state is , more or less , one percent of the adult world population is hiv-infected . it means 30 to 40 million people , the whole of california -- every person , that 's more or less what we have today in the world . now , let me make a fast replay of botswana . botswana -- upper middle-income country in southern africa , democratic government , good economy , and this is what happened there . they started low , they skyrocketed , they peaked up there in 2003 , and now they are down . but they are falling only slowly ,
what 'the sultan 's elephant ' represents is no less than an artistic occupation of the city and a reclamation of the streets for the people .  we can talk about the economic impacts of these festivals on their cities , but i 'm much [ more ] interested in many more things , like how a festival helps a city to express itself , how it lets it come into its own . festivals promote diversity , they bring neighbors into dialogue , they increase creativity , they offer opportunities for civic pride , they improve our general psychological well-being . in short , they make cities better places to live . case in point : when  the sultan 's elephant  came to london
your pets are happier than you are . so kitty cat , meow , happy happy happy , human beings , screwed . completely and utterly -- so , screwed . but my point is , if we do n't talk about this stuff , and we do n't learn how to deal with our lives , it 's not going to be one in four . it 's going to be four in four who are really , really going to get ill in the upstairs department . and while we 're at it , can we please stop the stigma ? thank you . thank you . so i want to talk a little bit about seeing the world
and i was lying in my bedroom with one of those long extension cords . and i was calling all the dry cleaners in winnipeg to find out how much would the dry cleaners pay me for coat hangers .
anita roddick is another one of these ceos we interviewed .
this poet describes it as opening a door that floats in the sky -- a very similar description to what albert einstein gave as to how he imagined the forces of relativity , when he was struggling with trying to understand how it worked . but it happens in other activities . for instance , this is another student of mine , susan jackson from australia , who did work with some of the leading athletes in the world . and you see here in this description of an olympic skater , the same essential description of the phenomenology of the inner state of the person .
this is a real medical need ,
so , zizzing away , and so — — and for every one — i know , i drew this myself . thank you . for every one single neuron , you can actually have from 10,000 to 100,000 different connections or dendrites or whatever you want to call it , and every time you learn something , or you have an experience , that bush grows , you know , that bush of information . can you imagine , every human being is carrying that equipment , even paris hilton ? go figure . but i got a little bad news for you folks . i got some bad news . this is n't for the one in four . this is for the four in four .
my dad was my hero and my mentor for most of my life , and i 've spent the last decade watching him disappear . my dad 's not alone . there 's about 35 million people globally living with some kind of dementia , and by 2030 they 're expecting that to double to 70 million . that 's a lot of people . dementia scares us . the confused faces and shaky hands of people who have dementia , the big numbers of people who get it , they frighten us . and because of that fear , we tend to do one of two things : we go into denial :  it 's not me , it has nothing to do with me , it 's never going to happen to me . 
we 've asked older and younger people to view faces in laboratory studies , some frowning , some smiling .
the advantages of responsive neurostimulation : it can detect and terminate seizures before the clinical symptoms occur , provide stimulation only when needed , can be turned off if seizures disappear ; it has minimal side effects -- as a matter of fact , in all our clinical trials to date , we 've seen no side effects in the 40 or so patients in whom it 's been implanted -- and it 's invisible , cosmetically hidden , so , if you have epilepsy and you have the device , no one will know it because you ca n't tell that it 's there . and this shows what an electroencephalogram is , and on the left is the signal of a spontaneous seizure of one of the patients .
but there 's another way of thinking about ptsd . what looks like pathology to us may actually be a useful adaptation in some circumstances . in a particularly dangerous environment , the characteristic manifestations of ptsd -- a hyper-awareness of one 's surroundings , a quick-trigger response to danger -- could save someone 's life . the notion that the prenatal transmission of ptsd risk is adaptive is still speculative , but i find it rather poignant . it would mean that , even before birth , mothers are warning their children that it 's a wild world out there , telling them ,  be careful .  let me be clear .
but the offer was exclusive , and only stood for a limited period of time . the album sold more copies than previous releases of the band . the danish chocolate company anthon berg opened a so-called  generous store  in copenhagen . it asked customers to purchase chocolate with the promise of good deeds towards loved ones . it turned transactions into interactions , and generosity into a currency . companies can even give control to hackers . when microsoft kinect came out , the motion-controlled add-on to its xbox gaming console , it immediately drew the attention of hackers . microsoft first fought off the hacks , but then shifted course when it realized that actively supporting the community
are probably the most important words that kids ask . so we called it y water . and so this is another place where it all comes together in the same room : the three-dimensional design , the ideas , the branding , it all becomes deeply connected . and then the other thing about this project is , we bring intellectual property , we bring a marketing approach , we bring all this stuff , but i think , at the end of the day , what we bring is these values , and these values create a soul for the companies we work with . and it 's especially rewarding when your design work becomes a creative endeavor ,
then in early 2007 , a really interesting thing happened .
that want to kind of build that dream with us , and i think if we could get kids to embrace the idea at a young age of being entrepreneurial , we could change everything in the world that is a problem today . every problem that 's out there , somebody has the idea for . and as a young kid , nobody can say it ca n't happen because you 're too dumb to realize that you could n't figure it out . i think we have an obligation as parents and a society to start teaching our kids to fish instead of giving them the fish -- the old parable :  if you give a man a fish , you feed him for a day .
you eat on the floor , you sleep on the floor , you work on the floor .
they 're all over the world .
i heard a telephone tone , and it felt green because it sounded just like the color green .
i think that 's a question we have n't really answered yet , but i think something that has the potential to be an answer is that maybe happiness has an awful lot to do with the contents of our moment-to-moment experiences . it certainly seems that we 're going about our lives , that what we 're doing , who we 're with , what we 're thinking about , have a big influence on our happiness , and yet these are the very factors that have been very difficult , in fact almost impossible , for scientists to study . a few years ago , i came up with a way to study people 's happiness moment to moment as they 're going about their daily lives
reflect a drainage of a tidal marsh . life is a force in its own right . it is a new element . and it has altered the earth . it covers earth like a skin . and where it does n't , as in greenland in winter , mars is still not very far . but that likelihood fades as long as ice melts again . and where water is liquid , it becomes a womb for cells green with chlorophyll -- and that molecular marvel is what 's made a difference -- it powers everything . the whole animal world today lives on a stockpile of bacterial oxygen that is cycled constantly
so that they do n't regress . we have about three fathers who have been trained to cook . we have taught them nutrition , hygiene . we have helped them set up the kitchen and now they are supplying food to all our children . they do a very good job because their children are eating their food , but most importantly this is the first time they have got respect , and they feel that they are doing something worthwhile . more than 90 percent of our non-teaching staff are all parents and extended families . we 've started many programs just to make sure that the child comes to school .
or just at home negotiating with my teenage sons . when i sat down to write a book about creativity , i realized that the steps were reversed . i had to let go at the very beginning , and i had to immerse myself in the stories of hundreds of artists and writers and musicians and filmmakers , and as i listened to these stories , i realized that creativity grows out of everyday experiences more often than you might think , including letting go . it was supposed to break , but that 's okay . that 's part of the letting go , is sometimes it happens and sometimes it does n't , because creativity also grows
and left their child in a will to me . did i know anything about this ? because i had n't told them what i was doing , because i was so upset with the story they 'd run . so , i went back to korea , and i went back to hyun-sook 's village , and she was gone . and the house that i had spent time in was empty . it was incredibly cold . no one in the village would tell me where hyun-sook was , because the grandmother had always hidden her from westerners . and they had no idea about this request that she 'd made of me . so i finally found myung sung ,
because , with our present knowledge , we have no idea what would happen . even now , man may be unwittingly changing the world 's climate through the waste products of his civilization . due to our release , through factories and automobiles every year , of more than six billion tons of carbon dioxide -- which helps air absorb heat from the sun -- our atmosphere seems to be getting warmer . this is bad ? well , it 's been calculated a few degrees ' rise in the earth 's temperature would melt the polar ice caps . and if this happens , an inland sea would fill a good portion of the mississippi valley .
as we age , our time horizons grow shorter and our goals change . when we recognize that we do n't have all the time in the world , we see our priorities most clearly .
they know what to expect , even though it 'll be subtly different and the colors will be different and the name will be different .
which are essentially the radiation -- the footprint and cost , the potential , in terms of effect on land and various things , is almost in a class of its own . ca : if this does n't work , then what ? do we have to start taking emergency measures to try and keep the temperature of the earth stable ? bg : if you get into that situation , it 's like if you 've been over-eating , and you 're about to have a heart attack : then where do you go ? you may need heart surgery or something . there is a line of research on what 's called geoengineering , which are various techniques that would delay the heating
and the answer is a fair amount -- more than you would pay for a brand new sweater or a sweater owned by somebody who you did n't adore . then we asked other groups of subjects -- we gave them different restrictions and different conditions . so for instance , we told some people ,  look , you can buy the sweater , but you ca n't tell anybody you own it , and you ca n't resell it .  that drops the value of it , suggesting that that 's one reason why we like it . but what really causes an effect is you tell people ,  look , you could resell it , you could boast about it ,
that desperately needs their contributions . together we can make certain that the so-called exceptions begin to rule . when we change the way we see ourselves , others will follow . and it is time for all of us to think bigger . thank you very much . so i am a surgeon who studies creativity , and i have never had a patient tell me that  i really want you to be creative during surgery ,  and so i guess there 's a little bit of irony to it . i will say though that , after having done surgery a lot , it 's somewhat similar to playing a musical instrument .
and then , here 's how the crash test works .
and this was all quite remarkable . but what i felt towards the child at that moment was deep affection , but nothing like what i feel for him now , five years later . and so we 've done something here that is heretical . we have charted our love for our child over time . this , as you know , is an act of heresy . you 're not allowed to chart love . the reason you 're not allowed to chart love is because we think of love as a binary thing . you 're either in love , or you 're not in love . you love , or you do n't love .
and it turned out that never , in all the times my dad gave out this pill , the really tiny pill , did anyone ever come back still complaining of sickness . so , my dad always took that as evidence that this little , teeny , powerful pill had the ultimate placebo effect . and in some sense , if that 's the right story , i think integrated car seats you will see , very quickly , becoming something that everyone has . the other possible conclusion is , well , maybe after coming to my father three times , getting sent home with placebos , he still felt sick , he went and found another doctor .
and brings in more such sources of protein . this is called fishing down the food chain . but there are also glimmers of hope , and i think anytime we 're doing a big , big story on this , we do n't really want to go and just look at all the problems . we also want to look for solutions . brian photographed a marine sanctuary in new zealand , where commercial fishing had been banned -- the result being that the overfished species have been restored , and with them a possible solution for sustainable fisheries . photography can also compel us to confront issues that are potentially distressing and controversial .
this is on the way to school . this is the morning assembly outside her school . and i noticed that she was clowning around . when the teachers would ask questions , she 'd be the first person to raise her hand . again , not at all shy or withdrawn , or anything like the other children that i 'd photographed . again , the first one to go to the blackboard to answer questions . getting in trouble for whispering into her best friend 's ears in the middle of class . and one of the other things that i said to her through the translator -- again , this thing about saying stop -- was to not pay attention to me .
when people have mental damage , it 's always an active imagination ? how come every other organ in your body can get sick and you get sympathy , except the brain ? i 'd like to talk a little bit more about the brain , because i know you like that here at ted , so if you just give me a minute here , okay . okay , let me just say , there 's some good news . there is some good news . first of all , let me say , we 've come a long , long way . we started off as a teeny , teeny little one-celled amoeba , tiny , just sticking onto a rock , and now , voila , the brain .
so we are trying to wipe out this virus completely . what the polio eradication program is trying to do is to kill the virus itself that causes polio everywhere on earth . now we do n't have a great track record when it comes to doing something like this , to eradicating diseases . it 's been tried six times in the last century , and it 's been successful exactly once . and this is because disease eradication , it 's still the venture capital of public health . the risks are massive , but the pay-off -- economic , humanitarian , motivational --
actually getting fresh food into schools . now , in berkeley , we 've gone totally fresh . we have no high-fructose corn syrup , no trans fats , no processed foods . we 're cooking from scratch every day . we have 25 percent of our -- thank you -- 25 percent of our stuff is organic and local . we cook . those are my hands . i get up at 4 a.m. every day and go cook the food for the kids , because this is what we need to do . we ca n't keep serving kids processed crap , full of chemicals , and expect these are going to be healthy citizens . you 're not going to get the next generation ,
and this is the first night i met hyun-sook . her mother was still alive . her mother was not raising her , her grandmother was raising her . and what struck me immediately was how in love the two of these people were . the grandmother was incredibly fond , deeply in love with this little girl . they slept on the floor at night . the way they heat their homes in korea is to put bricks under the floors , so the heat actually radiates from underneath the floor . hyun-sook was 11 years old . i had photographed , as i said , a lot of these kids . hyun-sook was in fact the fifth child that i found to photograph .
and there 's clothes , and there 's kids , and , you know , there 's three adults and 75 kids -- you can imagine . and he said ,  the second day she was here she made up a list of all of the names of the older kids and the younger kids . and she assigned one of the older kids to each of the younger kids . and then she set up a work detail list of who cleaned the orphanage on what day .  and he said ,  she 's telling me that i 'm messy , and i have to clean up my room .  and he said ,  i do n't know who raised her ,
we can apply those lessons then for the public good . coke 's success is relevant , because if we can analyze it , learn from it , then we can save lives . so that 's why i took a bit of time to study coke . and i think there are really three things we can take away from coca-cola . they take real-time data and immediately feed it back into the product . they tap into local entrepreneurial talent , and they do incredible marketing . so let 's start with the data . now coke has a very clear bottom line -- they report to a set of shareholders , they have to turn a profit .
to men and women all around afghanistan . business , she said , was critical to her country 's future . because long after this round of internationals left , business would help keep her country peaceful and secure . and she said business was even more important for women because earning an income earned respect and money was power for women . so i was amazed . i mean here was a girl who had never lived in peace time who somehow had come to sound like a candidate from  the apprentice .  so i asked her ,  how in the world do you know this much about business ? why are you so passionate ? 
because i 'd thrown a penny out in the street , and my dad said ,  go pick it up .  he said ,  i work too damn hard for my money . i 'm not going to see you ever waste a penny .  and i remember that lesson to this day . allowances teach kids the wrong habits . allowances , by nature , are teaching kids to think about a job . an entrepreneur does n't expect a regular paycheck . allowance is breeding kids at a young age to expect a regular paycheck . that 's wrong , for me , if you want to raise entrepreneurs . what i do with my kids now -- i 've got two , nine and seven --
if we challenged some of these sacred cows . follow your passion -- we 've been talking about it here for the last 36 hours . follow your passion -- what could possibly be wrong with that ? probably the worst advice i ever got . you know , follow your dreams and go broke , right ? i mean , that 's all i heard growing up . i did n't know what to do with my life , but i was told if you follow your passion , it 's going to work out . i can give you 30 examples , right now -- bob combs , the pig farmer in las vegas who collects the uneaten scraps of food from the casinos